* 1117603
* SHF: Small: Reusing Debugging Knowledge
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Zhendong Su, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2016
* USD 515,988.00

Developers spend most of their time debugging software. This
effort&lt;br/&gt;results in perfective changes to their applications, but is
otherwise&lt;br/&gt;lost. No central repository exists that stores all bug
descriptions&lt;br/&gt;and fixes. The reason for this state of affairs is the
belief that&lt;br/&gt;debugging is an idiosyncratic, context-specific task that
does not&lt;br/&gt;generalize. In contrast, this project hypothesizes that
applications&lt;br/&gt;decompose into smaller, similar problems and that
limitations of the&lt;br/&gt;human mind imply that we are likely to make similar
errors when&lt;br/&gt;confronted by similar problems. In practice, most
developers&lt;br/&gt;agree. When fixing a bug, a developer often begins by
searching for&lt;br/&gt;similar bugs that have been reported and resolved in the
past, because&lt;br/&gt;a fix for a similar bug can help him understand his bug,
or even&lt;br/&gt;directly fix his bug. In short, the problem is that the
knowledge&lt;br/&gt;gained during debugging is wasted---either not stored or
not&lt;br/&gt;searchable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
revolutionize debugging by capturing and reusing&lt;br/&gt;debugging knowledge.
Developers can leverage the knowledge of the&lt;br/&gt;community to speed up
debugging. To this end, it proposes to create a&lt;br/&gt;universal bug
repository capable of storing all bug information,&lt;br/&gt;indexed on bug
traces. To speed debugging, this repository will&lt;br/&gt;support efficiently
finding similar bugs and their fixes. It will be&lt;br/&gt;the basis of
automatic debugging tools that match closed bugs to an&lt;br/&gt;open bug, then
test the applicability of their fixes to that open&lt;br/&gt;bug. Programmers
will consult the proposed bug repository as a matter&lt;br/&gt;of course during
debugging. Monitors that compare the current&lt;br/&gt;execution against traces
in the repository can also prevent bugs and&lt;br/&gt;improve software
reliability. This project promises to significantly&lt;br/&gt;speed up debugging
and reduce software production cost. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;educational
innovations and outreach efforts can also help train more&lt;br/&gt;capable IT
professionals for the workforce.