* 1117015
* RI: Small: Automatic Speech Recognition of Unconventionally-Vocalized Speech
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Daniel Ellis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2016
* USD 457,999.00

Despite great advances in computer recognition of conventional speech, automatic
recognizers have enormous trouble with speech that deviates from speech norms in
pitch range, speaking style, and timing.&lt;br/&gt;Unconventional speech
includes the "motherese" used to speak to young children, certain kinds of
dysarthric speech, and singing. Current speech recognizers draw their power from
statistical models of very large collections of real speech, but the corollary
of this power is that speech that differs from this norm cannot be handled
nearly so well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a
speech recognition system able to handle a broad range of non-canonical speaking
and voicing styles. As a motivating basis, we will target the transcription of
singing.&lt;br/&gt;Sung speech poses a number of significant challenges with
implications in broader speech scenarios: In comparison with conventional
speech, the speech timing is highly distorted; the pitch level, range, and
dynamics are very different; and there are frequently simultaneous sound sources
(i.e., accompanying instruments) whose signals must be distinguished from the
voice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to make a best-effort separation of
the voice, e.g., by closely filtering the predominant pitch in a mixed signal.
This candidate voice is then transformed and normalized to resemble conventional
speech: The pitch harmonics are interpolated to achieve a more pitch-invariant
spectrum, and the time axis is warped to achieve a more uniform rate of change
(eliding over sustained, unchanging sounds). Then, a conventional speech
recognizer is adapted to recognize this normalized speech. To train the
recognizer for the target domain, a substantial collection of music audio is
manually aligned with phoneme-level transcriptions of the singing. This corpus
will be freely available to other researchers in music and non-canonical
speech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will develop techniques to make current
speech recognition applicable to a much broader range of speech material and
speakers.