* 1117496
* EAGER: Early-mid Pliocene Climate Change in Northern Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Linda Godfrey, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 49,851.00

Godfrey/EAR-1117496/Rutgers University&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this early-concept
proposal for exploratory research is to determine the climate significance of
the Opache formation, a carbonate rock unit deposited in the Atacama Desert of
northern Chile between ~7.8 and 3.37 million years ago. Rainfall in the Atacama,
both in its central area and in the Andes to its east, is strongly influenced by
El Ni√±o, the Pacific Decadal Oscillation, and on longer timescales by the South
American monsoon. The Opache is made up of two carbonate facies, a laminated
tufa which formed from basin over-spill and a palustrine unit. The aim of this
study is to reconstruct climate (hydrologic balance) from sedimentological
features such as lamina thickness. The investigators believe that two bands were
deposited annually with the seasonal cycle strengthening roughly every seventeen
years, but they want to demonstrate that two laminae form annually and are
directly related to climate. The palustrine carbonate unit deposited in the
Calama Basin will be used to infer the long-term climate of the region during a
time of climate re-organization.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will focus on modern
analogs to aid in interpreting the rock record. The Opache is unique in the
central Andes in regard to its size rather than formation mechanism. Within 30
km, active carbonate deposition occurs in and close to the Rio Loa from
groundwater springs as well as in high altitude lakes and both can provide
important insight to the formation of both Opache facies. In addition to study
of sediment fabrics from thin section, the investigators will use stable
isotopes to constrain kinetic effects on CO2 such as degassing. Dating for these
modern analog studies will utilize Ra-226 (half life 1599 years), combined with
U-Th dating at Rutgers. Laminae cyclicity can be determined by counting between
dated horizon from active growth surface and compared with recorded climate
data. This EAGER proposal includes addition of dates of the laminated unit by
U-Pb, bringing the technique to Rutgers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful testing
of the hypothesis that a decadal climate record is possible will result in a
submission of a full proposal which will yield a rare continental decadal
climate record from the early-mid Pliocene in a region influenced by ENSO. This
project will include undergraduate involvement in international research and
collaboration with Rutgers University which broadens their research experience.
The investigators have high expectations that a recent climate record will be
extracted from the modern analog studies.