* 1117593
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Automating the Detection of Architectural Degradation in Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Nenad Medvidovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 299,135.00

Over time, a software system's architecture eventually deviates from the
original designer's intent and degrades through unplanned introduction of
changes that invalidate original design decisions. Architectural degradation
increases the cost of making new modifications and decreases a system?s
reliability, until engineers are no longer able to effectively evolve the
system. At that point, the system's actual architecture may have to be recovered
from the implementation artifacts, but this is a time-consuming and error-prone
process, and leaves critical issues unresolved: the problems caused by
architectural degradation will likely be obfuscated by the system?s many
elements and their interrelationships, thus risking further
degradation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project aims at
pinpointing locations in a software system's architecture that reflect
architectural degradation. The proposed research comprises four integrated
research tasks: (1) Develop a catalog of commonly occurring symptoms of
degradation. (2) Develop an architecture recovery technique that automatically
extracts both a system's major building blocks and the concerns that influence,
drive, and interact with these building blocks. (3) Devise a technique for
formally capturing the recovered architectural design decisions, their involving
concerns, and the identified causes of degradation. (4) Devise a suite of
techniques that leverage the catalog to automatically identify system-specific
instances of degradation. As a result, this project will have a potential for
broad impact by providing a rigorous, scientific basis for software engineers to
streamline the currently prohibitively expensive and error-prone system
maintenance and evolution tasks.