* 1117049
* NeTS:Small:Understanding the Impact of Unreliable Hardware on the Resilience of Networked Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Sandeep Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2015
* USD 439,998.00

Networked systems have always been designed to operate even in the presence of
failures, especially in communication links and storage. Until recently other
components of such systems had relatively low probabilities of failures and for
most networked systems, desired levels of resilience could be achieved using
minimal redundancy added in an ad hoc manner. Two opposing trends are likely to
make the task of achieving resilience significantly more difficult in the coming
years: (a) increasing hardware failure probabilities: with the move towards
finer nano-scale fabrication, chips are increasingly vulnerable to soft errors
caused by external noise and are increasingly likely to fail early due to
fatigue; (b) higher resilience requirements: as critical services continue to
migrate to clouds, service providers are compelled into more stringent service-
level agreements (SLAs), including higher reliability, higher availability, and
tighter guarantees on service times. The above combination can dramatically
increase the overhead of existing approaches for achieving desired levels of
resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The first outcome of this
project will be a holistic roadmap for resilience of networked systems. This
resilience roadmap will take the roadmaps from the nano-scale CMOS (trends in
chip cost, functionality, performance, power, and resilience that can be
attained at chip level) and attempt to realistically project the future cost of
currently-used networking and systems techniques for achieving desired level of
resilience. The second outcome of this project is to develop resilience methods
that scale gracefully in the face of increasing hardware failures. Such
techniques will use novel partitioned redundancy strategies that achieve
reliability at different levels across hardware and software layers.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The resilience roadmap will provide unprecedented
understanding of the trends in resilience and a uniquely realistic assessment of
challenges and opportunities. This will significantly influence the research in
the hardware as well as networking communities. A systematic design of scalable
resilience methods will lead to significantly higher levels of resilience, lower
costs - capital (equipment) as well recurring (especially, energy), and/or
higher levels of performance. The utilitarian gains to society by the proposed
project are likely to be substantial, since networked systems now constitute one
of our most critical infrastructures and consume an increasingly large
proportion of our resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will draw upon
two different disciplines, hardware architecture and networked systems, and
involve detailed case studies and development of completely new theory and
techniques, and will therefore provide unique educational and training
opportunities for students and working professionals in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Budget Impact Statement: The item numbers in this
paragraph refer to those in Figure 9 and Section 3.2 (entitled 'Proposed
Research Tasks and Plan') of our original proposal. We will undertake all tasks
and sub-tasks proposed in item-1 (and all its sub-items). In item-2, we will
undertake the development of a general framework to consider all basic
redundancy schemes and alternative ways of deploying them (sub-item-2.1). We
will also characterize the associated tradeoffs (sub-item-2.2) and the
consequences of realistic constraints (sub-item-2.3). However, we will pursue
the development of prototype tools (as outlined in sub-item-2.4), to the extent
necessary to demonstrate the benefits of our approach and to conduct case
studies (described in item-3). Finally, we will undertake the case studies as
originally proposed in item-3.