* 1117439
* CIF: Small: RUI: Fixation-Driven Contour Integration of Natural Images for Early Visual Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Toshiro Kubota, Susquehanna University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2015
* USD 170,619.00

A reliable system for automated image understanding can have immense impacts on
many applications including image search, video surveillance, autonomous
vehicles, and robotics, to name a few. However, the progress of the technology
has been slow compared to text understanding and speech recognition. The problem
can be attributed to lacking ways of breaking an image into a set of meaningful
components analogous to words in text and speech processing. This research will
develop an algorithm to partition a digital image into such meaningful
components efficiently and effectively. To reach the goal, the investigators
focus on discontinuities in color and brightness often called "edges" and study
algorithmic ways to group them and delineate objects found in the image.
Undergraduate students will actively participate in interdisciplinary research
involving computer science, mathematics, statistics, psychology and biology. The
PI will also develop an interdisciplinary course that integrates cognitive,
neuro, and computer sciences. The resulting source code, software tools, data,
and visual materials will be made publicly available to promote STEM education.

More specifically, the study centers on two recent innovations developed by the
investigators: semi-group smoothing with a matrix of linear filters, and
successive partitioning of a graph with increasing complexity. The former is an
affine commutative linear operator that is shown to be effective in extracting
high-curvature points while robust against aliasing. It will be used to
smoothen, partition, and characterize contour fragments. The latter generates a
set of closed contours surrounding a focal point successively from a simple
shape to more complex ones. Furthermore, the study investigates new context
sensitive perceptual saliency metrics that quantify the importance of edges
based on their surroundings.