* 1117126
* NeTS: Small: Innovating Internet Access Pricing: From Theory to Deployment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mung Chiang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

There has been no shortage of headline news on Internet access pricing in 2010
and 2011. From AT&amp;T and Verizon shifting to usage-based pricing for wireless
access to FCC's revealing the National Broadband Plan, and from Comcast-
Netflix/Level3 battle on two-sided pricing to FCC's 2010 December statement on
pricing innovations, the Internet is witnessing the start of a transformative
period in the interplay between access pricing and the technology of networking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical core of this project is organized around
four fundamental questions: (1) How much to charge? The debate between flat-rate
and usage-based pricing renews with fresh perspectives. (2) How to charge?
Should the price charged depend on the time of bandwidth consumption or
congestion condition of the network? (3) Whom to charge? When will
content/application producers find incentives to pay for higher data rate or
heavier bandwidth consumption by consumers? (4) What to charge? What kind of new
service classes can be invented, especially in heterogeneous wireless networks
with multiple platforms co-existing? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique features
of this project include extensive participation from diverse sectors in the
networking industry, implementation of prototypes and trials, and access to and
dissemination of data. It combines the collection of fresh, large-volume of
empirical data with rigorous design and prototype implementation. The project
goes all the way from data analysis through optimization algorithms, to proof-
of-concept demos and trials, eventually to practical impact on public policy and
ISP business decisions, thus closing the loop in the study of network
pricing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: While we sharpen and apply a
variety of tools from optimization theory, microeconomics, game theory, and
statistics, the challenges arising out of these social issues also demand the
development of new methodologies, such as supply chain contracts for multi-
platform, two-sided pricing with conflicting interests of content providers and
Internet service providers (ISPs). Furthermore, the interactions between
technology evolution and economic policies are mutual: new enabling technologies
such as femtocell raises new questions on the interaction between engineering
artifacts and pricing structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposal is driven by timely and important questions faced by policy-makers,
networking industry, and broadband consumers: (1) Who will pay for the estimated
cost of $350B in the next decade to enable universal coverage of broadband
services in this country? (2) Can pricing mechanisms be leveraged by the ISP as
a practical approach to network management and new service class be created that
is net-neutrality compatible? (3) How to regulate the nonstop surge of bandwidth
demand to create win-win for both the ISPs and consumers? Furthermore, the
project presents unique opportunities for undergraduate curriculum development,
extensive industry participation and impact, and unconventional community
outreach, both within US and across the world.