* 1117277
* CGV: Small: Towards a Mathematics of Terrain
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* W Randolph Franklin, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Terrain, in this project, is defined as the elevation of the earth's surface
above some reference geoid. Over the last few decades, ever larger quantities of
terrain data with higher accuracy in (x, y) and z have become available.
Improved bathymetry data of the sea floor has also been collected, and elevation
data for other planets and their satellites is now available (for a generalized
definition of "terrain"). The PI's goal in this project is to develop and
validate a new mathematical representation of terrain, which will be closer to
the physics of how terrain is formed and be designed to represent legal
realistic terrain more easily than unrealistic terrain. Aside from constituting
an interesting application of deeper mathematics in its own right, such a
foundation for terrain representation that is geologically sound will enable the
design of operators such as compression and siting from first principles. This
work will generalize and extend the PI's previous successful terrain
representation and algorithms work, such as ODETLAP. The new terrain
representation will be a sequence of parameterized transformations of various
classes inspired by the physics of how terrain is formed. Modeling the real
world, the transformations will be nonlinear (e.g., real river valleys cannot be
superimposed and added). Nonlinearity is powerful, but difficult to study. The
first class of transformations, called scooping, will model how river valleys
form, and will guarantee to produce only hydrologically valid terrain. Erosion,
deposition and hill creation transformations will also be studied. Each class of
transformation has many design options; for example, should fewer and more
powerful, rather than many but less powerful, transformations be used? The PI's
goal is to encode the terrain in as few bits as possible while satisfying, in
addition to RMS error, richer, application-dependent, metrics such as multi-
observer siting to maximize viewshed, and then path planning to avoid those
observers. Hydrological accuracy and visual recognizability are other metrics.
This project continues the PI's collaboration with Professor Marcus Andrade at
the Federal University of Vicosa in Brazil. Project outcomes will be validated
by means of extensive tests on real terrain
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The simplest implication of
this work will be more compact terrain compression algorithms. Thus, this
research will allow larger terrain datasets to be accessed and processed by
consumers in portable products such as GPS navigators. Easier access to large
terrain databases will facilitate a probability distribution over possible
realistic terrain, which in turn will allow optimizing operations such as multi-
observer siting and path planning (the former has applications ranging from cell
phone tower siting to surveillance, while the latter is important for energy
conservation during transportation). Hydrological applications of better large
terrain data include floodplain planning (flood damage in the US amounted to
$50,000,000,000 during the 1990s). Through involvement of graduate students in
the PI's research and through his graduate courses, this project will also help
to increase the educated workforce in a foundational discipline that is
important to American productivity and future economic prosperity.