* 1117763
* TC: Small: Adaptive Differentially Private Data Release
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Li Xiong, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Clifton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 429,647.00

Current information technology enables many organizations to collect, store, and
use massive amount and various types of information about individuals.
Governments and other organizations increasingly recognize the critical value
and enormous opportunities in sharing such a wealth of information. However data
privacy has been a major barrier for such information sharing, bringing much
attention to privacy preserving data publishing and analysis techniques.
Differential privacy is widely accepted as one of the strongest unconditional
privacy guarantees. While many effective mechanisms have been proposed for the
interactive model with differential privacy, non-interactive data release with
differential privacy remains an open problem with the recent years only see
negative results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to build a data-driven
and adaptive framework for differentially private data release. It circumvents
the hardness of differentially private data release in the non-interactive
setting by novel and sophisticated use of the differentially private primitives
exploiting the characteristics of the underlying data. The specific research
objectives include: (1) design adaptive query strategies for releasing data with
differential privacy, including traditional relational data and high dimensional
and sparse set-valued data, (2) design statistical inference technique to
accurately answer user queries using the released data, and (3) design
algorithms to model and incorporate potentially dynamic workload characteristics
in the framework. In addition to formal analysis and experimental evaluations,
the project will evaluate and integrate the developed solutions in real health
applications at Emory University to support health research while providing
rigorous privacy guarantee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of the proposed
research will help overcoming barriers for large scale data sharing and will
have broader impacts to large societies beyond the field of data privacy and
information management. The proposal also includes a set of closely integrated
educational activities including new course development on data privacy and
security emphasizing a strong interdisciplinary aspect, continued involvement of
undergraduate students in research, and encouragement of women and minority for
participation. The project also closely aligns with Emory's university-wide
strategic initiatives in Predictive Health and will help develop the new Ph.D.
program in Computer Science and Informatics at Emory University.