* 1117664
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Systematic Approaches for Real-Time Stream Data Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Stephen Goddard, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

Data-intensive real-time applications, such as transportation management,
military surveillance, and network monitoring, need to handle massive amounts of
stream data in a timely fashion. It is challenging to support real-time stream
data services (RTSDS) due to stringent timing constraints, potentially unbounded
continuous stream data, bursty stream data arrivals, and workload variations due
to data value changes. This project will develop cost-effective methods and a
runtime system for RTSDS. The project will systematically investigate methods
and tools to support real-time continuous queries for RTSDS even in the presence
of dynamic workloads. Specifically, the project will study a) real-time
continuous query modeling, b) new performance metric design c) adaptive query
scheduling design, d) tardiness control and load shedding, for both single node
and clustered RTSDS. The project will also have prototype implementation and
testbed evaluations. The results and findings of this project will advance and
seamlessly integrate real-time computing and stream data
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time stream data services (RTSDS) play an
important role in many emerging application including intelligent
transportation, green buildings, smart grid management, military surveillance,
and network monitoring. Our everyday lives are highly dependent on these
applications. RTSDS is a fundamental technology for developing critical data-
intensive real-time applications with great socio-economic impacts. The project
will develop the scientific foundations and associated engineering principles
for building RTSDS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide excellent
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to acquire hands-on
experience as well as theoretical backgrounds in RTSDS. The PIs will work
closely with students to carry out the research in this project. Through this
project, the PIs will train students to become strong in both analytical and
implementation skills, and help them solve challenging problems in RTSDS.