* 1117860
* SHB: Small: Privacy-Enhanced Technologies to Support Underserved Older Adults Age in Place
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Katherine Connelly, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 569,504.00

The shifting demographics associated with an aging population require novel
solutions to meet the health needs of the growing number of older adults in the
US and around the world. Since caring for individuals in assisted living and
long-term care facilities costs nearly twice what it costs to care for their
non-institutionalized counterparts, technologies that support aging in place are
seen as one way to address this pressing problem. Among older adults, the groups
at the highest risk for extensive care and services are individuals from rural
areas, and underprivileged urban areas. Of these two sub-populations, rural
individuals make up one fifth of the elderly population and are at highest-risk
for requiring long-term care services and support. Similarly, urban-dwelling
older adults in low-SES neighborhoods often experience higher rates of
functional loss, and poorer overall health outcomes. In addition to stressing
the long-term care resources of Medicare, these high-need older adults often
require support from informal caregivers. Informal caregivers provide service
that would otherwise cost the Medicare system $375 billion dollars a year. The
average caregiver is employed, has children, and sixty-six percent of all
informal caregivers in the U.S. are women. These caregivers are often called the
"sandwich generation" because, in addition to traditional family and work roles,
they must also provide care to an older adult relative. Thus, there is a huge
need to ease the burden on these caregivers so that they can continue to provide
the care required to keep older family members out of assisted
living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide guidance to community
members, service providers, and governmental agencies about how to wield
technology to enable low-SES, urban- and rural-dwelling older adults to age in
place, while simultaneously easing the burden on caregivers. Specifically, the
project will perform a needs analysis of these two groups, with an eye to how
they are similar to and different from the higher-SES older adults for whom
aging in place technologies have already been designed. The project will develop
design guidelines to assist designers in targeting this high-need population,
taking into account attributes such as proximity of caregivers, access to
transportation, access to health services, technology infrastructure and
attitudes towards technology. The project will then utilize these guidelines to
customize a suite of existing technologies for the specific needs of these two
populations. The technologies will be deployed in the homes of older adults in
rural and urban settings so that the project can assess how older adults use
such technologies and how well these technologies support their ability to age
in place. The results will show how pioneering technologies developed in other
contexts may be customized for use by low SES, urban- and rural-dwelling older
adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project include
outreach to underserved communities, training of undergraduate and graduate
students, broad dissemination of research results beyond traditional
disciplinary silos, and building strong connections between academia, private
companies, and government agencies, all of whom share the goal of enhancing the
quality of life for underserved older adults. Finally, the broader impact in
terms of benefits to society is inherent in the research; the project seeks to
discover innovative ways of providing more appealing, less invasive, less costly
options for caregivers and private and public payers, while simultaneously
serving the underserved.