* 1117726
* CSR: Small: Statistical Memory Monitoring in Hardware for Security and Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* T Vijaykumar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2015
* USD 420,000.00

This project applies statistical sampling techniques to detect deviation from
normal or desired behavior for a variety of applications, ranging from security
problems such as phase-change memory (PCM) wear leveling and intrusion detection
to performance problems such as multicore communication, data migration, and
locality optimizations. Existing performance monitoring and measurement
techniques are insuf&#64257;cient for our applications for a variety of reasons.
Many depend upon the OS which (1) may be compromised and hence be unsuitable for
security-related monitoring, and (2) tracks data at page granularity whereas
memory hierarchy performance often needs monitoring at the block granularity. To
avoid these limitations, this project designs a monitoring architecture for
statistically sampling memory access patterns. Brute-force monitoring would
require large, frequently-searched hardware structures that increase complexity
and power, whereas sampling enables much smaller structures that are searched at
low rates, incurring far less overhead. In general, sampling loses accuracy or
requires a large number of samples (and large hardware structures) if the
monitored behavior exhibits high standard deviation. Our key insight is that we
can bound the standard deviation of the behavior within the region of interest
to the application, thereby allowing accurate and low-overhead sampling. Our key
intellectual merit is to show that statistical sampling and performance
monitoring can unify the aims of disparate applications and enable monitoring
with high accuracy and low overhead. The broader impacts include paving the way
for robust statistics-based performance monitoring in future computer systems
and for research and education efforts that combine statistics and computer
architecture.