* 1117000
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Learning to perform consistently in human/multi-robot teams
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Susan Epstein, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 223,412.00

This project focuses on practical deployment of human/multi-robot teams in
situations where robots can explore regions that are unsuitable for humans. For
example, a team of "rescue" robots can sweep through a collapsed building
searching for victims and transmit their positions to human first-responders
outside. Managing a human/multi-robot team in a dynamic environment is a
challenging problem. Not only is the world mutable, but also the team can
experience altered membership because a robot gets lost or a human operator
needs rest---the world is changing, and so is the team that is exploring that
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop strategies
for human/multi-robot teams to learn to perform consistently and effectively.
Three primary aims will be pursued: first, to mitigate changes in team
composition via a practical framework for institutional memory that remembers
and uses past experiences; second, to model and record expertise for later use
by learning behaviors performed by a human operator; and third, to distribute
tasks among team members efficiently by providing a balanced mechanism for
social choice. The novel approach of this project is applicable to a broad
spectrum of human/multi-robot, and human/multi-agent teams, by integrating
institutional memory, learning from human teammates, and resolving conflict
among differing perspectives. The strategies will be evaluated using a
human/multi-robot testbed comprised of one human operator plus a heterogeneous
set of inexpensive, limited-function robots. Although each individual robot has
restricted mobility and sensing capabilities, together the team members
constitute a multi-function, human/multi-robot
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses important challenges in
robust intelligence, including behavior modeling, learning from experience,
making coordinated decisions, and reasoning under uncertainty. Expected outcomes
include strategies for human/multi-robot teams that learn to collaborate
effectively under a variety of conditions and can maintain their performance
despite run-time changes in team membership, as well as knowledge about how
people interact with robot teams. Broader impacts include providing access to a
networked experimental testbed for remote collaborators; publishing proven
curricular materials on multi-robot teams addressed to graduate, undergraduate
and high school students; involving undergraduates in research activities; and
working with existing contacts at local museums to demonstrate results to the
general public.