* 1117515
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Integrated Verification, Built-in Self-test, and Tuning for Digitally-Intensive Analog Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 224,998.00

Designing analog integrated circuits is more of an art than a science. Their
continuous nature makes them difficult to both verify to be correct before
fabrication as well as difficult to test to be free of faults after fabrication.
This fact leads to design errors forcing costly re-spins (repetitions of the
design and fabrication process) and even worse faulty parts being shipped to
customers. In an attempt to address this problem, engineers are exploring the
use of digitally-intensive analog circuits. In these circuits, designers use the
simpler 0-1 binary digital assumption for the majority of the implementation,
and they only use analog components when absolutely essentially. While this has
some advantages, it creates new challenges as traditional verification and test
methodologies for digital and analog design are extremely different. The project
is attempting to address these challenges. In particular, the project is
exploring the integration of both design-time verification as well as new built-
in self-test and tuning techniques. This integration will allow not only joint
enhancement of design correctness and robustness, hence a holistic guarantee of
design quality, but also verification of self healing analog systems with built-
in digitally-assisted test and tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of this work is that it will enable the design of nanoscale robust computing
systems vital to a wide range of applications. Also, interdisciplinary
explorations will provide new opportunities for solving research problems of
practical significance and offer educational opportunities to make students well
grounded in both theory and application. The PIs will promote the research
participation from undergraduate students and students from underrepresented
groups. The research outcomes of this work will be integrated into undergraduate
and graduate curriculum and widely disseminated in the research community. The
developed software computer-aided design tools will be released in the public
domain.