* 1117143
* SHF: Small: Programming Networks of Molecular Interactions Using DNA Strand-Displacement Cascades
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* David Soloveichik, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 429,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programmed molecular self-assembly could be used
for the massively parallel construction of nanoscale devices. For example,"Smart
drugs" that target drug activity to disease cells and activate in response to
specific molecular clues would have minimal side effects and improve therapeutic
outcomes. Such tasks require molecular systems that operate autonomously in
complex environments, sensing and responding to molecular events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes an approach for the automated
construction of programmable molecular systems using DNA. DNA is not used to
store genetic information but as a nanoscale engineering material. Interactions
between single-stranded DNA molecules are determined by the linear sequence of
these molecules and follow the rules of Watson Crick base pairing. The
relatively low cost of synthesis and the predictability of interactions set DNA
apart from other (bio) polymers such as proteins, and make DNA an ideal
substrate for an engineering approach. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this method, a
desired chemical system is first specified using the language of chemical
reaction networks. Next, this formal description is compiled into an
experimentally testable DNA implementation. Auxiliary multi-stranded DNA
complexes mediate the interactions between these signal strands. Because the
language of chemical reactions can be used to specify a large number of
behaviors -- including chemical oscillations, chaos, digital logic and even
algorithmic responses -- this work suggests a powerful approach for generating
complex molecular behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
tightly integrated with an outreach program with two main aims. The first aim is
to develop an educational framework that teaches the interdisciplinary skills
required to succeed in molecular programming research. The second aim is to
leverage this framework to attract and engage students who are not traditionally
involved in electrical engineering or computer science research. A strong
educational focus on molecular programming could be an important recruiting tool
for attracting more women undergraduates to electrical engineering and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To achieve their aims, the PI and co-PI are
engaged in developing and teaching a new interdepartmental curriculum on
synthetic biology: The departments of Electrical Engineering, Computer Science
&amp; Engineering and BioEngineering are offering a joint sequence of classes on
synthetic biology. These courses form an important first step towards developing
a broad new educational program on "molecular programming". The PI also
participates in the College of Engineering BRIDGE program at the University of
Washington, which is designed to increase the participation of underrepresented
minorities and women in engineering.