* 1117335
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: A Large-Scale Data Mining Framework for Genome-Wide Mapping of Multi-Modal Phenotypic Biomarkers and Outcome Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Andrew Saykin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2015
* USD 216,000.00

Today's massive generation of digital data is greatly outpacing the development
of computational methods and tools and presents critical challenges for
achieving the full transformative potential of these data. For example, recent
advances in acquiring multi-modal brain imaging and genome-wide array data
provide exciting new opportunities to study the influence of genetic variation
on brain structure and function. Major computational challenges are, however,
bottlenecks for comprehensive joint analysis of these data due to their
unprecedented scale and complexity. This project will employ the new
capabilities of large-scale data mining techniques in multi-view learning,
multi-task learning, and robust classification to address critical challenges in
systematically analyzing massive multi-modal genetic, imaging, and other
biomarker data. Specifically, this project will: (1) develop new multi-view
learning methods to detect task-relevant phenotypic biomarkers from large scale
heterogeneous imaging and other biomarker data, (2) implement new sparse multi-
task regression models to reveal the genetic basis of phenotypic biomarkers at
multiple levels (e.g., SNP, haplotype, gene and/or pathway), (3) design novel
robust classification methods via structural sparsity for outcome prediction
using integrated genotypic and phenotypic data, and (4) package these new
methods into a data mining toolkit and release it to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project derive not only
from the development of novel data mining methods, but also from their
application to imaging genetic studies. These methods are designed to take into
account interrelated structures among multiple data modalities and offer
systematic strategies to reveal structural imaging genetic associations. The
proposed methods and tools are expected to impact neurological and psychological
research and enable investigators to effectively test imaging genetics
hypothesis and advance biomedical science and technology. In addition, the
proposed data mining framework addresses generic critical needs of large-scale
data analysis and integration and, therefore, will impact a large number of
research areas where high-value knowledge and complex patterns can potentially
be discovered from massive high-dimensional and heterogeneous data sets. This
project will facilitate the development of novel educational tools to enhance
several current courses at UT Arlington and IUPUI. Both universities are
minority-serving institutions, and the PIs will engage the minority students and
under-served populations in research activities to give them a better exposure
to cutting-edge scientific research.