* 1117604
* CSR: Small: Software Cache Memory Managements with Reconfigurable Hardware Emulators
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Zhao Zhang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 360,345.00

As multi-core systems become the major computing platform, efficient cache
management is even more crucial to system performance and power efficiency than
before. An effective approach is to use software cache management (SCM) with
hardware supports to manage shared last-level cache, because sophisticated SCM
may adapt to the complex scenarios of cache usage on multi-core
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical and unsolved issue in SCM is the
lack of rich and relevant information for software to reason about cache
performance under different configurations. The project investigates the use of
lightweight and Reconfigurable hardware Cache Emulators (RCEs) to extend the
capability of SCM. With this new hardware support, sophisticated SCM algorithms
that constantly monitor cache usage through RCEs are developed. Those SCM
algorithms aim to improve cache power efficiency by turning off unused cache
portion, optimize cache partitioning for multi-core processors, and improve
software-controlled cache mapping to improve cache
utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will improve system performance,
power efficiency, and performance predictability for laptop, desktop and server
computers using multi-core processors of large shared caches. It may make an
impact on industry processor design to include lightweight RCEs as well as
enrich SCM algorithms. It will also introduce new educational materials for
students to study multicore cache management through hand-on experiments.