* 1117303
* RI: SMALL: Collabrative Research: Investigations of the Role of Dorsal versus Ventral Place and Grid Cells during Multi-Scale Spatial Navigation in Rats and Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jean-Marc Fellous, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 264,430.00

Spatial navigation is a complex cognitive process that relies on robust and
adaptive mechanisms to relate current and future spatial positions to specific
locations in the environment. The goal of this project is to provide a better
understanding of spatial navigation by integrating information obtained from
experimental studies in rats, computational models, and experiments on robots
that will test new hypotheses on how these mechanisms work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hippocampus and medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) are
major brain regions involved in mammalian spatial navigation. While the role of
place cells in the hippocampus has been extensively studied, there are still
many open questions on the functional role of MEC grid cells and their
interaction with the hippocampal place cells. Of interest to this proposal is
the recent finding that grid cells are organized in an orderly fashion along the
dorso-ventral axis of the MEC, with dorsal grids being much more tightly spaced
than ventral ones. The investigators hypothesize that this multiscale
organization endows the navigation system with a coding mechanism that will
inherently achieve robustness with respect to external perturbations such as
obstacles or unexpected changes in visual cues. In order to evaluate this
hypothesis the investigators will develop computational and robotic models while
systematically performing experiments in rat in which the dorsal or ventral
portions of MEC or hippocampus will be inactivated. They will introduce new
types of mazes in which the spatial frequency of the trajectories will be
controlled. This work will contribute to better spatial navigation in robotics
by: (1) providing a robotic testbed to evaluate hypotheses on the role of the
entorhinal cortex and (2) providing biologically plausible models for robust
spatial navigation under uncertain and dynamic environments. These models will
suggest alternatives to classical probabilistic methods commonly used in robot
Simultaneous Localization And Mapping paradigms. This work will also contribute
to studies of spatial navigation in rats by: (1) showing the usefulness of
robots in providing a physical testbed beyond pure computational modeling, and
(2) exploiting the shorter cycle of robot experimentation to produce maze
configurations that are optimal for testing specific hypotheses in rat
experiments.