* 1117153
* III: Small: Network Learning for Integrative Cancer Genomics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Rui Kuang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

New large-scale DNA sequencing and array technologies now provide a promising
way to study the molecular mechanisms of cancer by generating enormous
information measuring aberrations in cancer genome. The genomic information can
potentially guide drug design on targeted molecules, and improve clinical
decisions in cancer treatment. One of the main obstacles to further progress is
to elucidate multiple complex molecular indicators of cancers from the enormous
genomic data. This proposal tackles the problem with network-based machine-
learning theoretical frameworks and methods that can model the underlying
biological mechanisms for an integrative study of cancer genomic information and
relevant biomedical knowledge. As a proof of concept, the developed methods will
be applied to study chemoresistance in ovarian cancer treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at creating a general computation-
driven approach for guiding cancer genomics research and improving genomics-
based clinical decisions in cancer treatment. The research activities described
in the proposal will deliver a collection of effective and efficient
computational tools to utilize heterogeneous genomic data combined with
biomedical knowledge for clinical practices. The study of the ovarian cancer
data will help reveal the crucial pathways driving chemoresistance, and provide
useful prediction tools and drug targets for ovarian cancer treatment. This
proposal will also integrate the latest research development in computational
cancer genomics into new courses in several training programs to prepare
students for their future professions to meet the need of workforce in the
growing biomedical and health informatics industry in the upper midwest region.
The education plan will also have a focus on recruiting students in minority and
under-represented groups in computer science and information
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals, the components of the
research plan are 1) to formulate graph kernels and subgraph mining algorithms
that can integrate various types of cancer genome aberrations to improve cancer
outcome predictions and to discover cancer-causative genome aberration patterns;
2) to formulate semi-supervised matrix factorization methods with Laplacian
constraints for predicting novel cancer phenotype and gene associations for
identifying potential drug targets, utilizing known relations in phenotype, gene
and their association networks; 3) to study the chemoresistance in ovarian
cancer treatment to reveal the crucial pathways driving the resistance, and
develop useful prediction tools and drug targets for ovarian cancer treatment;
4) to release the developed methods in both software packages and webtools for
public use in academia. The two major components of the education plan are: 1)
to offer a two-week course, titled Cure Cancer with Computers, in the summer
academy of the BioSMART program for Minnesota high school students, and 2) to
create a new course Computational Genomics in Biomedical Informatics to support
two graduate programs for training students in biomedical/health informatics
with knowledge in genomics and computer science.