* 1117936
* TC: Small: Algorithmics and Security of Lattice Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Daniele Micciancio, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Lattice cryptography is a cutting-edge area of cryptology which has the
potential to deliver new and better solutions to many security problems. Lattice
algorithms are routinely used to attack and analyze the security of lattice
cryptography. However, our current understanding of state-of-the-art lattice
algorithms is weak. As a result, the usability of lattice cryptography is
severely limited by the lack of high confidence security estimates. Lattice
algorithms are investigated, with the goal of providing better understanding of
known algorithms, and develop new algorithms as well. Specific goals of the
project include: (1) the development of practical variants of the asymptotically
fastest known lattice algorithms, (2) the study of analytic models that can be
used to predict and explain the behavior of heuristic approaches to lattice
problems, and (3) the use of the new models and algorithms to provide concrete
security estimates for lattice cryptographic functions. Lattice algorithms are
studied using rigorous mathematical methods that provide provable guarantees on
the behavior of the algorithms, coupled with extensive practical experimentation
to gauge the practical significance of the theoretical results. Computational
problems on lattices arise naturally in many areas mathematics and science, from
algebraic number theory and communication theory to crystallography and
combinatorial optimization. The applicability of the improved lattice algorithms
resulting from this project extends beyond cryptography, to reach those other
areas as well. Algorithms, experimental data, and instructional material
developed in the course of this investigation will be made widely available on
the Internet.