* 1117794
* AF: Small: Metanumerical Computing for Emerging Architectures: Automated Embedded Algorithms for Partial Differential Equations on Multicore  Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Kevin Long, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 05/31/2013
* USD 499,654.00

Computers were invented to automate tedious and error-prone&lt;br/&gt;tasks,
especially in the context of numerical calculations for&lt;br/&gt;scientific
simulation. Given the importance and difficulty of &lt;br/&gt;developing these
simulations, it makes sense to study whether &lt;br/&gt;computers can assist in
their production as well. This project &lt;br/&gt;focuses on the open-source
project Sundance, which provides&lt;br/&gt;high-level syntax to describe finite
element methods (FEM) for the&lt;br/&gt;numerical solution of partial
differential equations, freeing users &lt;br/&gt;from the burdens of low-level
programming. This approach can reduce &lt;br/&gt;development time from months to
days or even hours, allowing &lt;br/&gt;scientists and engineers to get correct
answers more quickly. &lt;br/&gt;Sundance is useful software starting from a
solid theoretical basis,&lt;br/&gt;where the structure of finite element
operators are derived and&lt;br/&gt;analyzed from software-based Frechet
differentiation of variational&lt;br/&gt;forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Via this
domain-specific embedded language, Sundance users (domain&lt;br/&gt;scientistis
and engineers) can express and simulate nonlinear processes &lt;br/&gt;with
little more difficulty than linear ones; Jacobians are calculated
&lt;br/&gt;internally and automatically. This robust system automates not only
&lt;br/&gt;standard simulations, but also sensitivity calculations,
eigenvalue&lt;br/&gt;problems, and PDE-constrained optimization, all through the
language of&lt;br/&gt;differentiation, providing a simple gateway to efficient
``embedded''&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for optimization and control. Furthermore, in
this project, &lt;br/&gt;Sundance will be extended to run on emerging
architectures such as &lt;br/&gt;multicore CPU and GPU machines. New low-
complexity finite element &lt;br/&gt;algorithms based on Bernstein polynomials
will be developed and included &lt;br/&gt;within Sundance to further exploit
this new hardware. Thus, this project &lt;br/&gt;represents concrete
transformational contributions not only automating&lt;br/&gt;mathematical
software but in core numerical algorithms, broadening the&lt;br/&gt;circle of
domain specialists with access to leading-edge simulation&lt;br/&gt;technology.