* 1117831
* NeTS: Small:  Adaptive Network Coding for Wireless Relay Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Jian Ren, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2016
* USD 416,603.00

Network coding has demonstrated to be very effective in increasing wireless
network capacity and reliability. However, the benefits of network coding are
only applicable in networks consisting of reliable and trustworthy nodes. Non-
negligible network coding (NC) noise and network pollution can cause substantial
performance decrease. There is a cogent need for adaptive network coding schemes
that can optimize network level throughput by exploiting NC noise and NC
pollution. This research develops efficient adaptive model that can provide
optimal network level throughput by designing of adaptive network coding
schemes, pollution detection model, and joint treatment of coding and dynamic
routing. The overall objective is threefold. First, it develops adaptive
characteristic model and efficient estimation on the NC noise and NC pollution.
Based on this, novel on-the-fly adaptive network coding schemes are developed.
Second, this research develops theoretical characterization and effective
pollution detection and immunization schemes in relay networks through source
privacy protection. Third, this research establishes the mathematical structure
for the wireless relay node, and designs cost function for optimal throughput
computation. Based on this, provably optimal algorithms with polynomial time
complexity are developed under the given pollution constraint and security
requirement. In addition, this project also includes a significant education
component aimed at integrating frontier research with undergraduate and graduate
curricula.