* 1117462
* NeTS:  Small:  Inducing and Exploiting Spectrum Predictability via Traffic Shaping and Mobility for Cognitive Communication in White Space
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 429,864.00

Spectrum opportunities in white space hinge heavily on the traffic patterns of
the licensed users (PUs), and vary across space, time, and frequency. Making a
paradigm shift, this project advocates to leverage traffic shaping and mobility
patterns of PUs for inducing predictable structures of spectrum holes in the
spatio-temporal domain, which in turn enables more efficient spectrum access by
cognitive radio users. With such a common thread, this project will 1) study
joint traffic shaping and network coding for PUs, as a spectrum shaper, to
induce predictive structures in spectrum holes; 2) investigate SUs? cognitive
transmissions via adaptive file fragmentation and predetermined file
fragmentation that can match the characteristics of spectrum opportunities
discovered on the fly; and 3) explore cognitive routing via exploiting PU-
mobility predictability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Efficient spectrum usage will
facilitate a wide variety of scientific and engineering applications and result
in a significant impact on the society at large. This research will open a new
direction for spectrum shaping that induces predictable structures of spectrum
opportunities, which can then be exploited by SUs for effective cognitive
communications. The findings will advance the state-of-the-art of cognitive
radio networking and spur a new line of thinking. Another major task of this
project is to integrate research with educational activities. In particular, the
PIs will continue to involve under-represented and minority students in
research.