* 1117016
* CSR:  Small:  A Scalable and Efficient Framework for Switch Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Deng Pan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2016
* USD 397,988.00

This project addresses network virtualization by developing a suite of bandwidth
allocation and packet scheduling techniques as an integrated framework for
switch virtualization. The goal is to achieve scalable, efficient, and isolated
link sharing among virtual networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network
virtualization allows for the creation of multiple coexisting logical networks,
each customized to a specific purpose, by reorganizing the resources of a common
physical infrastructure. Network virtualization has many important applications
in delivering reduced hardware cost, improved resource utilization, simplified
maintenance, and incremental service deployment. Implementation of network
virtualization relies on creating slices for various resources of the underlying
physical infrastructure. However, effective solutions are needed to create
slices for switches, the important interconnecting components of any network.
This project develops Scalability and Efficiency Aware Link Sharing (SEALS)
framework for switch virtualization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
considers two types of switch virtualization: intra-switch virtualization which
creates multiple logical switches within a physical one, and inter-switch
virtualization which creates a logical switch by combining multiple
heterogeneous physical ones. The SEALS framework accurately emulates the ideal
Generalized Processor Sharing (GPS) model to realize scalable, efficient, and
isolated switch virtualization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of
theoretical analysis, simulations, and experiments are used to evaluate the
design. The SEALS framework is implemented in OpenFlow switches to obtain
experimental data from a realistic environment. The outcome of this project will
facilitate the creation of commercial and academic virtual networks to build
cost-saving infrastructure or experiment new network prototypes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this project offers research
opportunities in computing to underrepresented minority groups, through summer
workshops, curriculum development, and undergraduate research programs. Florida
International University is among the top grantors of computer science and
engineering degrees to Hispanic students in the nation. Its history of involving
underrepresented groups in research efforts will be leveraged during the course
of this project. The project web site will be used for dissemination of all
publications, course materials, and source code resulted from the project.