* 1117261
* CSR: Small: Enabling Renewable Energy Powered Sustainable High Performance Computer Architectures and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Tao Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The continuing decline of conventional fossil fuel has resulted in increasing
energy costs all around the world. Meanwhile, fossil fuel-induced greenhouse gas
emissions have profound implications for our environment. Renewable energy is
generated from natural resources that are naturally replenished. Photovoltaic
(PV) generation is gaining increased popularity due to its advantages such as
absence of fuel cost, low maintenance, and no noise and wear due to the absence
of moving parts. Designing renewable energy driven computer systems poses
various challenges in terms of intelligent control strategies for better energy
utilization, optimizations for reducing overhead and improving reliability. The
proposed research will develop novel enabling technologies for high-performance
computer architectures (e.g. multi-core CPU/GPU) that can achieve high
efficiency and dependability in utilizing renewable energy. The research goal
includes GPU power management schemes that can maximize a solar panel?s total
energy output using load-matching and intelligently allocate the available solar
power across multiple cores and threads so that maximum workload performance can
be achieved. The proposed research project can greatly contribute to enabling
high-performance computing systems to stay on track with its historic scaling
and hence benefit numerous real-life applications. This project also contributes
to society through engaging under-represented groups, research infrastructure
dissemination for education and training, and outreach to renewable energy
industries and research community.