* 1117772
* CSR: Small: Enabling Dual-mode Execution for Removing I/O Bottleneck: A Highly Applicable Design and Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Song Jiang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

Maintaining high parallelism is critical for efficient use of multicore- and
cluster-based parallel systems, but this can be at odds with I/O efficiency,
resulting in suboptimal performance of I/O-intensive parallel applications. The
efficiency of request-processing policies at different levels of the I/O stack
relies on the locality of requests from various processes. Processes are the
producers of I/O requests, and their scheduling determines the timing of request
issuance and the locality among requests from different processes. When a
program is I/O bottlenecked the scheduling of its processes directly affects the
storage system?s efficiency, and thus the program?s execution time. In such
scenarios, a scheduling policy designed to improve request locality, in
preference to the usual objectives such as load balance and fairness, is
expected to improve the overall efficiency of the I/O stack and ameliorate I/O
bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator proposes a dual-mode
execution, incorporating a new data-driven mode to complement the normal
statement-driven mode. In the data-driven mode processes are scheduled such that
they will issue requests with improved locality, and will consume data that has
been efficiently pre-fetched. The research focus of this 12-month project is the
investigation and understanding of the extent to which process scheduling can
positively affect I/O performance. It takes into account variance of I/O
intensity, I/O access pattern of individual processes, and the ratio of reads
and writes. The investigator will perform an extensive examination of I/O
performance behaviors at different I/O layers, including the I/O library, system
buffer, and I/O scheduler, with various hypothetical I/O-aware process
scheduling strategies. This research will reveal the potential merits of the
proposed dual-mode execution, and delineate the design space for algorithms
supporting it. It will also identify pitfalls and limits of potential designs
and their implementations. By so doing, this project is expected to pave the
road to the introduction of a disruptive technique for mitigating I/O
bottlenecks.