* 1117975
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: VLSI Design Predictability Improvement By New Statistical Techniques in Timing Analysis, Delay ATPG, and Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Bao Liu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

One of the most critical challenges in todays nanoscale VLSI design is the lack
of predictability in analysis and optimization. As VLSI technology continues
scaling in the nanometer domain, VLSI systems are subject to increasingly
significant parametric variations coming from not only the manufacturing process
but also the system runtime environment. Increasingly significant parametric
variations lead to increasingly significant variations in IC timing performance,
power consumption, and other product metrics. Existing VLSI statistical analysis
techniques cannot accurately and efficiently capture such variations; this
greatly compromises design optimization and design convergence, affecting
product quality and time-to market. In this work the PIs plan to develop
techniques for signal probability-based statistical timing analysis (SPSTA),
which would achieve accurate performance estimates for different inputs, rather
than input-oblivious pessimistic delay bounds. In this project, the PIs propose
to build on the foundation of SPSTA to enable a new, predictive and less-
pessimistic VLSI implementation methodology. Core techniques will span VLSI
statistical analysis, delay test ATPG, and optimization techniques that exploit
improved predictability. Specifically, there are three thrust areas in this
project, and it is expected that that these techniques will outperform existing
alternative techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this project is
critical to the cost-effective continuation of semiconductor technology scaling
(i.e., Moore's Law), and to maintaining growth of the semiconductor industry's
economic engine in the coming years. The broader impacts of the proposed project
can be further measured by a strong education program including curriculum
development and research training which incorporate statistical VLSI analysis
and optimization techniques into the computer engineering programs at the PIs?
institutions, and into course infrastructure that is broadly and openly
available to others online. Following their established practices of well over a
decade, the PIs will broadly disseminate their research results by publication,
industry collaboration, and online posting of open-source software. This project
will also allow the PIs to broaden participation of students from under-
represented groups based on the minority institute status of UT San Antonio; it
will help educational initiatives that are aimed at preparing the San Antonio
regional economy to transform into a technology-oriented one.