* 1117679
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Provable Security from Group Theory and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Antonio Nicolosi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 07/31/2014
* USD 42,117.00

Information technology is an established component of the infrastructure of
modern societies, and cryptography is a cornerstone of information security.
Provable security quantifies the resilience of cryptographic constructions to
attacks. This quantification is often relative to the hardness of a handful of
reference "intractable" problems like integer factorization. Because of the
intrinsic strength of heterogeneity, diversifying the set of intractable
problems enhances the robustness of the overall structure. This project responds
to the challenge by building a foundation for cryptography from problems in
combinatorial group theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project capitalizes on
earlier efforts on the algorithmic unsolvability of standard computational
problems in combinatorial group theory like the "word problem", but looks at
them through the lens of the probabilistic modeling, characteristic of modern
cryptography. The research objectives can be grouped into three main categories:
1) identifying efficiently sampleable distributions on which (variants of) the
standard computational group-theoretic problems remain _difficult on average_;
2) developing new _hard group-theoretic learning problems_; and 3) exploring the
implications of this foundational work to applications with enhanced
cryptographic functionality, with the long-term goal of deriving group-theoretic
instantiations of public-key cryptography with homomorphic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this project will enrich the theory
and practice of cryptography with new tools and alternatives, stimulating for
researchers throughout the cryptography and group-theory communities, thus
fostering collaborations between the two fields. The undertaking of the research
entails significant student participation in research at institutions that serve
demographic groups that have been historically underrepresented in computer
science and mathematics.