* 1117221
* CSR: Small: Designing Server Clusters to Handle Variable Solar and Wind Power
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2014
* USD 228,000.00

As data centers have increased in size, the energy consumed in powering and
cooling server clusters has become a significant fraction of the total cost of
ownership of operating a data center. As a result, there is an increasing trend
towards reducing the energy and carbon footprint of data centers as well as in
using green sources of energy such as solar and wind power to run data centers.
In this project, we will conduct fundamental research on system support for
server clusters that are designed to run using variable power, such as that from
renewable sources. We will design a new supply-side technique to manage the
energy and power footprint of a data center server cluster and to adapt this
footprint to supply-side fluctuations. Our enables compute and data nodes in a
server cluster to be duty-cycled so that their power and energy footprint can be
gracefully adapted to a varying supply curve. We will design study how
distributed storage and server virtualization can be adapted to exploit such
duty-cycling of servers to reduce energy use. The broader impacts of this work
include a new graduate seminar course on Sustainable Computing, summer REU
projects to include undergraduate students, especially from underrepresented
groups, in this research, and outreach to K-12 teachers and community college
faculty via tutorials in sustainability.