* 1117426
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Representation-theoretic techniques for pseudorandomness and lower bounds
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Cristopher Moore, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2012
* USD 248,979.00

Fourier analysis, where we decompose a complex function into a sum of simple
oscillations, is used in virtually every form of digital technology, from JPEG
compression to voice recognition. In computer science, Fourier analysis has led
to new algorithms for "pseudorandom numbers," i.e., numbers with no apparent
pattern, which are useful both in cryptography and in algorithms for estimating
functions and confirming computational claims. Fourier analysis also plays a key
role in Shor's quantum algorithm for factoring, which breaks RSA public-key
cryptography, and in proofs that some problems are hard to solve with certain
kinds of parallel algorithms or circuits.

Profs. Moore and Russell will use the more powerful tool of nonabelian Fourier
analysis to obtain new results in these areas. In particular, they propose new
ways to "derandomize" algorithms, replacing random numbers with pseudorandom
ones. They will study the extent to which rich, high-dimensional structures can
be embedded in low-dimensional spaces with only a small amount of distortion,
and prove that certain problems require a long time even for quantum computers
to solve. Finally, they will study whether some alternatives to RSA, such as the
McEliece cryptosystem based on error-correcting codes, will remain secure even
if and when quantum computers are built. Thus their research has important
impacts on algorithms, security, and cryptography. They teach courses that train
students from Physics and Computer Science to work at the boundary between these
disciplines, and their outreach activities include bringing this material to
high school and middle-school teachers.