* 1117254
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Active DNA Assembly of Aperiodic Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Natasa Jonoska, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 159,250.00

AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Active DNA Assembly of Aperiodic
Structures&lt;br/&gt;PIs: N.C. Seeman, N. Jonoska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
science of computing and information processing is rapidly proliferating within
established disciplines that at first glance appear unrelated. Examples include
biochemistry and biology through the areas of bioinformatics and algorithmic
molecular assembly, or physics, through quantum computing. Current top-down
photolithographic methods of electronic component construction are likely to
encounter severe barriers as miniaturization requires features at very small
sizes. An alternative approach to such constructions is programmable bottom-up
assembly on the molecular scale. The most popular basis for bottom-up assembly
is DNA self-assembly, because DNA contains information through which assembly
can be controlled in a variety of ways. This approach has been explored by a
variety of laboratories in recent years, but was pioneered by the PI Seeman's
laboratory roughly thirty years ago. Robust DNA motifs can be self-assembled
into objects, lattices and devices, using the information content inherent in
the DNA molecules (or their analogs) themselves. Notable milestones include the
self-assembly of DNA polyhedra, the self-assembly of 2D DNA periodic lattices,
the self-assembly of high-resolution 3D DNA crystals, the development of clocked
and autonomous cascade-like DNA walkers, the development of DNA origami, and the
construction of 1D and 2D algorithmic assemblies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to combine several of these developments to produce robust
aperiodic structures that will enable nano-scale construction of computational
machinery. The goal of the project is to introduce a new paradigm in the self-
assembly of nano-scale devices by DNA self-assembly: active (rather than
passive) recursion-based assembly of aperiodic structures. The project will
incorporate elements of DNA walkers into DNA origami-based tiles as signals that
guide hierarchical active assembly of aperiodic arrays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed hierarchical algorithmic assembly would be
the first demonstration of recursion in molecular self-assembly that can be seen
as a physical incarnation of programmed recursion. It is known that self-similar
and fractal-like structures have advantages in material design, heat exchange
and information processing, e.g., the very significant advances obtained by
miniature fractal-like antennas. Consequently, the possibilities for self-
similar arrangements at the nano-scale can be expected to advance further the
design of materials and electronics, while decreasing the costs involved in
their construction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is highly
interdisciplinary, ranging from computer science to molecular design, from
biochemistry to crystallography, physics and engineering. It directly supports
training of a postdoctoral associate (a female Hispanic) and graduate students.
The training that the postdoc and the students receive in doing this work will
prepare them as unique interdisciplinary research scientists, trained
researchers able to pursue studies that require broader scientific knowledge.
The postdoctoral fellow will be trained to lead and coordinate a project of a
fundamentally interdisciplinary nature. Through their teaching, the PIs impact a
wider student body, and through writing textbooks they impact the wider society.
The PIs are prominent members of the DNA-based nanoengineering community. Their
contributions are well recognized in the field of nanoscale engineering, DNA
computing and DNA nanotechnology, and as such the PIs are involved in the wider
scientic organizations and events as both, lecturers and organizers. PI Seeman
is frequently involved in science-art activities, and has just written an
article on this topic for the new NSF journal Mosaic.