* 1117954
* AF: Small: Nearly Linear-Time Algorithms for Mixed Packing and Covering Linear Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Neal Young, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2014
* USD 102,044.00

On both practical and theoretical levels, linear programming is one of the most
important optimization problems studied in Computer Science and Operations
Research. But, on both levels, our current understanding of linear programming
has substantial room for improvement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretically, the
worst-case time bounds that are known for current algorithms are far higher than
what is observed in practice. Although the recent development of smoothed
analysis gives polynomial-bounded running time on certain kinds of instances,
the bounds are still very high-degree polynomials, much larger than what we see
in practice. Our current theoretical models do not accurately model how linear-
programming algorithms behave in practice. Practically, current algorithms often
take time quadratic in the size of the input (even to find approximate, as
opposed to optimal, solutions). An ideal algorithm should take linear, or nearly
linear, time. State-of-the-art implementations (such as CPLEX) are generally
commercially developed, taking research on them out of the public/academic
domain. Effective implementation of Simplex and Interior-Point algorithms is
difficult, as evidenced by the performance gap between free and commercial
solvers and the cost of the best commercial solvers. To solve very large
problems, even the most effective implementations sometimes require manual
testing and tuning, and even then can be unpredictably slow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing algorithms leave room for improvement on several
fronts, including ease of implementation, ease of use, numerical stability,
public accessibility, running time, and good theoretical analyses. Given the
widespread practical and commercial importance of linear programming, the
development and publication of algorithms with provably good worst-case running
times, provable numerical stability, and relatively simple, open-source
implementations, have the potential for broad practical and commercial impact.
The goal of the project is to make progress in this direction by designing
provably fast (nearly linear time) and numerically robust approximation
algorithms for very large linear-programming problems. The project focuses on
algorithms for so-called mixed packing and covering linear programs --- an
important special case in which all coefficients in the constraint matrix are
non-negative. In practice, for problem instances having more than thousands of
rows and columns, the goal of the project is algorithms that find solutions
within 1% of optimal, and do so orders of magnitude more quickly than algorithms
now used in practice (Simplex, Interior Point, and Ellipsoid). The algorithms
should be numerically stable --- requiring no special treatment of instances
with ill-conditioned constraint matrices. The algorithms will be made publically
available via implementations and open-source publications.