* 1117280
* CSR: Small: Codesign of Accelerator Interface Software and Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Mark Hill, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2014
* USD 399,999.00

Frequent doubling of computer system performance has facilitated innovations in
science, education, government, and commerce. The foundations of these
improvements, Moore's Law improving density and Dennard scaling reducing
transistor power, have enabled chips with exponentially more transistors at
roughly fixed power and cost. However, upcoming physical limits threaten to
force a choice between either chip power and cost escalation or stagnant chip
performance where lowest cost wins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks a
new middle approach, called dark silicon, that keeps the number of powered-on
transistors roughly constant even as the number of transistors per chip grows.
Rather than add general-purpose cores, future mainstream chips will deploy many
accelerators to improve performance or power by 10x-100x. Such chips will turn
on one or more accelerators when needed to help power and/or performance and
leave most others off. Accelerators for system-on-chip (SoC) have already been
designed, for such uses as encryption, (de)compression, network protocols, XML,
and graphics. This research seeks to invent and refine architecture and system
support to make existing and future accelerators possible in mainstream
processors. Specific focus is given to low-overhead solutions facilitating fine-
grain use that allow accelerators to be used and shared while protecting
security and privacy. The project relies on co-design of hardware and software
interfaces to accelerators in order to enable direct, low-latency access from
user-mode code via coherent shared-memory
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More efficient access to accelerators
enables Moore's law to bring continued performance increases without
corresponding increases in power. This can reduce the overall power consumption
of computing and reduce greenhouse gas production, as well as provide greater
computation power at any scale, whether in a mobile device or a supercomputer.
The PIs continue to impact broadly the state-of-the-art of computer systems
through students, courses, talks, industrial affiliates, commercial influence,
and sharing of infrastructure.