* 1117184
* SHF: Small: Generation of High-Quality Tests by Treating Tests as Proof Encoding
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Panagiotis Manolios, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 495,258.00

Verification is a bottleneck of crisis proportions in the design of the hardware
and software systems society depends on. The two main approaches to verification
are formal verification and testing. Formal verification has the advantage that
it rules out the existence of any logical bugs that violate the properties under
consideration. Unfortunately, current formal methods are not scalable and cannot
be directly applied to entire designs. In contrast, testing is very scalable and
is therefore the method of choice in practice. The disadvantage of testing is
that it does not rule out the existence of bugs, and bugs that escape the
testing process can lead to recalls, software crashes, and even the loss of
life. The research proposed will make testing more effective by developing
methods of test generation that reduce the probability of missing bugs while
simultaneously keeping the number of tests generated relatively small.

The proposed research is based on the new idea that tests can be thought of as
encodings of proofs. This is a fundamentally different way of viewing testing,
which is traditionally thought of as a method for sampling the space of all
possible system behaviors. The research will explore several potentially
tranformative directions. The first is that one can effectively generate small
and complete test sets, i.e., tests sets that rule out the existence of bugs.
Another direction is that testing regimes can be compared by checking to see
which lead to test sets that are closest to encoding relevant proofs. A third
direction is to establish strong connections that bridge the gap between formal
verification and testing. Finally, the proposed research will lead to the
development of efficient algorithms for test generation that will be applied to
a range of important problems arising in hardware and software verification.