* 1117665
* SHB: Small: InteCog System: ClockReader+ and CogStim Game for Screening and Preventing Cognitive Impairment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Yi-Luen Do, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 102,000.00

Age-related cognitive impairments, including Alzheimer's disease, are among the
most common diseases in the United States. Prevention through delay is currently
considered the best way to tackle Alzheimer's disease and related disorders
(ADRD). Early detection is crucial, as screening individuals with Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI) may delay its progression and prevent it from developing. This
research investigates the role of technologies for senior citizens with
potential MCI at-risk factors and for medical practitioners, such as
neurologists or neuropsychologists, to make data-driven clinical decisions.

The Clock Drawing Test, in which the patient is asked to draw a clock showing a
certain time, is one of the easiest and most frequently used instruments for
dementia screening. Current practice requires medical practitioners to
administer and assess each individual paper-and-pencil test. It requires tedious
effort and is prone to errors and inconsistent scoring among different
clinicians. To address these difficulties, previous work by this research group
has resulted in a computer-based version of the Clock Drawing Test that records
a patient's freehand drawing on a tablet computer, then analyzes the drawing for
evidence of cognitive imparment.

The current project is extending the computer-based system to acquire additional
data associated with the Clock Drawing Test. This data includes timing of
drawing and pausing phases, and pressure applied during drawing. The data can be
used in evaluating drawings under several different scoring critera that can be
chosen by the clinician. Through analysis of data and focus group discussions,
the clinical utility of the new features are being evaluated with a goal of
further improvement.