* 1117509
* RI: Small: Exploiting Correlated Sparsity Pattern Change in Dynamic Vision Problems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Namrata Vaswani, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 204,395.00

This project develops a new framework to solve a large class of dynamic vision
problems by exploiting correlated sparsity pattern change in the appropriate
domain. The focus is on high-dimensional visual tracking problems such as
deformable contour tracking or target tracking in the presence of significant
illumination changes. These are difficult because of the high dimensionality and
because the observation models are highly nonlinear and/or non-Gaussian due to
clutter, occlusions or low contrast. However, in most such problems, even though
the state (e.g., contour deformation or illumination) is high-dimensional, at
any given time, most change occurs in only a few principal directions. In a long
sequence, this set of directions can gradually change over time. Most existing
methods need a set of past state estimates to estimate this change on-the-fly
while tracking noisy or nonlinear systems. The research team provides a
completely new solution to this difficult problem by re-interpreting it as a
problem of "recursively reconstructing sparse state sequences with slow time-
varying sparsity patterns" and tapping into ideas from their ongoing recursive
sparse recovery work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of this project enriches
the knowledge base of computer vision and can be applied to many different
applications such as medical image analysis and video surveillance. The project
provides research opportunities for graduate students and involves undergraduate
students, including under-represented minorities, through summer, senior design
projects and REU projects.