* 1117384
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Autonomous Failure Detection and Recovery in Networked Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Xiaorui Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Developers of networked embedded systems often find it difficult to diagnose
bugs. A key observation is that in such systems, it can be beneficial to exploit
domain knowledge about events in the physical world to detect failures. For
example, in a sensor network deployment, knowing that the received signal
strength of a radio transmission will normally decrease over distance, the
application developer can enforce runtime checks to detect faulty nodes based on
their relative distances to the source and the orderings of their received
signal strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on this intuition, this project
addresses the challenge of developing correct, resilient, and reliable networked
embedded systems by (i) proposing, developing, and evaluating a methodology of
using physical events to detect software bugs, (ii) developing software
libraries and APIs to facilitate easy access to physical event constraints by
application developers, and (iii) evaluating the effectiveness of the software
libraries using real-world applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The completed
framework could significantly reduce the debugging and maintenance costs for
complicated networked embedded systems, and improve their reliability. Beyond
such direct social and economic benefits, the broader impacts of this work
include: (i) improving curriculum with hands-on debugging sessions; (ii) raising
interest in technology among high school seniors through a Pre-Collegiate
Research Scholars Program; (iii) supporting talented female and under-
represented minority PhD students to successfully accomplish their doctoral
studies; (iv) disseminating research results through high-quality publications,
high-profile tutorials, and open-source sites.