* 1117956
* RI: Small: Towards Practical Tractability in Constraint Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Berthe Choueiry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2015
* USD 435,564.00

Many problems in artificial intelligence, engineering, and management can be
advantageously modeled and solved as Constraint Satisfaction Problems, but
scalability remains in practice a major obstacle to the successful deployment of
Constraint Solvers. The goal of this project is to design algorithms and
strategies that enable computers to overcome, in practice, the scalability
barrier. To this end, the proposed research targets the two fundamental
mechanisms in Constraint Processing that are the most promising for breaking the
complexity barrier, namely, enforcing consistency and detecting and breaking
symmetry. This project aims to design new algorithms for those two mechanisms
and develop strategies for intertwining them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
tractability of a problem is guaranteed by a relationship between a structural
parameter of the problem and its level of consistency. This project aims to
design algorithms that enforce the needed level of consistency without adversely
modifying the structure of the problem. Symmetries can be detected and exploited
to dramatically reduce the cost of problem solving. This project aims to (1)
design algorithms for detecting symmetries, and (2) develop approximation
strategies for exploiting them without sacrificing the soundness and
completeness of problem solving. A key observation is that algorithms for
enforcing consistency and those for locally detecting symmetry are based on the
same atomic operations. Furthermore, they seem to be effective under
complementary operating conditions. This project further aims to design
strategies for intertwining the operation of the two types of algorithms so that
the application of the one type enables and facilitates that of the other type,
in order to yield new opportunities to control the combinatorial explosion. The
approach will be validated on applications of practical importance and extended
to address similar combinatorial problems in other areas of Computer Science
such as Databases and Software Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activities contribute to the progress of the research on two fundamental aspects
of Constraint Processing. From a practical perspective, this research directly
benefits many combinatorial problems of practical importance. From a scientific
standpoint, this project will identify connections and build new bridges with
other areas of Computer Science, such as Databases and Software Engineering. The
insight gained from these investigations will be used to improve the scope and
content of introductory and advanced courses on Constraint Processing. The
opportunities and research avenues will be heavily exploited to involve
undergraduate students in research and to give them experience in using the
project's insights on problems that they find engaging (e.g., Sudoku) and for
understanding the operation of algorithms in Computer Science courses; the goal
is to motivate students to conduct research in Constraint Processing and to
transfer results from this field to other students and researchers in Computer
Science, Mathematics, Engineering, to entice high-school students to study
Computer Science, and in addition, to explain to the general public some of the
fundamental mechanisms at the heart of complex problem solving.