* 1117263
* CSR:Small:Sensor-driven Thermal-aware Autonomic Management of Instrumented Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Dario Pompili, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

Due to the increasing demands for computing and storage, energy consumption,
heat generation, and cooling requirements have become critical concerns both in
terms of the growing costs as well as their environmental and societal impacts.
Thus, thermal awareness, which is the knowledge of local unevenness in heat
generation and extraction rates, and hence, heat imbalance at various points
inside a datacenter, is essential to maximize energy and cooling efficiency as
well as to minimize server failure rates.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
research are to acquire knowledge about the heat imbalance at different regions
inside a datacenter and to enable thermal-aware self-configuration and self-
optimization of computing resources inside a datacenter. These objectives are
aimed at increasing the energy and cooling efficiency and at decreasing
equipment failure rates so to minimize both the impact on the environment and
the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) of datacenters. Specifically, the project
focuses on designing autonomic adaptive sampling solutions for enabling self-
organization of heterogeneous sensors - composed of thermal cameras, scalar
temperature and humidity sensors, and airflow meters - into a multi-tier sensing
infrastructure, and on studying proactive, Quality of Service (QoS)-aware, heat-
imbalance-based solutions for Virtual Machine (VM) consolidation and cooling
system optimization in a virtualized air-cooled datacenter.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also result in the generation of computer-literate undergraduate
and graduate researchers with a comprehensive knowledge of complex optimization
problems in energy-efficient design and management of large datacenters. The PI
will create new teaching modules on distributed sensing, provide opportunities
for exchange programs, leverage existing minority student outreach networks at
Rutgers, and incorporate student exchange programs as well as team-teaching
approaches.