* 1117782
* CSR: SMALL:  Formal Models, Processor Architecture, and Evaluation of Sampling for Hardware Reliability
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Karthikeyan Sankaralingam, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2014
* USD 199,999.00

Device physics, manufacturing, and engineering challenges in process scaling are
providing signi?cant challenges in producing reliable transistors for future
technologies. Many academic experts, industry consortia, and research panels
have warned that future generations of silicon technology are likely to be much
less reliable with multi-core chips with cores failing in the ?eld due to faults
in silicon are around the corner. Concurrently with the reducing reliability,
the individual energy ef?ciency of transistors is not keeping up with increase
in transistor density. These two trends portend a perfect storm: as the energy
ef?ciency of transistors is slowing down, they are becoming highly unpredictable
which will force further inef?ciencies. Addressing hardware reliability is a
fundamental problem for microprocessors and hence for sustaining the IT
revolution. This project looks at mechanisms for allowing chips and the higher
levels of software to continue working even when devices fail. The basic idea
the project looks at is how to detect when chips fail.

The core idea that this projrct builds upon is the principle of Sampling.
Instead of checking for failures all the time, the idea is to use a periodic
sampling window for checking for device failures. The project investigates
formal models, hardware implementation, and evaluation to understand the effect
of device failures and the impact of the detection techniques.