* 1117983
* CIF: Small: Jamming in Wireless Networks: Offensive Strategies and Cooperation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Arnold Swindlehurst, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2014
* USD 368,940.00

Interference is a key impediment to achieving high data rates in wireless
communications systems. Intentional interference or "jamming" has primarily been
studied in military communication networks. Most prior work has used non-
descriptive models for the jammers, without ascribing any strategies or special
capabilities to them beyond their ability to broadcast noise. This research
project focuses on the design of the jamming strategies themselves, rather than
on their mitigation (although the latter issue is inherently addressed as well).
Questions considered include: What information can jammers exploit? How does the
jammer deal with situations where this information is imprecise? How can
distributed jammers coordinate their interference to maximize its effect? How
should the jamming be designed to mask communications that must be kept secure
from eavesdroppers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focuses on jamming
techniques that exploit multiple antennas at the physical layer. Specific
research thrusts include:&lt;br/&gt;-- Cooperative jamming in wireless networks:
Cooperative policies are being developed that optimally allocate resources to
the desired link and friendly jammers.&lt;br/&gt;-- Malicious feedback:
Scenarios where the "jamming" is not noise but rather malicious physical layer
feedback. These are studied to determine the extent of potential damage and
possible remedies.&lt;br/&gt;-- Robustness to inaccurate channel estimates:
Maximizing the impact of jamming depends critically on the quality of the
available channel information. This research is investigating the effect of
inaccuries in this information and on techniques that are robust to
such.&lt;br/&gt;-- Experimental studies: Using MIMO radios in their lab, the
researchers are implementing cooperative jamming approaches in a real network
and studying the gap between theoretical and actual performance.