* 1117761
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: An Argumentation-based Framework for Security Management
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Elizabeth Sklar, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 264,596.00

Computer users are increasingly faced with decisions that impact their personal
privacy and the security of the systems they manage. The range of users
confronting these challenges has broadened from the early days of computing to
include everyone from home users to administrators of large enterprise networks.
Privacy policies are frequently obscure, and security settings are typically
complex. Missing from the options presented to a user is a decision support
mechanism that can assist her in making informed choices. Being presented with
the consequences of decisions she is asked to make, among other information, is
a necessary component that is currently lacking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
introduces formal argumentation as a framework for helping users make informed
decisions about the security of their computer systems and the privacy of their
electronically stored information. &lt;br/&gt;Argumentation, a mature
theoretical discipline, provides a mechanism for reaching substantiated
conclusions when faced with incomplete and inconsistent information. It provides
the basis for presenting arguments to a user for or against a position, along
with well-founded methods for assessing the outcome of interactions among the
arguments. An elegant theory of argumentation has been developed based on meta
rules characterizing relationships between arguments. Rules for argument
construction and evaluation have been devised for specific domains such as
medical diagnosis. This project investigates argumentation as the basis for
helping users make informed security- and privacy-related decisions about their
computer systems. Three specific aims are addressed:&lt;br/&gt;1) Implementation
of an inference engine that reasons using argumentation,&lt;br/&gt;2) Facilitate
security management through an argumentation inference engine, a rule base
specialized for security management, and sensors providing security alerts all
enhanced with an interactive front-end.&lt;br/&gt;3) Reason about the
consistency and completeness of domain knowledge, as it evolves.&lt;br/&gt;To
understand the kinds of domain-specific inference rules required, diverse
security applications are studied, such as determining if an attack imperils a
particular system, finding the root cause of an attack, deciding on appropriate
actions to take in the presence of an uncertain diagnosis of an attack, and
deciding on privacy settings. &lt;br/&gt;Emerging from this project will be a
prototype towards the practice of usable security. The team is working with
organizations responsible for the security administration of large enterprise
networks and will make the prototype tools available to these organizations. The
team is working with everyday users from a cross-section of community members.
&lt;br/&gt;Curricular modules that cover the intersection of argumentation and
security are being developed and shared.