* 1117628
* The First All-Sky Airglow Imaging Experiments Over Western Europe
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,09/30/2016
* Jeffrey Baumgardner, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 09/30/2016
* USD 363,832.00

This is an effort aimed at developing, installing, and operating a modern all-
sky imaging instrument to study airglow emissions over a site in northern Italy
(an astronomical observatory of the University of Padua). The primary science
rationale of doing so is to study Stable Auroral Red (SAR) arcs, Medium Scale
Traveling Ionospheric Disturbances (MSTIDs), and gravity-wave signatures in the
mesosphere. Specifically, the new all sky camera will provide the first ground-
based multi-longitudinal coverage for the SAR arc. In combination with the
existing Millstone Hill all sky camera, the new camera will allow the
examination of the longitudinal variations of the SAR arc, which is crucial for
a better understanding of the SAR phenomenon and its relation to the dynamics of
the magnetosphere and the ring current. On the medium scale TIDs, the new data
sets will be used to explore the effects on source mechanisms in Europe, where
the characteristics of geographic and geomagnetic latitudes, and the orientation
of the geomagnetic meridians, are quite different from those found in the North
and South American sectors that are the main focus of current on-going studies.
Likewise, the orograhic differences between Europe and other continents will
manifest into longitudinal variations in mesospheric gravity wave activities.
The location of the new instrument in the Dolomite Mountain Range will enable
the first study of source processes in Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is fundamentally international in scope, building on a long-established, strong
collaboration between scientists at Boston University and the University of
Padua in the area of Planetary Atmospheres. The collaboration will be expanded
with this effort to terrestrial atmospheric science, with involvement of a new
set of students and research staff members from Boston and Padua. A dense
network of GPS receivers and ionosondes, already operational within the field-
of-view spanned by the imager, will contribute to the studies via collaborations
set up with colleagues in Florence (Italy) and Bath (UK). These will be used,
together with satellite over-flights, in multi-diagnostic studies by a multi-
national team.