* 1117960
* CCF:  Small:  A Programming Environment for High Performance Computing Based on Practical Program Transformation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Ralph Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2014
* USD 495,259.00

Successful software systems continue to change. Most programmers work on
projects that they did not start, and most companies spend more on maintaining
old systems than on building new ones. This goal of this research is to make
programs easier to change by developing better software tools and by studying
how programmers change software. The project is extending Photran, an open-
source programming environment for FORTRAN, so that it better supports the way
FORTRAN programmers change their software to make them run on next-generation
supercomputers. The new version of Photran will have the potential to make it
much less expensive to port high-performance software, and the ideas have the
potential to reduce the cost of software development in general.

The new system will record each change that a programmer makes and will
represent these changes at a high-level, i.e. not just as textual changes, but
as more meaningful units of changes, such as refactoring or optimizations. It
will let programmers modify these changes after the fact, making it possible to
change the portable version of a program and then replay the hand-crafted
optimizations. Programmers can port a program to a new architecture by starting
with a portable version and then choosing optimizations that were useful for
similar machines, or that were discovered by an auto-tuner, or that were
invented as needed. They will be able to think of a program as a sequence of
program transformations, and to generate a new program by reusing sub-sequences
from other programs. Thus, a sequence of changes will be just as valid a
representation of a program as a set of modules