* 1117186
* SHF: Small: FAST: A Simulation and Analysis Framework for Designing Large-Scale Biomolecular-Silicon Hybrid Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2015
* USD 386,602.00

The objective of this research is to investigate a computer aided design (CAD)
framework that can be used for verification and reliability analysis of hybrid
bio-silicon circuits used for designing biosensors. It is envisioned that
similar to integrated circuit (IC) CAD design tools, the same framework will be
useful in biosensor system optimization and in the discovery of new sensing
modalities that combine proteins and silicon circuits at a system level. Similar
to an IC design-flow, the proposed simulation and analysis framework will be
used to verify the functionality and reliability of biosensor systems before
undertaking laborious fabrication and experimental
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With advances in micro-nano-fabrication, the
emerging biosensors can integrate an ever increasing number of detection
elements on the same device. This has opened the possibility that perhaps
exploiting spatial redundancies across multiple detection experiments could be
used to alleviate the effects of biosensor artifacts using forward error-
correcting techniques. However, the full potential of this technique in
biosensing methods can only be achieved on high-density arrays that can
potentially integrate millions of protein-based circuits. The proposed research
would serve as a simulation and analysis framework to verify the functionality
and reliability of these high-density assays before undertaking painstaking
fabrication and experimental procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an outreach
component of this proposal, the PI plans to make software tools and the library
of protein-based circuit models publicly available through a webportal. The
users will be able to modify the software and integrate the modules with other
circuit simulation tools. From the perspective of a computer scientist or a VLSI
researcher the software could serve as a useful tool for explorations in the
area of hybrid bio-silicon circuits without resorting to time-consuming
laboratory experiments. The PI is also strongly committed to the training of
women, underrepresented and K-12 students. Different outreach programs which are
available at Michigan State University be used to recruit students to
participate in the proposed research.