* 1117121
* NeTS: Small: Towards Ubiquitous Multimedia Sensing through Compressive Video Streaming
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Dimitris Pados, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

While there has been progress in recent years in solving numerous wireless
sensor networking challenges, the key problem of enabling real-time quality-
aware video streaming in large-scale wireless networks of resource-constrained
devices is still open and largely unexplored. Existing wireless networking
protocol stacks based on transmitting predictively-encoded video are
computationally expensive, have limited resilience to wireless channel errors,
and use available network resources inefficiently. This project is attempting a
new approach based: (a) On the development of a novel wireless streaming
framework for resource-constrained devices rooted in the theory of compressed
sensing (CS) and (b) co-design/optimization of the video encoder and key
wireless networking functionalities.

The new networked wireless streaming system being developed is referred to as
Compressive Video Streaming (CVS) and has the potential to significantly reduce
power consumption for a given target video quality for resource-constrained
sensing devices. New network control algorithms are designed and integrated with
the video encoder that, unlike TCP and TCP-friendly approaches, use the
estimated received video quality as the basis for resource allocation decisions.
Project implementation and extensive testing is being carried out on several
experimental platforms.

The technology to be developed has the potential to strongly impact the state of
the art in resource-constrained wireless video sensor networks. Important
educational objectives of the program include mentoring of minority graduate and
undergraduate students, and development of new interdisciplinary course
materials.