* 1117599
* Biomaterials Day at Texas A&amp;M University
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Elizabeth Cosgriff-Hernandez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 04/30/2012
* USD 3,500.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1117599 PI: Cosgriff-Hernandez, Elizabeth ORG: Texas
A&amp;M &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Biomaterials Day at Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the Biomaterials Day at Texas A&amp;M
University is to enhance networking between academic and industrial sectors and
increase student exposure to exciting biomaterials research. The meeting program
will include a keynote lecture and two invited talks by leading biomaterials
scientists. Oral presentations from both academic and industrial researchers
will showcase ongoing research and promote collaboration and knowledge exchange
between institutions and industry. Finally, abstracts will be solicited for an
afternoon poster session that will provide a venue for student research
presentations and networking. Judges will select poster award recipients in each
student category (Undergraduate, Graduate) which will be presented at the
banquet. This one-day symposium will be held at the Annenberg Presidential
Conference Center in College Station, Texas, which provides lecture/banquet
halls, support staff, and catering. NSF support will go entirely toward rental
of facilities for the event. Other sponsors are the Texas A&amp;M Departments of
Chemical Engineering and Biomedical Engineering and the Society for
Biomaterials. Events of this sort introduce students to the excitement of the
biomaterials field and help them in formulating career decisions.