* 1117854
* HCC: Small: STAAR: Spatial Touch Audio Annotator and Reader for Individuals with Blindness or Severe Visual Impairment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Tonya Smith-Jackson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 498,781.00

The PI's goal in this research is to develop tools on a state-of-the-art
platform (the Apple iPad) that will afford access to textual information for
individuals who are blind or who suffer from severe visual impairments (IBSVI).
The PI's approach is to use an embossed screen overlay to provide spatial and
tactile correlates to text read aloud, and to engage the spatial cognition and
memory resources of the target population for navigating through a document and
annotating it if/as desired. The PI argues that from the invention of print
media forward, information has been formulated and optimized for consumption by
beings (people) with a dominant visual capability. This visuo-spatial bias is
not well-understood or studied in the context of information access by and
delivery to the IBSVI community; most technological information aids funnel
information to them as sequential aural streams, obviating the use of broader
spatial cognitive resources. In this project the PI will develop a Spatial Touch
Audio Annotator and Reader (STAAR) testbed to explore a multimodal alternative
that enables the user to fuse spatial layout and informational content through
touch location on a slate-type device and audio rendering of text to speech,
respectively. STAAR will enable self-paced reading using a tactile overlay
pattern on an iPad surface, which will be designed to provide tactile landmarks
to help the user navigate the "page." STAAR will render the text chunk touched
audibly. The use of touch gestures to enable contextualized highlighting and
note-taking will also be investigated. The PI will study how the target
population may employ spatial strategies and exploration to re-find and re-
access information both in the act of reading and for recall after some time
interval. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A new generation of slate-type
devices exemplified by the Apple iPad threatens to widen the accessibility gap
between the IBSVI community and the majority of the population. By supporting
the use of spatial cognitive and memory resource for both reading and
contextualized annotation, the PI hopes to ameliorate this endemic barrier to
participation. Project outcomes will contribute to our understanding of the role
of space in information design and representation, and the spatial cognition and
memory resources needed for uptake of such information. And they will contribute
to the domain of mobile computing, for the IBSVI community in particular but
ultimately for the population in general, through the STAAR system, which will
be designed and implemented from the ground up as a portable device on a state-
of-art interaction form-factor. The multimodal fusion of haptics and speech in
STAAR will have implications for the designs of such things as navigational aids
and service delivery systems for the non-sighted as well as the sighted. The
project will in addition provide unique cross-disciplinary educational and
learning opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. All software
developed in this project will be placed in open source.