* 1117687
* TC: Small: Real-Time Intrusion Detection for VoIP over IEEE 802.11 Based Wireless Networks: An Analytical Approach for Guaranteed Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Yu Cheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 12/31/2015
* USD 386,136.00

Voice over IP (VoIP) over IEEE 802.11 based wireless networks leads to a
promising all-IP platform provisioning economic high-quality voice services to
mobile users anytime and anywhere. Due to the openness and distributed nature of
the protocols involved in the VoIP over wireless, it becomes easy for malicious
users to achieve their own gain or disrupt the service by deviating from the
normal protocol behaviors. This project develops a real-time intrusion detection
framework, requiring no modification to the relevant standard protocols.
Analytical tools are also developed for guiding the detection system design for
guaranteed performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to
significantly advance the state of the art of real-time intrusion detection for
VoIP over 802.11 based wireless networks, through three complementary tracks:
selfish behavior detection over the 802.11 protocol, session initiation protocol
(SIP)-layer attacks and detections, and development of a cross-layer intrusion
detection framework. On the education front, the proposed interdisciplinary
research seamlessly integrates theoretical studies in the areas of Markov
decision process, wavelet analysis, 802.11 protocol analysis, and traffic
modeling, as well as computer simulation and testbed experiments, with the
advantages of providing various training projects to undergraduate and graduate
students with different interests. On the industry front, the success of this
project will generate an intrusion detection framework for the VoIP over
wireless networks with the advantages of robust detection performance, provable
detection quality of service, and excellent extendibility for future intrusion
detection techniques.