* 1117799
* SHF: Small: GOALI: Addressing the Challenges of Parameter Variation in the Design of Ultra-Low Power Chip Multiprocessors Using Near-Threshold Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Radu Teodorescu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The computing revolution of the last few decades has been driven in large part
by a rapid growth in the performance of microprocessor chips. Unfortunately,
this growth is now severely restricted by hard limits on power consumption. To
ensure that computing technology will continue to evolve, solutions that
dramatically increase the energy efficiency of computation must be created. This
proposal focuses on developing techniques for building microprocessors that are
an order of magnitude more efficient than the current state of the art. This
will be achieved by designing and testing technologies for making chips more
intelligent in the way they manage power. These systems will dynamically monitor
their power consumption, allocate power intelligently to critical tasks and
coordinate application execution with the power regulation mechanism, all with
the goal of reducing energy waste. The proposed solutions span multiple
technology layers, bringing together experts from different areas of chip design
from both academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its
technological and commercial potential, this research will further strengthen
multidisciplinary teaching and research in energy efficient design at Ohio State
University. The PIs will pilot a joint graduate-level course focusing on ultra-
low power microprocessor design. This proposal will also help foster a long-term
collaboration between Ohio State and Mentor Graphics that is committed to
sending engineers and researchers to visit the Ohio State campus, advice
graduate students involved in this project and be intellectually involved. This
will encourage students to seek careers in computer aided VLSI design and
microprocessor technology, thus helping fuel an industry that is vital to the
growth of the US economy.