* 1117980
* CIF: Small: Nonlinear Matrix and Tensor Completion with Applications in Systems Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Ely Kerman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2016
* USD 478,005.00

Many experiments in molecular biology designed for discovering cellular
functions and organization, or estimating the efficiency of drug treatments, are
prohibitively expensive to be systematically conducted on large scale systems.
It is therefore of paramount importance to develop analytical methods for
predicting which experiments are likely to provide the most informative outcomes
of biological tests, based only on a small sample of incomplete and noisy
measurements. Frequently, the incomplete data are random or pseudo-random
samples of a matrix, or more generally, a multidimensional array (tensor). This
suggests the use of a new algorithmic and analytic paradigm, termed low-rank
matrix and tensor completion, for solving the inference problems at hand.

This research involves the development of novel tensor and nonlinear completion
methods for inference of protein-protein interaction networks and design of
synthetic lethality experiments. The methods used represent a combination of
information-theoretic and algorithmic approaches centered around constrained
optimization on Grassman manifolds. This research program has the potential to
benefit many branches of molecular biology, neuroscience, computer vision,
control, economics and signal processing in terms of answering fundamental
inference questions for sparse systems and reducing the cost and time associated
with system testing and experimental design. It will also provide unprecedented
opportunities to graduate students in the electrical engineering and mathematics
departments at UIUC to explore state-of-the art technologies and research
problems at the intersection of molecular biology, bio-informatics, and signal
processing.