* 1117165
* SHF: Small: Creating Efficient, Verifiably-Secure Computing Architectures Using Programming Language Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Ben Hardekopf, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 09/30/2015
* USD 495,997.00

High-assurance systems are used in areas critical to human life and welfare,
such as avionic, military, financial, and medical systems. Because of the high
cost of failure, e.g., financial disaster or loss of life, these systems have
stringent requirements about both secrecy (guarantees that private information
cannot be made public) and integrity (guarantees that un trusted information
cannot corrupt trusted systems). In order to meet these requirements, the
underlying computer hardware on which these systems are run must itself be
verifiably secure using the same criteria. In addition, the hardware must also
be efficient, able to run the systems with sufficiently high performance to be
practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to create computer
hardware for high-assurance systems that is verifiably secure (that is, provably
meets the requirements for secrecy and integrity) while remaining highly
efficient. The unique approach taken is to leverage techniques from the
programming languages community (e.g., advanced type systems) to create a new
hardware description language called Caisson that enables hardware designers to
quickly and easily create hardware systems that are provably secure by
construction. If a system is designed using Caisson, then it is necessarily
secure. Caisson will be used to explore the space of secure hardware designs in
order to develop systems that are efficient as well as secure. On a broad scale,
the fruits of this research will be a large step towards a safer digital domain,
safeguarding the integrity of our financial system, the privacy of our medical
records, and the safety of our transportation infrastructure.