* 1117939
* CIF: Small:  Computational Tools for Visual Inference of Complex Materials
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Richard Baraniuk, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2016
* USD 531,851.00

Central to the imaging process is the interaction of light with the objects in
the scene. Remarkable progress has been made over the past several hundred years
on solving inference problems (such as detection, classification, or estimation)
for a large class of objects constructed from simple materials with Lambertian
reflectance. Such objects scatter light such that the apparent brightness is
invariant to the observer's view angle. Unfortunately, real world objects are
made of considerably more complex materials that cannot be characterized in
terms of such an isotropic reflectance. While humans are able to effortlessly
reason about complex materials, today's image analysis and processing algorithms
fail miserably. The reason is that complex, non-Lambertian materials can be
characterized only by higher-dimensional functions that are relatively poorly
understood and even more poorly modeled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
developing new ways to model, capture, and process the rich reflectance patterns
of complex materials. The key tool is the object's plenoptic transport function,
which describes the transformation of the incident to the irradiated light due
to the properties of the material. In full generality, the plenoptic transport
function is 14-dimensional; hence, a fundamental complication for sensing,
analysis, and processing systems for complex materials is the dimensionality gap
between the high dimensional plenoptic function and the ability of most
conventional sensors (cameras) to acquire at best 2D or 3D image projections.
The tools and techniques under development include sparse and manifold models
(to bridge the dimensionality gap), geometric features (to mitigate the presence
of environmental illumination and other nuisance parameters), and new sensor
designs (to most efficiently acquire plenoptic information from natural scenes).