* 1117425
* CSR:Small:Employing Design Automation to Build Foundations for Holistic Multicore Design
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Sanghamitra Roy, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2015
* USD 386,000.00

Holistic design approaches have gained in prominence in microprocessor design
research, as they show tremendous potential in improving multiple design
objectives such as energy efficiency and reliability. However, holistic
techniques encompassing multiple design layers, which are traditionally
decoupled, are facing severe challenges from the economic feasibility
standpoint. On the other hand, to reduce the design costs, several industry
leaders are advocating techniques to effectively involve design automation in
multiple layers of computer system design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
combines two promising directions for future computer designs: holistic
perspective and embracing design automation at multiple design layers. The
research builds a foundation for realizing an end-to-end holistic design, where
design choices from multiple layers are seamlessly integrated.
Joint&lt;br/&gt;design space exploration is performed in logic and physical
design, while considering system level architectural design choices and their
implication on workload execution. Two central themes are explored under this
paradigm: (a) improving system wide energy efficiency, and (b) improving system
reliability focusing on intermittent timing fault vulnerability. Innovations in
computer design technology that surpass boundaries between multiple design
layers can be modeled and investigated using this framework, stimulating
research on far-reaching problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in
the area of cross-layer design will enable circuit designers and system
architects to increase collaborative design to develop affordable, energy-
efficient and reliable computer systems. Major research insights will be
integrated in courses taught by the PIs to train computer engineers. Skill sets
disseminated through teaching will create new specialties and lead to more
efficient future computer systems.