* 1117740
* III: Small:  Uncovering the Myths of Unlikelihood: Granger Graphical Models for Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time-Series Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Yan Liu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2016
* USD 499,999.00

The project aims to develop effective approaches to anomaly detection from high-
dimensional time series data, motivated by applications such as oil drilling,
semiconductor fabrication, and railroad operation.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
approach takes advantage of Granger Graphical models, which uncover the temporal
dependencies between variables, to efficiently compute a robust correlation
anomaly score for each variable and obtain insights regarding the causes of
anomalies. The project develops effective approaches to addresses several
specific challenges that arise in real-world applications of anomaly detection,
including (1) nonlinear temporal dependencies; (2) hidden variables; and (3)
massive amounts of data. The resulting algorithms will be evaluated on two real
production systems: an oil-field mechanical system and a semi-conductor
fabrication system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to advance the
state of the art in anomaly detection for high-dimensional time series data that
arise in many application domains. It offers research-based training
opportunities at the intersection of machine learning, data mining, and
intelligent production management, as well as operational research in
general.Workshops and mini-courses will be organized to introduce advanced
machine learning techniques to students, practitioners, and researchers in
production management. The anomaly detection code and data sets will be freely
disseminated to the broader research and educational community. Additional
information about the project can be found at: http://www-
bcf.usc.edu/~liu32/ggm.htm.