* 1117106
* TC: Small: Plugging Logic Loopholes in Hybrid Web Applications to Secure Web Commerce
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* XiaoFeng Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,987.00

With the increasing popularity of third-party services integrated in hybrid web
applications, come new security challenges posed by the complexity in
coordinating these individual services and the web client. Such complexity often
brings in program logic flaws that can be exploited to induce inconsistencies
among different services' internal states, causing the security control within
these applications to fail. A preliminary study of this research investigated
the security implications of the problem to online merchants that accept
payments through third-party cashiers (e.g., PayPal, Amazon Payments and Google
Checkout). It revealed stunning logic loopholes within leading merchant
applications, popular online stores and a prestigious payment service provider,
which can be exploited to purchase an item at an arbitrarily low price, shop for
free after paying for one item, or even completely avoid payment. These findings
point to a disturbing lack of understanding of the logic flaws within the
integrations of web services, and an urgent need for significant research
efforts on this important problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project endeavors
to gain an in-depth understanding about the scope and the magnitude of the
security threat posed by the logic flaws in hybrid web applications and the
common design pitfalls that lead to such vulnerability. Based upon this
understanding, it will study novel technologies to facilitate detection and
patching of these flaws when developing merchant software, security analysis of
other parties' applications and black-box testing of merchant websites. New
techniques will also be developed to enable web-service providers to better
support secure integrations of their services into merchant systems, and to
automatically detect the attempts to exploit these logic flaws in web
transactions. This research involves industry collaborators and will also
contribute to the improvement of security protection in other domains that
utilize hybrid web applications.