* 1117790
* NeTS:  GOALI: Towards Adaptability to Variations of Renewable Energy in Large Scale Rechargeable Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* James Conrad, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,017.00

This project, which is to be conducted by researchers from UNC Charlotte and the
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), addresses practical design issues for
achieving reliable and uninterrupted operation of wireless sensor networks
(WSNs) using harvested ambient energy. The challenge is that these energy
sources are often subject to significant spatial and temporal variations. The
goal of this project is to create a framework allowing rechargeable nodes to
automatically adapt to estimated energy budgets while performing their required
monitoring tasks. This adaptive framework is implemented at two levels. The
first applies to transmission power control and energy-aware routing; while the
second addresses adaptations to temporal variations using an adaptive level-
crossing sampling scheme. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research components may be applied to any rechargeable sensor network. The
proposed cooperative power control method can potentially solve the overhearing
problem, which is a key issue in large-scale wireless sensor networks. The
energy-aware and load-balanced routing problems considered here address the
unique requirement of meeting specific energy budgets. These network-level
solutions are integrated with an adaptive application-level solution designed to
overcome the challenges introduced by energy
variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research addresses a
critical issue that is currently of wide interest in the research community. In
addition, this project will make educational impacts on UNC-Charlotte students
by offering two graduate courses and creating graduate level research projects.
This project will bridge the gap between theoretical research and applications
and will facilitate stronger research collaborations between the academic and
industrial partners involved.