* 1117161
* NeTS: Small: New Directions in Routing and Traffic Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Scott Shenker, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Routing is arguably the most fundamental aspect of networking, since it answers
the basic question: how do you place the appropriate state in routers or
switches so that packets can travel from source to destination? There is a huge
literature on routing, covering many topics (intradomain and interdomain,
wireline and wireless, convergence and policy oscillations, etc.), and the
router vendors have been honing their routing implementations for many years.
After all this academic and commercial work, one might expect that there would
be little new of fundamental importance to say about routing, and that all
current work would involve small, incremental improvements to algorithms and
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, there are two conflicting trends
that are changing the context in which routing is being used, and which
necessitate a new round of routing research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliability
requirements: Because networks are being increasingly used for critical services
(hospitals, financial institutions, etc.), the reliability expectations for
networks are becoming more stringent i.e., 'five nines' of reliability). Routing
is responsible for directing traffic around failures (i.e., failure recovery)
and avoiding hotspots (i.e., load distribution), so the required increases in
reliability must come from improving the failure recovery and load distribution
mechanisms embedded in routing protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network size:
Networks are growing at a rapid pace, and a new class of networks - datacenters,
which can have hundreds of thousands of hosts and millions of VMs - are pushing
the scaling limits as never before. In all routing algorithms, because they are
essentially distributed consistency algorithms, the convergence times (for
responding to failures and hotspots) and/or the routing overhead (in terms of
the number and size of routing messages) increase with size.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The upshot of these two developments is that routing algorithms are
being asked to do a better job (in terms of reliability) on a harder task
(because of the increases in network size and complexity). As a result, both the
commercial world and the academic community have embarked on a new round of
routing research. These efforts first produced several ad hoc rerouting methods
(such as MPLS Fast Reroute and ECMP) and then concentrated on developing
multipath routing methods (such as Path Splicing and a variety of other
approaches). However, all of these developments are retrofitted on top of the
traditional approach to routing, which builds a single path from the source to
the destination. These mechanisms significantly improve the reliability of
networking, but they do not tell us how to incorporate more effective failure
recovery and load distribution into the core foundation of routing
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More recently, we (along with others) have
proposed a new routing paradigm, one that changes the basic output of routing
from a path to a directed acyclic graph (DAG). This new approach, which here
will be called Routing Along DAGs (RAD), automatically provides multiple paths
for local failure recovery and load distribution. This allows RAD to, without
any global route recomputations in response to failures or hotspots, guarantee
connectivity (as long as the graph is connected) and provide optimal load
distribution (in a simple single-destination traffic model). This project is
investigating the RAD approach from many angles: design, simulation,
implementation, and theory. The goal is to have a put this new routing paradigm
on a firm scientific footing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: There is a
pressing commercial and governmental need for increased reliability and easy-to-
manage routing algorithms. This proposed project will produce prototypes of new
routing and traffic engineering approaches built on commercial routing hardware
(using the OpenFlow interface) that could be used to test these ideas in
commercial settings. This could have a significant impact on how datacenter
networking is done, and more generally improve network reliability. Promising
preliminary discussions have already been held with router vendors in this
regard.