* 1117009
* CIF: Small: Compressive Network Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Lili Qiu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

The rich information generated by computer and human networks creates exciting
opportunities for network analytics, namely, the process of gaining knowledge
and insights by mining a large amount of network data collected by a diverse set
of monitors. To enable effective network analytics, several significant
challenges must be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;--- (i) Scalability. The enormous scale
of computer and human networks makes it challenging to analyze massive network
datasets in a scalable fashion. &lt;br/&gt;--- (ii) Complexity. Real-world
network datasets are complex and often violate the operational conditions of
existing analysis techniques. &lt;br/&gt;--- (iii) Robustness. Anomalies and
imperfections are common in real-world network datasets. &lt;br/&gt;--- (iv)
Diversity. Network analytics often requires mining information from diverse data
sources with different characteristics and data
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the above challenges by
developing a series of novel compressive sensing techniques to effectively
exploit the presence of structure and redundancy in real-world network datasets,
including:&lt;br/&gt;--- (i) clustered spectral graph embedding, a novel
technique for reducing a massive graph to a much smaller graph while preserving
essential clustering and spectral information of the original
graph,&lt;br/&gt;--- (ii) LENS decomposition, a novel method for accurately
decomposing a network data matrix into a Low-rank matrix, an Error term, a Noise
matrix, and a Sparse matrix, and &lt;br/&gt;--- (iii) multi-source spectral
learning, a novel framework for effectively integrating information from diverse
data sources. The research promises to significantly enhance the ability to
analyze massive network datasets. &lt;br/&gt;The resulting tools and techniques
have potential applications in business, information technology, networking and
cyber security. Finally, the research includes a significant education and
training component. The research results will be integrated into both
undergraduate and graduate curricula as well as outreach activities.