* 1117724
* Support of the Annual Bok Awards at the Intel International Science and Engineering Fair
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* James Manning, Astronomical Society of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2017
* USD 39,540.00

AST-1117724&lt;br/&gt;Manning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bok Awards, named in
honor of astronomers Bart and Priscilla Bok, recognize excellent research
conducted by high school students. Since 1992, the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific (ASP) and the American Astronomical Society (AAS) have shared the
responsibility for sending judges to the annual Intel International Science and
Engineering Fair (ISEF) to select Bok awardees. This sharing arrangement
usefully pools judges' expertise, shares the work of administering the award
programs, and forms a valuable working relationship between organizations that
serve different components of the astronomical community. The Bok program
addresses concerns about decreasing enrollment of undergraduate physics and
astronomy majors by targeting excellence in high school science research for
recognition and encouragement each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the judges' attendance at ISEF, some expenses related to the prizes,
and attendance of the winners at the winter meeting of the AAS, where they are
encouraged to present their winning research. It is augmented by contributions
from the AAS, including waiving registration fees for the winners, and from the
ASP, who will provide the award prizes and some additional
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merit of the prizes is undeniable, fostering
excellence in research by peer-reviewing and rewarding student research in a
public forum. By example, the Bok program encourages other science-oriented
students to consider astronomical research as an exciting future career, and
thus seeks to mitigate, in a modest but targeted way, lagging interest in the
physical sciences.