* 1117164
* SHF: Small:Methodologies and Tools For Verification of Nano-Pipelined Circuits and Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Sudarshan Srinivasan, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2015
* USD 193,223.00

The continuing and accelerated advancement of nanotechnology promises a future
in which computing will be truly ubiquitous. The ability to develop minuscule
Integrated Chips that implement exceedingly complex systems will impact all
aspects of human development ranging from medicine to space exploration. A
majority of these applications will be safety critical applications in which the
cost of failure will result in loss of human life and exceedingly high economic
costs. Scalable verification technology at the nanoscale for developing reliable
and bug-free designs is therefore a requirement for the growth and impact of
digital systems in the nano-era. One of the key optimizations used extensively
in digital design is hardware pipelining, which is similar in operation to the
pipelined automotive assembly line. Pipeline implementations at the nanoscale
are very complex and prone to errors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks
to develop solutions to enable efficient and scalable verification of pipelined
circuits and systems at the nanoscale. The verification solutions are based on
refinement, a notion of equivalence used to compare systems defined at very
disparate levels of abstraction. The overall approach is to use high-level
refinement-based transformations to reduce the nano-pipelined circuit/system to
be verified, in incremental steps, to a functionally equivalent non-pipelined
synchronous machine. The non-pipelined machine can then be easily compared with
high-level specifications using existing verification techniques.