* 1117274
* NeTS: Small: Efficient Techniques for Failure Recovery and Tomography in Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Srinivasan Ramasubramanian, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2015
* USD 322,725.00

The emergence of rich interactive collaborative applications on desktop and
mobile platforms demands a robust network infrastructure. The network must
recover quickly from link and node failures and must do so while having only a
small amount of information. This project seeks to develop scalable proactive
failure recovery techniques that require only a constant factor increase in the
information maintained at every node. The techniques developed in this project
are applicable to circuit-switched and packet-switched networks. In order to
improve the robustness of the network further, link and node performances may be
monitored periodically by observing the behavior of end-to-end paths, referred
to as network tomography. This project seeks to develop fundamental theories and
practical algorithms for the identifiability of link and node metrics from end-
to-end path observations. The expected results from this project include: (1)
algorithms and protocols that may be employed in the data link and network
layers of the protocols stack; (2) tools for evaluating different recovery and
monitoring techniques; and (3) novel games based on the research problems,
targeted at mobile platforms such as iPhone/iPod touch and Android-based
devices. The results of the project will be integrated into the undergraduate
and graduate networking and graph theory courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project is in identifying the fundamental graph
theoretical problems underlying the various techniques developed for recovering
from multiple link failures and network tomography. The result will lead to new
insights into network design, operation, and monitoring with guaranteed
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will have
significant broader impact. The algorithms developed for network tomography is
applicable to similar problems in the fields of nanoelectronics, compressive
sensing, and power systems management. The impact of games derived from the
research concepts will reach beyond the intended audience, as the games will be
made available through the iTunes App Store for world-wide dissemination and
students will share the games their siblings, relatives, and friends.