* 1117866
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: ReDS:  Reputation for Directory Services in P2P Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mohan Kumar, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Peer-to-peer (P2P) systems are gaining popularity and importance for
applications ranging from communications to content delivery over the Internet.
Since such systems are inherently formed by a large collection of untrusted
peers, their security and reliability can be adversely impacted by malicious
peers in the system. In particular, P2P systems must provide a reliable
decentralized directory service for locating peers with the desired content and
services. If malicious peers are able to subvert directory lookups, the
integrity of the system is greatly compromised. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project advances the state of the art in P2P security and reliability by
applying reputation information at the directory level for improved success of
subsequent lookups. The new systems will use information from successful and
failed lookups, as well as the structure of the peer-to-peer system, to derive
reputation information for various peers and estimate the locations of malicious
nodes in the system. The project will also include an investigation into
mechanisms to limit Sybil attacks, in which attackers attempt to overwhelm the
system with malicious peers. The mechanisms will combine the use of social
network links and the structure of the P2P system to create a robust identifier
space for nodes, thus constraining how many Sybils can be introduced into the
system. Through a combination of such techniques, the project will make P2P
systems more trustworthy and reliable, directly impacting the millions of users
who already make use of such systems today.