* 1117218
* CIF: Small: RUI: Multiple-Antenna Systems in Spatially Distributed Networks with Non-Idealized Assumptions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Siddhartan Govindasamy, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 126,847.00

The electromagnetic spectrum is becoming scarce as the usage of wireless
communications devices becomes ubiquitous. Current research has shown that by
using multiple antennas at each wireless device, significantly higher densities
of users can share the electromagnetic spectrum without reducing the performance
of individual users. Most existing research in this area however is based on
idealized system models that are often unrealistic. This project studies the
extent to which the promising performance gains of multi-antenna systems
predicted using idealized network models apply to networks models with more
realistic assumptions, and is an important bridge between existing theoretical
understanding and future practical implementation of a technology that could
potentially alleviate the spectral crowding problem
significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most existing research on spatially-
distributed wireless networks with multi-antenna nodes is based on idealized
models such as uniformly random spatial distribution of users, uncorrelated
channels between antennas, and the availability of accurate channel-state-
information (CSI); assumptions which often do not hold in practice. The
investigator is studying the impact of non-uniform node distributions, channel
correlations, and inaccurate CSI on the performance of wireless networks with
multi-antenna nodes. Specific questions addressed include 1) What spectral
efficiencies can be achieved in such networks? 2) To what extent can increasing
the number of antennas per user with user density maintain constant perlink data
rates in such networks? 3) What are appropriate models for spatial node
distribution, channel correlation, and CSI uncertainty for spatially distributed
networks? Answers to these questions help improve existing understanding of the
performance benefits of multiple-antenna systems in realistic systems and in
particular, their potential to alleviate spectral crowding in practice.