* 1117286
* SHB: Small: Project MindsEye: Development and Evaluation of a Human Computer Interface for the MindLinc Clinical Decision Support System
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,04/30/2017
* Javed Mostafa, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2017
* USD 350,000.00

A critical impediment to taking full advantage of electronic health record (EHR)
systems is the human computer interface (HCI). The project's core aim is to
design, implement, and evaluate several new HCI features for clinical decision
support (CDS) systems that have the potential for directly impacting point-of-
care treatment and improving care for patients suffering from long-term illness.
Some of the primary HCI features proposed include: 1) Visually enhanced
interactive functions for EHR systems such as treatment trend maps and data
indicators, 2) Patient data summary of critical data elements in a dashboard
format, 3) Access to evidence-based recommendations relevant to individual
patients, and, 4) Display of co-morbid conditions explicitly to encourage review
and analysis in the context of routine patient care. The proposed work will
explore the use of visual analytics to process patient and comparative
population medical profile data to generate data summaries in the form of
interactive visualizations (data views). The data views will be designed to
provide physicians with the capability to filter patient data based on key data
elements such as medications and co-morbid conditions, and to compare patient
treatment trends with established evidence-based guidelines to identify
treatment gaps and options. As part of the usability evaluation, the proposed
work will engage end-users (i.e., care providers) directly in requirement
generation, implementation, evaluation, and refinement of the CDS HCI. The broad
impact of the proposed work include disseminating the outcome and findings
through the network of Clinical Translational Science Awardees (60 academic
medical centers) that are involved in developing novel informatics solutions to
accelerate the translation of medical treatments and prevention strategies.
Additionally, the MindsEye software will be distributed with appropriate
documentation to contribute to health IT education and training and to spur
practical IT engagements and new research activities.