* 1117433
* III: Small: A Discriminative Modeling Framework for Mining of Spatio-Temporal Data in Remote Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Zoran Obradovic, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,959.00

Understanding the physical and chemical processes of Earth's atmosphere, land,
and ocean presents significant scientific challenges. Due in part to the
societal impact of addressing these challenges, recent years have seen
significant investments in a large number of satellite and ground-based sensors
dedicated to Earth observation. The observations from these sensors are used to
estimate important geophysical properties such as temperature, clouds, aerosols,
greenhouse gases, snow and ice, and used in scientific studies aimed at climate
modeling, weather forecasting, air quality monitoring, and disease management.
Current techniques from spatial statistics and data fusion fall short of what is
needed because of computational constraints, difficulties in modeling and
parameter estimation, or inability to provide uncertainty estimates. The
objective of this project is to develop methods that help best utilize large
quantities of multi-source observations from satellite and ground-based
instruments for Earth observation having different capabilities regarding
coverage, resolution, and quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
novel discriminative modeling framework for fusion of multi-sensor remote
sensing data based on the Gaussian conditional random field model. The framework
is designed to be flexible, robust, and computationally efficient, and hence
suitable for use on large spatio-temporal data sets. It allows learning from a
mixture of labeled and unlabeled data with partially observable attributes, in
the presence of sampling bias. The methods will be implemented in an open
source, user-friendly, software tool for use by practitioners. The resulting
tools will be evaluated on the problems of atmospheric aerosol and surface level
pollution estimation, which are some of the important problems in climate
research and environmental science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project include methodological advances in the current state of the art in
spatio-temporal data mining and geostatistics as well as Earth remote sensing.
It will enable improved characterization of the effects of aerosols on the
Earth's radiation budget and climate. The data fusion framework is directly
applicable to estimations of many other atmospheric, land, and ocean properties.
The research activities in this project are integrated with education. They will
help broaden the participation of students ranging from doctoral to K-12 level
and increasing diversity in Computer Science through already established
channels at Temple University for engaging students from underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional details about the project can be found
at: http://www.dabi.temple.edu/~vucetic/nsf_fusion.htm