* 1117652
* HCC: Small: Embodied Mediated Communication in Collaborative Work
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Leila Takayama, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 503,810.00

The goal of this project is to gain a deeper understanding of mobile remote
presence systems (MRPs) and to create guidelines for their effective design,
development, and adaptation into organizational use. MRP systems enable embodied
mediated communication in which individuals at a remote location connect to a
local robot that is used to physically navigate in the local environment and to
interact with local users via audio and video. MRP systems allow remote users to
visit individuals in an organization and attend group meetings, seminars, and
social gatherings in the local environment. MRPs enable new forms of
interactions and offer remote users an improved sense of presence compared with
stationary video-conferencing systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
study the use of MRPs in communication from an interdisciplinary approach
drawing from and building on knowledge and methods from design, social and
cognitive psychology, communication studies, and computer science. A series of
field and laboratory studies will focus on four topics: (a) how remote users
present themselves through MRPs; (b) how local users perceive remote users; (c)
the role that social cues play in embodied mediated communication; and (d) the
social and organizational outcomes of embodied mediated
communication.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project will
advance understanding of the role of embodiment in mediated communication in
collaborative work and inform the design of future mobile remote presence
systems. In addition, the results will contribute to basic science in human-
computer and human-robot interaction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The
results will enable more effective embodied mediated communication in
organizations, thereby improving collaboration in distributed work groups. The
results will also inform the development of tools that help individuals with
mobility-related disabilities interact with their social and professional
communities. In addition, the project will enhance the undergraduate and
graduate curriculum at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and there will be an
outreach program to disperse interdisciplinary knowledge in and methods for
designing robotic technology into K-12 education through an annual summer camp
and biannual daylong workshops.