* 1117896
* CIF: Small: Multiscale Methods for Mobile Underwater Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 479,345.00

The oceans cover 71% of the earth's surface and represent one of the least
explored frontiers, yet the oceans are integral to climate regulation, nutrient
production, oil retrieval, and transportation. Future scientific and
technological efforts to achieve better understanding of oceans and water-
related applications will rely heavily on our ability to communicate reliably
between instruments, vehicles (manned and unmanned), human operators, platforms,
and sensors of all types. The glue of such underwater networks will be the
underwater acoustic communication link. Despite recent activity on acoustic
physical layer single-links, digital acoustic communication is in its infancy in
comparison to comparable efforts for radio-based terrestrial wireless
communication. This project exploits the unique features of the underwater
acoustic channel to significantly improve performance of underwater networks.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research focus is on design for the inherently multi-
scale, multipath channels in this wideband environment. Surprisingly,
transceiver design for the coupled efforts of wideband channels and distinct
Doppler scales for practical underwater communication systems does not appear to
have been thoroughly investigated. The network is examined from the perspective
of individual links up to entire networks of multiple nodes, encompassing novel
multi-scale, multi-lag channel modeling, waveform design, equalizer designs,
channel estimation, single-link and network capacity evaluation, novel coding to
achieve capacity, as well as signaling and routing over large-scale networks. In
a principled manner, the fundamental properties of multi-scale, multipath
channels are explored in order to design and analyze high performance underwater
acoustic networks. Implementable algorithms are designed which endeavor to
achieve the fundamental limits. The research outcomes will also impact
ultrasound, ultrawideband, wideband radar, sonar, acoustic signal processing,
and moderate to high speed vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication and possibly
understanding of biosonar.