* 1117099
* CAREER: Dynamics of cells and celullar mimetics in flow and electric fields: An integrated biophysical and engineering approach
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Petia Vlahovska, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 02/28/2015
* USD 349,274.00

0846247&lt;br/&gt;P. Vlahovska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay
between deformable microstructure and macroscale flow dynamics is a long-
standing problem in particulate and multiphase fluid dynamics. The major
challenge stems from the free-boundary nature of the particle interface. Lipid
bilayer membranes that envelop cells are particularly complex interfaces because
of their unique mechanics: the molecularly thin membrane is a highly-flexible
incompressible uid sheet. As a result, particles made of closed lipid bilayers
(cells and vesicles) exhibit richer dynamics than would capsules and drops. The
objective of the proposed research is to understand the fluid-bilayer membrane
coupling, with the long-term goal of explaining the non-equilibrium dynamics of
suspensions of soft particles, such as biological cells. To achieve these goals,
the PI will integrate ideas from fluid dynamics and biophysics to build a
unified theoretical framework that will elucidate the interrelation between
membrane deformation and composition, fluid motion, and external fields. This
transformative approach encompasses three fundamental non-equilibrium problems:
flows, electric fields, and multicomponent membranes. The proposed combination
of theoretical, numerical, and experimental work will quantify vesicle
deformation, orientation, and motion in external
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER plan sets forth the first systematic study of non-equilibrium bilayer
membranes. The proposed research will advance our understanding of the interplay
of physical processes at the nano-scale (e.g., membrane thermal undulations,
poration), micro-scale (e.g., single vesicle deformation), and macro-scale
(e.g., rheology of vesicle suspensions). Moreover, it will shed light on several
controversial topics, e.g., the diversity of vesicle behaviors in linear and
complex flows, the unusual shapes of vesicles in electric fields, and the
viscosity of vesicle suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the research will dramatically
advance the field of biomicrouidics in multiple directions. First, the new
knowledge will establish a sound basis for innovative designs of micro- and
nano-devices built from lipid bilayers, such as networks of nanotubes and
vesicle containers. Second, the proposed studies will uncover new general
features of cell-force interactions, which will likely impact a wide range of
applications, including cell electro-manipulation and targeted drug and gene
delivery. The project has a strong interdisciplinary nature and combines
fundamental knowledge across many fields, including biology, physics, and
engineering. The international and interdisciplinary collaborations initiated by
the PI will facilitate communication among scientists and engineers in different
research and geographic areas. As a female faculty member, the PI will serve as
a mentor and a role model to women as part of the Women in Science Project at
Dartmouth, and will reach out to other under-represented minorities in science
and engineering. She will collaborate with the Montshire Science Museum and
Dartmouth's Outreach Office to develop educational programs for under-resourced
schools in poor and rural areas. Education. The PI will develop new courses,
e.g., Cellular and Molecular Biomechanics, which fuse engineering and
biophysics. Such classes will enhance the curriculum at Dartmouth College, where
engineering research and education in complex biological systems is in its early
stages. The PI's teaching will emphasize the importance of analytical skills and
theoretical framework in solving the real-world problems that students will
encounter in their professional lives. She is co-organizing a summer school on
Complex and Bio-Fluids Flows," for which the lectures will be web-published, to
promote the transfer of knowledge between disciplines and generations. The PI
will educate the public about the beauty of science by showcasing her Lab at the
annual Thayer School of Engineering open house, which attracts children, their
families, and local engineering enthusiasts.