* 1117982
* SHF: Small: High Quality Test and Post-Silicon Validation of System-On-Chip Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Duncan Walker, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Testing microprocessors and other chips to verify their clock rate is known as
delay testing. If the test is wrong, and a 3 GHz chip is really a 2.99 GHz chip,
the customer system may randomly crash. But if the test is wrong and a 2.8 GHz
chip will really run at 3 GHz, the manufacturer loses money by selling the 3 GHz
chip as a lower-priced 2.8 GHz chip. Today it is expensive to accurately
determine the clock rate of high-speed chips. This project is developing new
test techniques to lower the cost of accurate manufacturing tests, so that chip
prices can be reduced. Accurate delay testing becomes even more challenging when
chips are stacked together in products such as cell phones and tablets, since
noise from one chip can influence the speed of its
neighbors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is
in educating students to do advanced development and research in the
semiconductor and electronics industries, both by directly working on the
project, and through courses that use the project results. The results of this
research will be distributed to academia and industry. A longer-term broader
impact is acceleration of cost reductions in stacked chips in advanced consumer
products, providing more functionality at an affordable price with desirable
weight, size, and battery life.