* 1117709
* CIF: Small: Recovery of Multi-Channel Visual Signals from Limited Color Information Using Rank Minimization and Sparsity Maximization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Hayder Radha, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2015
* USD 408,536.00

The recovery of visual colors from captured images and video signals is among
the most prevalent and fundamental problems in digital imaging. This problem
affects billions of consumers, and it impacts the quality of the visual signal
that these consumers capture, communicate, and display. Millions of image and
video cameras, mobile and smart phones, and many other types of visual devices
and applications are impacted in a significant way. For example, virtually all
consumer cameras are based on an architecture that utilizes a Color Filter Array
(CFA), which captures single-color-per-pixel images to reduce cost, size, and
power consumption. Hence, one needs to recover the original three color images
(Red-Green-Blue) from the captured single-color-per-pixel CFA image. Despite
numerous contributions and noticeable progress that has been made in this area,
this problem is still largely unsolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the general problem of the recovery of multiple color channels (RMCC)
from limited color information. The project develops a joint rank-minimization
sparsity-maximization (RMSM) framework for the recovery of multiple color
channels. Rank minimization of matrices, which is a more general framework than
compressed sensing (CS) of vectors, provides many powerful tools. The project
targets both approaches jointly in novel ways. An important question is how to
strike an optimal balance between rank-minimization and sparsity-maximization
under a joint framework. Furthermore, this effort designs optimization
frameworks for a sparsifying "color"-dictionary paradigm. The notion of
utilizing overcomplete, sparsifying "color" dictionaries represents a major
departure from prior work. The project is also extending the applications of
this research to video demosaicing and visual coding systems.