* 1117174
* CIF: Small: Advancing State of the Art of Coding/Modulation for Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Tolga Duman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 438,680.00

Wireless networking constitutes an important component of future information
technology applications for both military and civilian purposes ranging from ad-
hoc and sensor networks deployed in a battle-field to cellular networks with a
very strong infrastructure. In order to design, implement and deploy highly
reliable wireless networks, it is of utmost importance to address the presence
of interference from other users in the system. In existing designs,
interference is either avoided by a carefully chosen networking protocol (e.g.
through time-division, space-division, frequency-division), or it is controlled
to be near an acceptable level (e.g. through code-division). While simplifying
the implementation, both of these commonly taken approaches are far from being
optimal, and for reliable and efficient wireless networks of the future, a
different look at the problem of handling the interference is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop explicit and practical
coding/modulation solutions for multi-user communication channels, and to assess
the possible gains with the enhanced physical-layer designs through end-to-end
network simulation studies. In particular, a number of problems ranging from
design of coding/modulation schemes for wireless interference channels, and two-
way relay channels, to practical signaling for finite-input finite-output multi-
user links are addressed. Both long block length coding/modulation solutions
aiming at near capacity (or capacity bound) operation as well as short block
length designs for delay sensitive applications are explored. Through these
research activities, the project directly contributes to design and development
of reliable wireless networks managing interference in an efficient manner, and
to the field of general multi-user communications in a fundamental way. The
project also integrates research and education generating many opportunities for
undergraduate students to be involved in these activities.