* 1117886
* III: Small: Reformulating Distributed Source Coding using Graphical Inference for Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Samuel Cheng, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 376,433.00

Sensor technology has grown tremendously in the recent decades. Using micro- and
nano-technologies, sensor devices nowadays can be implemented in extremely small
sizes. Networks of inexpensive sensors can now be easily deployed to areas in
harsh conditions to provide continuous monitoring for environmental, military,
and other scientific applications. As most sensor networks are utilized in
hardly accessible areas such as a wilderness or battlefield, it is very costly
or even infeasible to keep periodic maintenance of individual sensors.
Therefore, the average battery life of the sensors essentially determines the
life of the network itself. While the processing power consumption of a sensor
can be reduced through the advance of computing technology, power consumed for
communications can only be conserved by reducing the net amount of transferred
information. Thus, research on advanced signal processing techniques for
reducing communications power is essential for next-generation sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed source coding (DSC) has been
considered as the technology to drastically reduce energy consumption due to
communications in sensor networks. However, current limitations of DSC prevent
its adoption in sensor networks. The objective of this research is to advance
the state-of-the-art of DSC for next-generation sensor networks by remodeling
DSC as graphical inference problems. The resulting technologies are expected to
lead to significant reduction of power consumption for communications and thus
prolonged life span of such networks. To accomplish the goal, the researchers
study DSC design for sources with more than two terminals, adaptive DSC
algorithms for sources with dynamic varying correlation, and variational
inference of DSC beyond the belief propagation (BP) algorithm.