* 1117052
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards a Formal Framework for Analyzing and Implementing Secure Routing Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Boon Thau Loo, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,278.00

Today's Internet runs Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), a complex inter-domain
routing protocol. Over the past few years, there has been a growing consensus on
the complexity and fragility of BGP routing. In addition to the problems of
route oscillation and slow convergence, BGP has been shown to be susceptible to
malicious attacks. Despite the wide range of proposed solutions to BGP's
security vulnerabilities, there is currently a lack of a set of common tools for
researchers to analyze, compare, and contrast the effectiveness of various
schemes.

The goal of this project is to develop a unifying framework towards the design,
analysis and implementation of provably secure Internet routing protocols. The
first part of the project explores the use of Secure Network Datalog (SeNDlog),
a declarative networking language for encoding secure Internet routing
protocols. Language extensions to SeNDLog will be explored, in order to address
practical deployments issues at Internet-scale, and facilitate formal analysis
of a range of secure routing protocols. These extensions include customizable
authentication, goal-oriented evaluation, key distribution and management, and
modeling of adversaries. The second part of this project aims to identify
security properties of Internet routing protocols, and formally specify them
logically in terms of protocol execution traces. The third part of this project
aims to design and implement a formal analysis methodology towards verifying
SeNDlog programs for desired security properties specified in logic.

In terms of broader impact, this project will result a cleaner foundation
towards the analysis and development of trustworthy routing protocols.