* 1117025
* CSR: Small: Quest: A Real-Time Operating System for Multicore Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Richard West, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,999.00

Multicore processors are becoming ubiquitous among high-end servers, personal
computers, mobile phones and embedded devices. While these processors can
provide higher performance at lower power than single-core architectures, they
pose significant challenges for system designers. This is particularly true in
real-time embedded systems, such as in avionic and automotive control,
manufacturing, and healthcare. In these systems, tasks often have critical
timing requirements, with deadlines that must be met to avoid potentially
catastrophic outcomes. Providing timing guarantees on multicore processors is
made difficult by contention for shared on-chip caches and memory bus bandwidth,
and other factors such as hardware interrupts, instruction pipelines and
simultaneous multithreading that affect predictability.

This project focuses on the design of a real-time operating system that
addresses micro-architectural resource contention and enforces predictable
behavior on multicore processors. This system called ?Quest? is centered around
time as a first class resource, guaranteeing real-time shares of computational
resources among all tasks, including interrupts and application threads. Using
hardware performance counters available on modern processors, this project
implements a real-time performance monitoring subsystem to influence resource
management.

An additional aspect of this work focuses on the use of hardware sandboxing
techniques to guarantee the system is not compromised by ill-written software,
such as drivers or services implemented by third party developers. This is
especially relevant given the complexity of modern software systems that cannot
easily be verified to behave correctly using only static methods. As part of the
development of Quest, hardware virtualization capabilities are investigated to
enforce heightened software reliability, in particular, techniques for isolating
software components of a system, while ensuring predictability,

The outcomes of this work will impact the design of systems software on
multicore processors. A greater understanding of hardware features to improve or
ease the construction of software systems is gained, especially those with
safety-critical requirements. Investigations into system predictability and
safety will help prevent potentially disastrous outcomes for mission-critical
tasks. This work could lead to more robust systems that avoid costs of failure
in terms of loss of lives, equipment, or money. The Quest software will be
shared among the research community and used in courses involving operating
systems.