* 1117539
* NeTS: Small: Efficient CSMA in Wireless Networks: Theory, Protocol Design, and Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Nitin Vaidya, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 385,921.00

Deployment of wireless local area networks (WLAN) has undergone dramatic growth
in recent years. Multiple WLAN standards have been developed, including several
versions of IEEE 802.11. The widespread deployment of IEEE 802.11 is based on
the Distributed Coordination Function (DCF) component of the standard, which
incorporates channel contention resolution using CSMA (Carrier Sense Multiple
Access). However, an important shortcoming of past deployments of CSMA-based
protocols has been their inability to achieve optimal performance. In recent
years, researchers have developed new throughput-optimal CSMA algorithms. These
results have opened up the possibility of designing CSMA-based protocols that
can perform close to the optimal. However, the prior work on throughput-optimal
CSMA makes several simplifying assumptions, including assumptions of perfect
carrier sensing, symmetric interference relationship between links, and fixed
rate transmissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thrust of this project is on
developing CSMA-based scheduling mechanisms that can work well in practical
networks. Towards this goal, the project investigates systematic relaxation of
unrealistic assumptions and constraints, and attempts to develop CSMA algorithms
that can perform well under the relaxed conditions. The scope of the project
includes implementation of selected protocols on an experimental testbed. The
project explores CSMA in the context of wireless multi-hop mesh networks, as
well as infrastructure-based wireless LANs. Expected results from the project
include new theoretical algorithms as well as efficient CSMA-based protocols
that can perform well in practice.