* 1117139
* CGV: Small: Model-Driven Visual Analytics on Streams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Matthew Ward, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 515,918.00

Risk analysis and monitoring of continuously arriving data are required by a
wide range of domains critical to our individual and societal well-being, from
the military to the financial sector, from medicine to homeland security, from
man-made to natural disasters. These application areas use patterns or models to
differentiate behavior of varying degrees of importance or risk, both in terms
of the value for a particular variable, relationships between different
variables, and changes across time. The objective of this project is the design,
development, and assessment of visual analytics technology to support the real-
time interactive analysis of data streams that focuses on creating and using
models of stream behavior to identify instances of potentially important
activities and risks in the data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research breaks new
ground in the design of innovative exploration techniques of high-volume
streaming data, with a focus on visualization and interactions of competing and
complementary models extracted from the stream data and of change descriptions
derived from each. Novel technology includes computational and visual methods
for model formation, management, and model change analysis. Efficient indexing
and compression of the history of how data and models change provide analysts
with the ability to compare and contrast similar events over long periods of
time. Linked views of the different information spaces (data, model, change, and
history), and powerful interaction tools to support exploration and model
building enable analysts to confirm the expected and uncover the unexpected.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project are expected to have
significant impact is a wide range of domains that rely on extracting
information from real-time digital data, including finance, medicine, and
homeland security. In particular, tools are developed for solving financial risk
and fraud detection problems critical to the economic well-being of individuals
and organizations. Educational material from using the technology in courses are
freely available, along with source code and data sets, via the project web page
(http://davis.wpi.edu/~xmdv).