* 1117243
* SHF: Small: Software and Hardware Integration with Feedback and Transparency for Many-Core Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Gabriel Parmer, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2013
* USD 139,846.00

Multi-core processors are becoming prevalent and provide means for continuing to
increase our computational capacity. These emerging platforms with multiple
processing cores on chip offer the capability to run multiple programs
simultaneously, thereby increasing the processing power of computing systems.
However, since the running programs often share multi-core resources, execution
interference effects between such programs can hurt their performance. Often
times, software obliviousness to this underlying hardware behavior exacerbate
the multi-core performance problem. Such adverse effects limit our computational
progress in areas where interference can be detrimental such as high-performance
computing and cloud computing, and could further complicate the predictability
and deployment of these advanced processors in mission-critical domains such as
avionics and automobiles. Therefore, understanding software behavior and
Interference effects on multi-core processors is crucial to harnessing their
full potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research the investigators do
preliminary studies of the issues arising from execution interference between
multiple software threads on multi-core processor platforms. This research
involves revisiting how hardware resource management can account for
application-level constraints (such as performance isolation, fairness, and
priority) by enhancing the interface between hardware and the Operating System
(OS), and studying the hardware and software overheads. This research lays the
groundwork for the hardware-OS interaction based on active fine-grained
monitoring of resources and a two-way adaptation between both the hardware and
OS to tightly control the effects of interference between threads.