* 1117805
* CSR: Small: LOOM: a Language and System for Bypassing and Diagnosing Concurrency Errors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Junfeng Yang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2014
* USD 266,000.00

This project addresses programming challenges posed by the new trend in
multicore computing.

Multithreaded programs are difficult to write, test, and debug. They often
contain numerous insidious concurrency errors, including data races, atomicity
violations, and order violations, which we broadly define to be races. A good
deal of prior research has focused on race detection. However, little progress
has been made to help developers fix races because existing systems for fixing
races work only with a small, fixed set of race patterns and, for the most part,
do not work with simple order violations, a common type of concurrency errors.

The research objective of this project, LOOM: a Language and System for
Bypassing and Diagnosing Concurrency Errors, is to create effective systems and
technologies to help developers fix races. A preliminary study revealed a key
challenge yet to be addressed on fixing races that is, how to help developers
immediately protect deployed programs from known races. Even with the correct
diagnosis of a race, fixing this race in a deployed program is complicated and
time consuming. This delay leaves large vulnerability windows potentially
compromising reliability and security.

To address these challenges, the LOOM project is creating an intuitive,
expressive synchronization language and a system called LOOM for bypassing races
in live programs. The language enables developers to write declarative, succinct
execution filters to describe their synchronization intents on code. To fix
races, LOOM installs these filters in live programs for immediate protection
against races, until a software update is available and the program can be
restarted.

The greatest impact of this project will be a new, effective language and system
and novel technologies to improve the reliability of multithreaded program,
benefiting business, government, and individuals.