* 1117215
* CCF SHF(Small): Some Codes Applicable to Flash Memories and Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Bella Bose, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,037.00

In the past six decades error control codes have been extensively used to
improve the reliability in computer, communication and VLSI systems. Without the
use of appropriate coding methods several of the common electronics devices
(cell phones, computers, medical electronics, GPS, etc.) will not function in a
reliable manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, first, some error
control codes for multilevel flash memories are investigated. Even though the
use of multilevel cells increases the density of the flash memories compared to
single level cells it also imposes two major challenges. The first one is that
the voltage difference between the states is narrowed and hence there is a high
probability of errors due to noise. The error nature in such cases can be
considered as symmetric errors of limited magnitude. The second challenge is
that, in order to program a cell from an higher value to a lower value an entire
block of data needs to be erased and then each and every cell needs to be
carefully programmed to the desired values. In order to do this, electrons are
injected to the floating gates using many iterations. Thus, this is a very time
consuming operation. The overshoot of levels while writing can be considered as
asymmetric errors of limited magnitude. Thus, by using asymmetric error
correcting codes of limited magnitude the speed and reliability of the flash
memories can potentially be improved. The concept of limited magnitude error
correction and detection is new in coding theory area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some fundamental theory and efficient code design methods
are investigated for these types of limited magnitude errors. The other research
problems are related to efficient design of unordered codes and balanced
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flash memories find wide applications in cell
phones, cameras, computer systems, embedded systems, etc. The market value of
the flash memory is in the order of tens of billions of dollars and will
continue to grow in the coming years. The proposed codes is expected to help
improve speed and reliability of these memory and computer systems.