* 1117569
* SHF: Small: Improving the Applicability of Haskell-Hosted Semi-Formal Models to High Assurance Development
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Andrew Gill, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2015
* USD 527,750.00

In engineering practice, models are&lt;br/&gt;an essential part of understanding
how to build complex systems. In&lt;br/&gt;this project, high-level models and
efficient implementations of&lt;br/&gt;computer systems will be developed side-
by-side under a single&lt;br/&gt;framework that bridges the gap between them
using a high degree of&lt;br/&gt;automation. This is possible due to the use of
a modern functional&lt;br/&gt;language for both the model and implementation,
and the deployment of&lt;br/&gt;a new and powerful general-purpose and semi-
automatic refinement technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The functional language
Haskell has already enjoyed considerable&lt;br/&gt;success as a platform for
high-level modeling of complex systems with&lt;br/&gt;its mathematical-style
syntax, state-of-the-art type system, and&lt;br/&gt;powerful abstraction
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Haskell will be used to express a semi-
formal&lt;br/&gt;model and an efficient implementation, taking the form of two
distinct&lt;br/&gt;expressions of computation with the same mathematical
foundation.&lt;br/&gt;The project develops tools and methodologies that use
transformations like&lt;br/&gt;the worker/wrapper transformation to construct
links between these models&lt;br/&gt;and implementations, lowering the cost of
the development of&lt;br/&gt;high-assurance software and hardware components in
application&lt;br/&gt;areas like security kernels and critical control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Lowering the cost of linking semi-formal specifications and
models to&lt;br/&gt;real implementations will have
considerable&lt;br/&gt;impact. For example, Evaluation Assurance Level (EAL) 5
and 6 of the&lt;br/&gt;Common Criteria call for semi-formal methods to construct
such links,&lt;br/&gt;and this project addresses keys part of this requirement.