* 1118017
* SHB: Small: Enabling Technologies for Assessing and Assisting Independent Living
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Huaping Liu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2015
* USD 515,794.00

This research explores the development of a wireless in-home location monitoring
system for assessing and assisting independent living of the elderly, whose
population demographics in the U.S. alone will exceed 80 million by 2040. Key
areas where in-home location-tracking technologies exhibit particularly
significant potential for helping assess and maintain independence include
medication management, motor changes (e.g. walking speed changes), and fall
detection. Research has revealed that high-resolution localization information
is key to precisely characterizing these activities. Existing localization
systems are inadequate for this purpose due to their lack of multi-person
tracking capability, poor reliability, limited resolution in space and time, and
large form factors that make them uncomfortable for seniors to wear.

The investigators focus on developing a robust, high-precision, 3-dimensional
wireless localization system to simultaneously track multiple patients'
position/movement and activities. Specifically, they develop ultra-low power,
tiny transmitters that are unobtrusive for seniors to wear, and address several
unsolved technical challenges such as wireless synchronization of distributed
receivers and localization error due to multipath overlap. Inference algorithms
utilizing the location data acquired by the system to effectively characterize
medication taking are created. To validate the accuracy of the inference models
within independent living settings, the system is deployed in both a controlled
smart home environment and in the homes of the ORCATECH Living Lab community-
dwelling seniors. While the focus is on medication management due to project
scope/feasibility, the core technology created will enable characterization of
various behaviors, including motor changes that are known to be predictive of
patients' neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
diseases.