* 1118433
* Linking Cognitive Science, Measurement Theory and Evaluation Approaches to Assess Development of Scientific Reasoning --- CME
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Douglas Huffman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2014
* USD 234,230.00

The Cognition, Measurement and Evaluation (CME) project combines the latest
thinking in cognitive science about scientific reasoning and its attainment with
recent advances in modern instrument development techniques. The CME project
will produce a linked system of developmentally-appropriate, multiple-choice and
constructed-response assessment instruments designed to measure scientific
reasoning skills across age levels. These tools will be useful for researchers,
classroom teachers and educators in settings for learners from 5th grade through
college. The project focuses on scientific reasoning skills of control of
variables and evaluating evidence. These skills will be defined in ways suitable
for modern instrument development and will result in a draft instrument and
model computer platform that would be ready for initial field testing. The
ultimate goal is to create an assessment system that will provide information
to: (1) STEM researchers who want to understand how innovative technologies,
instructional approaches, and/or teaching practices impact students' scientific
reasoning abilities, and (2) teachers who need to understand how students are
responding to particular aspects of inquiry instruction. The institutions
involved include the University of Minnesota and the University of Kansas and
surrounding school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on needs assessment,
existing research and instruments and content expert advice, we will map the
constructs by developmental level across the three age groups. Each construct
map will include developmental levels and a qualitative description of
scientific reasoning at each level. The item development process will include
development of scoring systems to map responses to certain levels of the
scientific reasoning constructs. Initial drafts of the instruments will be
investigated through think-alouds, exit interviews, and focus group
interviewing. An initial pilot test with a more substantial sample will allow
for modeling of the data using IRT. We will use item fit, differential item
function, and coverage maps to assess item properties. We will also use item fit
and model comparisons to examine the structure of the constructs. During the
model-building phase, the Rasch family models, which are the most parsimonious
models, will be fitted to the pilot data. If it is discovered that Rasch family
models do not fit the data, revisions to the construct, instrument, scoring
model, and measurement model will be implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the most pressing needs in the evaluation of science education programs is the
need for appropriate measuring devices. Currently, the field uses a variety of
assessment devices, making it almost impossible to determine national effects or
to compare different approaches. Although assessment of scientific reasoning is
not a new concept, recent ideas about its definition and its measurement may be
transformative. The assessment devices developed by this project will be
validated to ensure cultural relevancy and absence of bias and therefore will
enhance the infrastructure available for research and education. Over time the
use of the developed instruments will allow in-depth understanding of the impact
of different programmatic approaches to the development of scientific reasoning,
a critical goal of STEM education.