* 1118671
* Developing and Testing a Model to Support Student Understanding of the Sub-Microscopic Interactions that Govern Biological and Chemical Processes
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Frieda Reichsman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 04/30/2012
* USD 2,104,855.00

This project designs, develops, and tests coherent interdisciplinary
instructional materials to support high school students' integrated
understanding of the forces and energetics involved in interactions that occur
between atoms and molecules, and explores how students' learning progresses
across time. Instructional materials focus on physical science core ideas
identified in "A Framework for K-12 Science Education" (NRC, 2011), and "College
Board Standards for College Success" (College Board, 2009). The two research
questions are: (1) How does learning progress over time when students experience
a set of interdisciplinary instructional materials designed to help them advance
toward important learning goals related to interactions at very small scales?;
and (2) How do the various learning activities support the development of
integrated understanding? The project is implemented in three Michigan school
districts with students who traditionally do not succeed in science. Two of the
school districts serve urban communities with ethnically diverse student
populations; the third serves a rural, primarily Caucasian community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop and test instructional materials and associated
assessments, the project joins efforts with the Concord Consortium and employs
the Construct-Centered Design process (a principled process based on evidence-
centered assessment and learning goal-driven designs); uses physical and
computer-based models and simulations; and draws on previous and ongoing work on
a learning progression of the hypothetical students' path in their understanding
of the structure, properties, interactions, and transformations of matter. Four
instructional units are produced: (1) Introduction to Electrical Forces, (2)
Water, (3) Larger Molecules, and (4) Bio-Molecules, with a duration of two to
six weeks each. After testing for usability, the units go through two additional
phases. Phase I comprises pilot testing with at least one teacher at two sites,
two classrooms each, yielding information from 100-120 students per unit. Phase
II consists of field testing the units with a larger sample. Using a power
analysis to determine sample size, the project tests two different sequences of
the units: (a) four teachers, eight classrooms, and 200 students use the units
as a single semester course before taking biology or chemistry; and (b) four
teachers, eight classrooms, and 200 students use the units in appropriate points
within a chemistry or biology course. Eight teachers from the same school
districts, 16 classrooms, and 400 students who do not use the units, serve as
the comparison group. A mixed-methods approach is used to collect and analyze
data. Data collection strategies include: (a) pre- and post- tests, (b) unit-
embedded assessments, (c) students' interest and attitudes, (d) assessments to
place students in the learning progression, (e) classroom observations, (f)
analysis of student classroom work, and (g) interviews with students and
teachers. Data interpretation strategies include: (a) coding of students' and
teachers' responses from interviews, (b) identification of patterns, and (c)
using item-response theory (IRT) procedures to place students' responses in the
learning progression. A range of methods are used to assess validity and
reliability of instruments used, including: (a) construct validity, (b) content
validity, and (c) IRT procedures. Project external evaluation addresses both
formative and summative aspects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key project outcomes
include: (a) a research-informed and field-tested semester-long course
comprising four integrated units with specific objectives, learning tasks,
phenomena to illustrate and support understanding at key points, reading
materials, and embedded assessments; (b) computer simulations aligned with the
units; (c) educative materials for teachers; (d) valid and reliable instruments
to measure students' understanding and attitudes; and (e) a set of research
manuscripts focused on how the new materials work and promote student learning
of key challenging ideas.