* 1118031
* CUR (Council on Undergraduate Research) Workshop:   Supporting Research Active Biology Faculty and Students at Historicaly Black Colleges and Universities; May 2011 Charlotte NC
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Nancy Hensel, Council on Undergraduate Research
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 04/30/2012
* USD 8,060.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Council on Undergraduate Research (CUR)
requests funds to support the increased participation of biology faculty from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in a CUR Proposal Writing
Institute. CUR has offered this institute each year since 2000. This particular
institute will be offered at Johnson C. Smith University, May 23-25, 2011. The
institute will only be for faculty from HBCUs and is partially funded from a
private foundation grant. The institute will include: 1) one-on-one work with a
mentor; 2) small groups discussions; 3) writing and critiquing of proposals,
including mentor and peer review of proposals; 4) plenary sessions about
effective proposal writing; 5) a meeting with an NSF biology program officer.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate research is a particularly effective way to
develop the problem-solving skills and work habits needed by science
professionals. It has been shown to improve retention in higher education,
connecting students' classroom experience to the world of work and motivating
them to continue their science studies at the baccalaureate and graduate levels.
Undergraduate research supports the development of critical thinking, problem-
solving skills, oral and written communication, and self-confidence (Lopatto,
2004). Mentors for undergraduate researchers need to be research-active
themselves. Writing successful proposals is an essential skill for a research-
active professor. &lt;br/&gt;Several reports have highlighted the importance of
STEM education to maintain innovation and economic competitiveness in the United
States (Business Roundtable, 2006; NAS, 2005; Council on Competitiveness, 2005).
Many of these reports have made recommendations to increase the number of
students studying in STEM fields with a particular focus on minority students.
Students benefit from the mentoring they receive when they are involved in
undergraduate research. The encouragement of a respected advisor, who can model
research activities, may be especially significant for minority students and
their aspirations for graduate work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of five additional biology faculty from HBCUs can
foster either the development or strengthening of proposal writing on their
campuses. Often successful proposal writing and undergraduate research will
begin in one department, perhaps even with an individual faculty member, and
expand to the whole department and other departments and disciplines on campus.
Since many graduate programs now expect applicants to come with undergraduate
research experience, the development or expansion of undergraduate research
programs can assist students in preparing for graduate school and being
competitive in the application process. This is a first step in increasing the
STEM pipeline for minority science professionals.