* 1118888
* Collaborative Research: Computer-Supported Math Discourse Among Teachers and Students
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Arthur Powell, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2018
* USD 342,132.00

This full research and development project is to design, develop, and test a
cutting-edge learning environment where students and teachers solve mathematical
problems and communicate their thinking with others through the virtual
environment. The major focus is to increase the quality and quantity of
significant math discourse among mathematics teachers and their students by
using the virtual learning environment. The researchers will test the usability
of the learning environment for engaging students in high quality discourse. The
researchers will also examine the impact of the virtual learning environment on
student significant mathematical discourse and achievement.

The project uses a design research method as well as summative evaluations to
achieve research and development goals. Mixed methods will be used to examine
the impact of the virtual learning environment on student significant
mathematical discourse and achievement.

The findings of the project contribute to the field in three ways: (1) The
virtual learning environment can be both an effective pedagogical tool and a
research tool in mathematics education; (2) It will contribute to our
understanding about the nature of mathematical discourse online as well as about
ways to foster the quality and quantity of significant math discourse among
teachers and their students; and (3) This project can provide insights into
effective online deliveries of courses.