* 1118107
* III: Small: From Regular Expressions to Nested Words in Complex Event and Semistructured Information Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Carlo Zaniolo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,999.00

The need for more powerful and efficient query languages to find complex
patterns in stored sequences and data streams is shared by a wide spectrum of
applications, including software analysis, complex event processing,
identification of RNA structures, temporal databases and XML queries. The goal
of this project is to develop a unified framework to support very powerful
pattern languages and their query optimization techniques for different
application domains. To achieve this goal, the project follows the approach of
using (i) nested Kleene-closure (K*) constructs to achieve greater levels of
expressive power for the query languages, and (ii) Nested Words and Visibly
Pushdown Automata as the basis for their unified implementation and query
optimization over different application domains. This K*-based approach was
previously applied successfully to relational sequences and are now generalized
to different computing environments and application domains. Through the unified
framework, the project designs and demonstrates XML and temporal query languages
that compare favorably in terms of expressive power and performance with
existing ones. It then demonstrates the use of the unified framework in new
application areas. In particular, it develops efficient query languages for RNA
structures and software analysis. These research results will have great impacts
on many applications, such as software analysis, genomic databases, complex
event processing, digital government and scientific studies. This project
supports Ph.D. students to pursue research in the areas of advanced query
languages and data stream management systems. A new graduate-level course
covering these areas and integrating the research results from the project are
introduced into the curriculum. Publications, technical reports, software and
experimental data from this research are available via the project web site at:
http://yellowstone.cs.ucla.edu/nsf-projects/RegExpr2NestedWords.html.