* 1118334
* Sixth International Workshop on Pion-Nucleon Partial-Wave Analysis and Interpretation of Baryon Resonances held at George Washington University
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Igor Strakovsky, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

The Partial Wave Analysis (PWA) Workshops, held in alternating years since 2005,
bring together the world's experts in a forum recognized internationally for its
singular contributions to the fundamental understanding of the most basic
building blocks of matter, the neutron and proton constituents of the atomic
nucleus. This year's PWA Workshop will be held at the Foggy Bottom Campus of The
George Washington University under the auspices of the Columbian College of Arts
and Sciences' Center for Nuclear Studies (CNS), which has been chartered since
November of 1990 and is universally recognized as an academic leader in the
field of the physics of the atomic nucleus. Currently, activity is very high in
fundamental and precision nucleon physics. Many recent developments in the field
have signaled a reinvigorated interest in and support for the PWA program at the
national level, which has been led by the Data Analysis Center (DAC) housed in
the CNS since 1998. These developments include the construction of Jefferson
Laboratory's 12-GeV Upgrade, which represents substantial commitment at the
federal level for equipment and infrastructure supporting the precision nucleon
physics program. The nucleon physics program at Jefferson Laboratory is part of
an international effort in precision experimental nuclear physics including
efforts in Europe and Japan. A wealth of precision data is forthcoming from
laboratories both in the United States and international institutions. These new
experimental physics efforts have ushered in a renaissance in theoretical and
analytical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of broader impact, this year's PWA
Workshop will bring specialists and experts together who are presently involved
in the analysis of existing and forthcoming experiments on nucleon and hadron
physics. Workshop attendees will include students, postdoctoral researchers, and
both younger and more experienced faculty and researchers. We will focus on
time-sensitive and critical issues addressed to the success of precision nucleon
physics experimental programs. Substantial support from Jefferson Laboratory
indicates the recognition of the importance of PWA and the work of the DAC and
CNS to the success of the program. Beside techniques to be exchanged an
important issue is the planning of future experiments to ensure the success of
the program.