* 1118643
* Energy: A Multidisciplinary Approach for Teachers (EMAT) Designing and Studying a Multidisciplinary, Online Course for High School Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,03/31/2017
* Kimberly Obbink, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 03/31/2017
* USD 3,074,721.00

The Energy: A Multidisciplinary Approach for Teachers (EMAT) project will
iteratively design, develop, field test, refine, and rigorously study a seven-
unit, facilitated, online professional development (PD) course focusing on
energy-related concepts in the context of alternative energy. The primary
audience is high school science teachers teaching out of their field of
endorsement and serving students underrepresented in the sciences. The project
will investigate whether the PD will precipitate changes in teacher knowledge
and practice that result in higher student achievement. As a result, EMAT will
improve the science achievement of underrepresented students and enhance their
future participation in science. Biological Sciences Curriculum Study and
partners Oregon Public Broadcasting, the National Teacher Enhancement Network,
the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, the Great Lakes Bioenergy Research
Center, and RMC Research Corporation bring significant resources and are highly
qualified to develop and research EMAT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EMAT project
advances knowledge in the field of teacher professional development by merging
two facets of PD that have hitherto been studied separately and testing
hypotheses about the degree to which this pairing enhances learning and
practice. These facets are structured constructivist experiences and experiences
grounded in situated cognition learning theory. Teachers reflect on research-
based teaching practices in the lesson analysis process through Science Content
Storyline and Student Thinking lenses. EMAT tests longitudinal impacts on
teachers' content knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, and teaching
practices and students' content knowledge, contributing much needed data for
future PD projects. EMAT also studies which aspects of online environments are
most effective for teachers. Data collected will inform full revisions of the
course and will help address significant gaps in our understanding of online
PD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EMAT advances the field's understanding of which
elements of online PD are effective and the extent to which high-quality online
PD translates to improved student learning. Simultaneously, the project develops
and tests a scalable, flexible resource to enhance teacher learning and
practice. As a result, EMAT will have a broad impact by promoting research-based
teaching and learning while advancing discovery and understanding. Furthermore,
by targeting the recruitment of teacher participants from large urban districts
with high numbers of teachers teaching out of field, EMAT impacts students
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. EMAT will not only contribute to
the research on PD, but also will be available for use in diverse settings. A
facilitation guide allows the course to be freely used by school districts and
teacher education and certification programs across the country. In addition,
the facilitated course will be offered for graduate credit through the National
Teacher Enhancement Network and will be freely available to individuals for
independent study. Results of all research and evaluation will be published in
science education journals and practitioner journals for teachers, and presented
to PD groups at conferences. EMAT will benefit society by impacting teacher and
student understanding of energy-related concepts, thereby increasing the
capacity of U.S. citizens to creatively address energy challenges from a
foundation of scientifically sound knowledge.