* 1118459
* 2011 Biomaterials &amp; Tissue Engineering Gordon Research Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Joyce Wong, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 05/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1108459 PI: Wong, Joyce ORG: Boston
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2011 Biomaterials &amp; Tissue
Engineering Gordon Research Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT:
Biomaterials- and tissue engineering-based strategies and approaches are central
for the successful performance of numerous biomedical devices. The theme of the
2011 Gordon Research Conference on Biomaterials &amp; Tissue Engineering is ?The
Path from Basic Science and Engineering to Translational Medicine.? It focuses
on applying basic science and engineering principles in diverse settings
including developmental biology, materials science, and nanotechnology with the
goal of solving important clinically relevant biomedical problems. The program
will provide a cutting-edge scientific program and discussion forum that focuses
on specific fundamental and applied science and engineering challenges that,
when overcome, will facilitate the translation of biomaterials and tissue
engineering technologies to clinical medicine. The program serves both to
educate the biomaterials and tissue engineering communities in the highly
relevant field of developmental biology and to stimulate discussion in current
approaches from both materials science and engineering and biological
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: In the spirit of the Gordon
Research Conferences, this conference seeks to bring together speakers and
discussion leaders at the forefront of their field with other prominent
investigators, junior attendees, and researchers from underrepresented groups.
This diverse group of speakers, discussion leaders, and poster presenters who
represent different fields of study (e.g. clinical investigators, basic
scientists and engineers, and industrial researchers) can contribute to the
advancement of the field of biomaterials and tissue engineering. Such
interactions are critical for building research networks for researchers at all
stages of their career and play a key role in developing future leaders in the
field of biomaterials science and engineering. The discussion leaders and
speakers were selected to represent the gender, ethnic, and cultural (i.e.
researchers from non-US institutions ? 6 non-US countries represented) diversity
in the biomaterials and tissue engineering fields. In accordance with Gordon
Research Conference policies, there are no formal publications; however, the GRC
format provides a stimulating environment to disseminate new ideas and to
establish new and continue existing collaborations/interactions. This year?s
program has 19 out of 41 discussion leaders and speakers who are women and/or
from underrepresented minority groups; 6 are assistant professors. Selection of
attendees from the pool of applicants will adhere to principles of affirmative
action with respect to minority groups, women, and junior scientists in addition
to the date of application and the scientific background of the applicant.