* 1118141
* Development of a Climatology of Precipitation System Organization in North Carolina to Improve Climate Precipitation Forecasts
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Thomas Rickenbach, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 314,033.00

Since no major rivers flow into the State of North Carolina, precipitation
falling within the state is the primary natural source of water to replenish
that region's rivers, soils, and groundwater reservoirs. As climate and
population pressures change, water management and sustainability policies in
North Carolina will be increasingly dependent on an improved understanding of
precipitation variability in that region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;The premise of this study is that a novel climatology of
precipitation system mode of delivery in North Carolina, developed with newly
available high resolution precipitation and three-dimensional radar reflectivity
datasets, will lead to improved regional climate and hydrological forecasts.
Mode of delivery refers to the spatial, temporal and water phase characteristics
of a precipitation system. Examples of mode of delivery that occur in North
Carolina within various synoptic regimes include short duration and spatially
heterogeneous convective cells, large mesoscale convective systems, widespread
long-lasting frontal precipitation, tropical cyclones, and winter precipitation.
Each mode of delivery may produce similar time-averaged precipitation totals,
but have very different climate and hydrological impacts. A mode of delivery
climatology will provide a unique tool for process-based downscaling of climate
simulations to the watershed scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
consist of three main parts, as follows. 1) The first part aims to develop and
implement a methodology to identify the distinct mode of delivery of rainfall,
which will be applied to five years (2006-2010) of the National Mosaic and
Multi-sensor Quantitative Precipitation Estimation (NMQ) radar reflectivity and
precipitation datasets. We will leverage a partnership between the University of
North Carolina Renaissance Computing Institute, and the National Climate Data
Center to analyze regional NMQ data sets constructed for this project using
data-mining techniques for computational efficiency. 2) The second part of the
project will examine the relationship between mode of delivery of rainfall and
the dominant regimes of the synoptic-scale flow and intraseasonal-to-interannual
climate variability. 3) The third part of this study will test the hypothesis
that for seasonal time scales and regional spatial scales, the mode of delivery
of rainfall provides a basis for the process-based downscaling (tied to
different synoptic regimes) of precipitation in reanalysis products and climate
model simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project will have significant implications for climate
prediction for a region (North Carolina) where those connections have not been
fully explored. The climatology will result in improvements to regional climate
model forecasting and with future applications to improve hydrological
simulations on the watershed scale. The project also include significant
benefits to NOAA and NASA hydrological research and operational programs (NOAA
Hydrometeorological Testbed-Southeast and NASA Global Precipitation Mission).
The project will provide a platform for undergraduate and graduate student
research and training. Project results and outreach will benefit the
agricultural communities in eastern North Carolina, which have been historically
underserved with respect to educational and economic opportunities, while at the
same time have been vulnerable to severe weather and flood-related hazards. The
success of this project will improve a process-based downscaling of climate
model precipitation estimates to the regional and watershed scale.