* 1118460
* An Experiment Relating Black Carbon Content to Reduction of Snow Albedo
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Stephen Warren, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 07/31/2017
* USD 324,731.00

Black carbon (BC) in snow and ice has been identified as one of the largest
uncertainties in estimates of global radiative forcing for climate change. In
this project artificial snowpacks will be made by freezing of water droplets
produced by a snowmaking machine in an open field, using water with and without
added quantities of a commercial soot, in concentrations about 100 times natural
soot levels so as to obtain a large signal on albedo. The reason for conducting
the experiment outdoors rather than in a laboratory is to obtain uniform
illumination, to avoid elimination of edge-effects, and to be able to measure
albedo rather than narrow-field-of-view reflectance. The optically effective
snow grain size will be determined from the measured near-infrared albedo;
matching the measured visible albedo will then require addition of BC to the
radiative transfer model. The BC content of the artificial snowpacks will be
measured by filtering the meltwater; the filters will be analyzed by a
laboratory spectrophotometer as is done for filters from samples of natural
snow. The BC from the filter measurement will be compared to that inferred from
the albedo measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of experiments will be
carried out, varying (a) the type of soot, to investigate different size
distributions; (b) the amount of soot, to investigate the nonlinearity of albedo
reduction; and (c) the grain size of the artificial snow, because the albedo
reduction by a given concentration of soot is predicted to be greater in coarse-
grained snow than in fine-grained snow. In conjunction with the experiments,
parameterizations will be developed for use in climate models, using soot
properties consistent with the experimental results. For models that resolve
layers of the surface snow, single-scattering quantities will be parameterized
for three spectral bands. For models in which snow albedo is a specified lower
boundary condition for the atmospheric model, average albedos will be computed
as functions of snow grain size and BC concentration, for the two broad bands
commonly used in general circulation models (GCMs), as well as the total solar
albedo, for incident solar spectra under both clear sky and cloudy sky. Simple
analytical functions will be fit to the model
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work are in the potential
to advance our understanding of the radiative forcing of BC in snow and its
climatic consequences and to improve the representation of this process in
models used for climate and mitigation studies.