* 1118894
* PROJECT ATOMS: Accomplished Elementary Teachers of Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2019
* Sarah Carrier, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,166,758.00

The project is studying the impact of the mathematics and science intensive pre-
service preparation program for elementary school teachers at North Carolina
State University called the Accomplished Elementary Teachers of Mathematics and
Science (ATOMS). Faculty in NCSU's Department of Elementary Education,
researchers at the Duke University Sanford School of Public Policy's Education
Research Data Center and the NC State College Professional Education Office are
involved in conducting this project.

The project includes assessments of pre-service teachers' math and science
content, teacher performance, self-report surveys, and teacher interviews.
Researchers are also tracking participants' perspectives on the program and
comparing knowledge dimensions and teaching performance of a sub-sample of ATOMS
teachers to a similar group of non-ATOMS teachers. Each of the study dimensions
(Knowledge Dimension, Teaching Performance, and Perspectives on the Program)
will be assessed at three time points across this longitudinal study, providing
a model for elementary teacher development of STEM teaching.

The study has potential to advance current understanding regarding teacher
preparation, especially in terms of supporting elementary teachers' instruction
in science and math. The project is also innovative and potentially
transformative by asking interesting and pertinent questions of how teachers can
affect the learning of their students. Besides generating new knowledge, this
project also has the potential to impact STEM education research. The ATOMS pre-
service teacher preparation program may serve as a model for effective pre-
service teacher education across the nation if the researchers can clearly
demonstrate the effect of participating in the program in changing teachers'
knowledge, attitudes, and skills, as well as their students' achievement.
Investigators propose the dissemination of findings to both K-12 audiences and
institutions of higher education. Additionally, key findings will be bulleted
for policy makers in brief reports or brochures sent to deans of Colleges of
Education nationwide, highlighting recommendations based on the findings.