* 1118879
* OPUS:   Marsupial Frogs and Their Allies: A Successful Evolutionary Experiment in Diversification of Reproductive Modes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* William Duellman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 98,000.00

Of the approximately 6000 species of frogs recognized today, most reproduce by
depositing eggs in water; the eggs hatch as tadpoles, which complete their
development in water before metamorphosing into terrestrial adults. However, in
10 frog families, terrestrial eggs bypass the aquatic larval stage, developing
directly into froglets. One of these families, Hemiphractidae, includes the
marsupial frogs and their allies. Marsupial frogs are unique among frogs in
their reproductive biology. This OPUS project will provide a comprehensive
synthesis on the marsupial frogs and their allies. The work will synthesize over
40 years of research, and will result in the publication of book. The book will
provide detailed information on the phylogeny, reproductive biology, evolution
of egg-brooding, historical geology, and evolution of the group, as well as a
systematic overview. About half of this information will be published for the
first time in this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
research training for graduate students in various facets of interdisciplinary
biological research, and interpreting and illustrating morphological features.
An undergraduate student will work with the PI and educators at the Natural
History Museum in producing a video for public viewing in the Museum gallery and
web site (http://naturalhistory.ku.edu/). The latter recently has been revamped
to provide extremely rich content by fusing the visual arts, journalism and hard
science.