* 1118798
* INT Summer School on Applications of String Theory.  Summer School will take place July 18-29, 2011, in Seattle, WA.
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Dam Son, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

The "INT Summer School on Applications of String Theory," to be held July 18-29,
2011 at the University of Washington in Seattle, WA, is designed to educate
advanced graduate students and beginning postdoctoral researchers in nuclear
physics about recent applications of gauge/gravity duality in various subfields
of physics. Gauge/gravity duality is a method, originally developed in string
theory, which is now being applied to systems in various subfields of physics
including nuclear and condensed matter physics. In nuclear physics, the main
application has been in modeling the strongly interacting quark gluon plasma,
and in modeling hadrons. Attempts to apply the method of gauge/gravity duality
to condensed matter physics have been made much more recently; this field is
developing very rapidly. At this summer school, participants will learn the
basics of gauge/gravity duality (or AdS/CFT correspondence) and its most
important applications to the physics of the quark-gluon plasma, hadron physics,
and condensed matter physics. The goal is to help the student quickly orient
him/herself in the current literature, learn the most important facts, formulate
the most important questions, and learn the basic computational skills for
successfully using the techniques of gauge/gravity
duality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an interdisciplinary subject, applied AdS/CFT
holds a special appeal to students across fields. The plan is to recruit about
half of the participants from nuclear theory, and the other half from string
theory and condensed matter theory. Such a mixed body will help broaden the view
of the participants who will be able to make connections with peers outside
their immediate research areas.