* 1118138
* Electroweak and Strong Interactions at Very High Energies: Precision Tests of the Standard Model and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Doreen Wackeroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2016
* USD 355,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Doreen Wackeroth at the
University at Buffalo, The State University of New York.

Particle physics research has entered an exciting era: The CERN Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) is successfully colliding proton beams at energies that allow for
the exploration of matter and the laws of physics that govern its properties at
the most fundamental level. Despite the enormous success of the Standard Model
(SM) in describing all experimentally observed electromagnetic, weak, and strong
interactions of the constituents of matter, it is generally accepted that the SM
is merely a low-energy approximation to a more fundamental theory which is
expected to reveal itself at the LHC in form of the emergence of new, non-SM
particles and interactions. Moreover, there is still one prediction of the SM
that awaits experimental confirmation: the existence of a Higgs particle, which
is thought to be associated with the observed phenonenon of electroweak symmetry
breaking. If the SM Higgs boson exists, it will not escape detection at the LHC.
However, in order to extract meaningful information from LHC data, the
theoretical predictions for relevant LHC processes must be of a precision that
exceeds anticipated experimental precision. This project will therefore consist
of improving the current predictions for such processes. Specifically, the PI
will perform calculations of cross sections at higher orders in perturbation
theory and implement these improved calculations in Monte Carlo programs.

This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. The
proposed calculations are challenging and will provide the graduate students
involved with an advanced research experience and with skills valuable beyond
the scope of particle-physics research. These research activities will be
pursued in collaboration with scientists worldwide, and will further US-
international joint scientific efforts. The PI will also continue to organize
activities involving the Physics Department's Physics & Arts Exhibition, which
aims to convey the excitement of fundamental research to K-12 and undergraduate
students as well as to the general public.