* 1118297
* Collaborative Research:  Population Ecology Models for Carbonate Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2012
* Christopher Jenkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2012
* USD 25,664.00

EAGER: Collaborative Research: Population Ecology Models for Carbonate
Sediments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Christopher C. Jenkins EAR-1118297 University of
Colorado, Boulder&lt;br/&gt; PI: Potts, Donald C. EAR-1118306 University of
California-Santa Cruz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbonate sediments are deposited
extensively in the oceans and are a significant factor in global carbon budgets.
But they are challenging to understand because they are created biologically,
then modified geologically. Prior to this project, they had been modeled with
rather simple rules-based methods which go under the name ?carbonate factory?.
This project takes the next step and directly applies biological principles
using advanced numerical modeling on the actual processes ? ?carbonate farm?.
The population and community ecology of carbonate-skeleton organisms such as
corals, bryozoans and algae is used to build realistic, detailed 3D time-
geologic architectures. This opens productive new research paths into the carbon
cycle, ocean acidification, rock properties, oil-gas resources, and
environmental responses to global change. &lt;br/&gt;Perceptions that process
modeling is not achievable are wrong ? the key is to employ good math tactics on
the correct set of processes, for the key organisms, at appropriate time-space
scales. In prototype this project has already produced emergent model features
such as high-production ?bone yard? ecologies, and correct statistics for the
variability of the accumulated sediments. The outputs can be compared even at
the core-description level with Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) core
logs and oil-industry reservoir variability statistics, promising cross-
discipline results.