* 1118059
* CSR:Small: Towards Reliable Concurrent Computing Using Hybrid Program Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Liqiang Wang, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2015
* USD 354,591.00

Inexpensive multi-core processors and many-core GPUs present tremendous
opportunities as well as serious challenges for software developers. Developing
concurrent programs is intrinsically difficult because multi-threading
introduces a whole new class of errors that do not exist in sequential programs.
This problem is exacerbated when developing and debugging large-scale, data-
intensive, and computation-intensive programs. Traditional testing and debugging
techniques are not appropriate for multi-threaded programs which may behave
differently from one run to another because threads are scheduled non-
deterministically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a toolkit to
detect correctness and performance problems on shared memory systems with the
following techniques. (1) Exploit the benefits of static and dynamic analyses
while avoiding their shortcomings. Specifically, extend dynamic analysis by
augmenting it with static analysis to systematically explore program code for
error detection and prevention. (2) Investigate different optimization
approaches to lower runtime overhead and improve the toolkit's scalability. (3)
Design a unified framework that can predict potential errors and enforce the
scheduler to avoid the errors by manipulating accessing
orders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project may enhance the
dependability of parallel computing systems and help design more reliable multi-
threaded programs. Research results will be integrated into the teaching of
undergraduate and graduate courses such as operating systems, parallel
programming, and compiler design.