* 1118168
* LOCUS: Levels of Conceptual Understanding in Statistics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Robert delMas, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,078,088.00

The goal of this project is to develop two tests (instruments) to assess
conceptual understanding of statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instruments
are based on the levels A/B and on level C of statistical understanding
development as described in the American Statistical Association Guidelines for
Assessment and Instruction of Statistics Education (GAISE) framework. These
instruments will be used to assess knowledge of statistics by grades 6-12
students. The instruments will have multiple-choice and constructed response
(CR) items. The CR items will have scoring rubrics. The assessments will be
pilot tested in school districts in six states. The instruments will be used by
teachers to analyze students' growth in understanding of statistics and will be
useable for both formative and summative purposes. An assessment blueprint will
be developed based on the GAISE framework for selecting and constructing both
fixed-choice and open-ended items. An evidenced-based designed process will be
used to develop the assessments. The blueprint will be used by the test
development committee to develop items. These items will be reviewed by the
advisory board considering the main statistics topics to be included on the
assessments. Through a layering process, the assessments will be piloted,
revised, and field tested with students in grades 6-12 in six states. A three-
parameter IRT model will be used in analyzing the items. The work will be done
by researchers at the University of Florida with the support of those at the
University of Minnesota, the Educational Testing Service, and Kenyon College.
Researchers from TERC will conduct a process evaluation with several feedback
and redesign cycles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assessments will be aligned with
the Common Core State Standards for mathematics (CCSSM) and made available as
open-source to teachers through a website. The research team will interact with
the state consortia developing assessments to measure students? attainment of
the CCSSM. As such, the assessments have the potential of being used by a large
proportion of students in the country. The more conceptually-based items will
provide teachers with concrete examples of what statistics students in grades
6-12 should know.