* 1118353
* An Undergraduate Network for Analyzing Plant Invasion in U.S. National Wildlife Refuges - A Workshop Proposal
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Stephanie Hampton, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 03/31/2012
* USD 23,668.00

Much of conservation policy is predicated on the idea that ecological reserves
can protect species that cannot survive in human-dominated areas. Unfortunately,
invasive species, including weeds, forest pests, and feral predators like cats
and rats, don't respect reserve boundaries. They may establish within reserves
and displace or consume the native species that the reserves were designed to
protect. Understanding the factors that promote the spread of invasive species
within protected areas is therefore a critical issue for conservation biology.
Students in undergraduate Ecology and Conservation Biology classes from across
the country will compile data on invasive plants in the National Wildlife
Refuges within their own region. The classes will use these data to analyze the
factors that tend to promote or inhibit plant invasions and the extent to which
these factors vary from one region to the next. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to
increasing our understanding of impacts of and controls on invasive species,
this project also has a strong educational component. More than 200 students in
eight classes will have the opportunity to participate in a continental-scale
ecological research project. All of these students will gain experience in data
analysis and data management at the interface of science and conservation
policy. NSF funding will support travel of one student and one instructor from
each class to an intensive workshop at the National Center for Ecological
Analysis and Synthesis. At this workshop, each group will present the results of
their regional analysis. Workshop participants will then complete an analysis of
the pooled data from all the classes and create a database on invasive plants in
National Wildlife Refuges. This database will be available to wildlife managers
and other researchers, supporting management efforts and future research on the
spread of invasive plants into protected areas.