* 1118626
* The Continued Development of Empirical Models to Understand the Selection of and Persistence in STEMM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Jon Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,124,750.00

This project is continuing a program of periodic data collection and analysis
from participants in the Longitudinal Study of American Youth (LSAY) in order to
continue monitoring the career development of this cohort of young adults.
Earlier funding from the STEP Program facilitated the location of 95% of the
original sample and re-contact of nearly 70% of the original participants. Two
cycles of data collection in recent years have yielded important results about
career choice and job satisfaction. These data are continuing to advance
understanding of career choice, career advancement, and career satisfaction in
science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and medicine (STEMM) careers and
other non-STEMM related careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the
first cycle - now under review by refereed journals - show that approximately 7%
of these two cohorts are now employed in a STEMM career and that an additional
8% are working in a STEMM-support occupation. Additional analysis indicates that
high school mathematics achievement and enrollment in a high school calculus
course are the strongest predictors of subsequent entrance into a STEMM career,
and that males are still more likely to enter a STEMM career than females,
holding constant the other major variables in the study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is collecting and analyzing in three
additional cycles of data collection for the LSAY, following the older of the
two age cohorts in LSAY to age 40. The focus of these cycles is on the levels of
satisfaction and success in STEMM work experienced by these adults in their 30s.
This is of interest because published studies show that a significant number of
young adults - especially women - leave STEMM careers after only a few years.
This project is expected to provide insights into the factors that are
associated with persistence in STEMM careers and the factors that discourage
STEMM careers. No single period of graduate study will fully prepare future
STEMM workers for 40 years of science. The extension of the LSAY cohorts for
another three cycles will allow an examination of the continuing education
activities of STEMM professionals and of STEMM-support workers and the extent to
which continuing education and on-the-job learning supports persistance in
STEMM-related careers.