* 1118379
* Wikisym Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Loren Terveen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 04/30/2013
* USD 13,163.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 8
promising graduate students from the United States and abroad, along with a
panel of about 5 distinguished research faculty mentors. The event will take
place in conjunction with the 7th International ACM Symposium on Wikis and Open
Collaboration (Wikisym 2011), which will be held October 3-5 2011.in Palo Alto,
CA. Wikisym is the leading international forum for bringing together
researchers, practitioners, and entrepreneurs working on open collaboration. The
topic of open collaboration is the study of the forms of collaboration found in
open source software and communities such as Wikipedia, Yahoo! Answers,
Slashdot,and Digg. Such systems have shown the power to be gained from creating
technologies that enable large distributed groups of people to collaboratively
create artifacts of lasting value. The Wikisym conference is attended each year
by approximately 100 people from around the world. Its proceedings are published
in the ACM Digital library and are considered archival work in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Consortium is a research-focused
meeting of a group of 8-15 selected Ph.D. candidates and a panel of four
distinguished research faculty that takes place at the Wikisym conference. The
Doctoral Consortium will take place on October 2nd, preceding the event. The
Doctoral Consortium Chair is Loren Terveen (University of Minnesota, USA). The
WikiSym Doctoral Consortium has been successful for the past three years in
attracting an international and interdisciplinary student constituency. It helps
new researchers develop peer relationships and relationships with experienced
researchers and practitioners. It also offers these new researchers expert
feedback and allows them to attend and participate in the leading international
conference focused on open collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The annual Wikisym doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of
the next generation of researchers in open collaboration, allowing them to
create a social network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a
critical stage in their professional development. Applications are encouraged
from all doctoral students whose research is Wikisym-related, regardless of the
fields in which they are earning their degrees. Participation is encouraged from
a broad range of relevant disciplines and approaches, including (but not limited
to) computer science, sociology, psychology, anthropology, information science,
cognitive science, rhetoric, communications, and economics. While NSF funds will
be used chiefly to support participation by students enrolled in graduate
programs in the United States, some international participants may be supported
as well in recognition of the fact that the Wikisym field embraces educational
and cultural traditions that vary in different parts of the world. The
organizers will try explicitly to identify and include the broadest possible
group of highly qualified participants. As a consequence of these steps, the
student and faculty participants will constitute a diverse group across a
variety of dimensions, which will help broaden the students' horizons to the
future benefit of the field.