* 1118819
* Evaluation Communities for Learning, Inquiry, and Practice about Systems (ECLIPS)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Pat Jessup, InSites, 'A Support Network for Educational Change'
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 06/30/2015
* USD 249,932.00

This exploratory study will investigate what is needed to increase the capacity
of STEM education evaluators to use a systems-oriented approach to evaluation.
The work will be guided by two research questions: 1) Are core system
evaluations more effective than evaluations without an intentional system
orientation? and 2) How does ECLIPS effectively build the capacity of evaluators
to conduct core system evaluations? Evaluators of ITEST and ATE projects will be
guided in revising their evaluations to employ a more systems-oriented approach
to evaluation. Results from the project on systems-oriented evaluation and what
is needed for evaluators to learn how to use this approach will be informative
to evaluators of the full range of STEM projects. Researchers will be from
InSites, a support network for educational change, located in Fort Collins,
Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six to eight STEM education evaluators of ITEST
and ATE projects will be identified to participate in the study. These
evaluators will work with guides and others who are knowledgeable about systems-
oriented evaluation to revise existing evaluation plans. Much of the
interactions will be through monthly webinars, annual meetings, and individual
interaction with guides. Sessions will be recorded and interactions among
participants and leaders will serve as a major source of data. In addition, a
pre and post questionnaire will be administered to the STEM education
evaluators. Other STEM evaluators and interested parties will be used to
validate inferences made. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes from the project will
include six to eight STEM education evaluators who are more knowledgeable about
systems-oriented evaluations, a written guide on how others can be educated in
using such an approach, and published articles on the process. The findings will
be particularly relevant to STEM project evaluators and evaluators in general.