* 1118075
* CIF: Small: Analog Networking: Distributed Source-Channel Approaches to Delay and Resource Constrained Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Kenneth Rose, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2015
* USD 302,132.00

Severe delay and resource (energy, bandwidth) constraints are typical in
emerging communications and networking applications within a variety of
scientific and engineering disciplines. This is particularly the case in highly
constrained sensor networks. Such applications strongly motivate foregoing the
convenience of digital communication and revisiting the potential benefits, and
even necessity of analog communication, albeit in the modern context of
distributed source-channel coding and routing. Major challenges emerge,
including the derivation of a theoretical foundation for analog networking from
estimation and information theoretic principles, specializing to a variety of
subproblems and networking scenarios involving distributed source-channel
coding, and developing effective practical algorithmic approaches, as well as a
formidable optimization challenge due to the high complexity of the overall
objective function which is literally riddled with poor local optima.

The general analog networking problem is formulated in terms of analog mappings,
between source and channel variables at source nodes (encoders), between
received and transmitted variables at intermediate network nodes, and between
received and reconstruction variables at sink nodes (decoders). Research is
pursued along several specific lines of investigation, including derivation of
delay-constrained performance bounds and optimality conditions, optimal and low
complexity algorithm design, global optimization techniques, analog mappings for
distributed source-channel coding, analog multiple descriptions coding,
extensions to sources and channels with memory, and optimal routing in an analog
network. The effort builds on a body of preliminary work and results, including
the necessary conditions for optimality of such mappings in simple settings,
iterative algorithms to find locally optimal mappings, as well as a powerful
non- convex optimization tool (deterministic annealing), which has been
successfully employed in related optimization problems.