* 1118151
* 2011 Applied and Environmental Microbiology Gordon Research Conference
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2011,11/30/2011
* Max Haggblom, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2011
* USD 8,000.00

The Applied and Environmental Microbiology Gordon Research Conference (GRC) has
been held every two years since 1950 and is one of the longest running of the
Gordon Conferences. The focus of the 2011 Conference is microbial functional
interactions from the level of molecules to biomes. This theme will be explored
in sessions on bacterial evolution and speciation, microbial interactions and
population dynamics, the roles of microbes in ecosystem functioning, the
biogeochemical cycling of naturally occurring and hazardous substances,
microbially mediated redox processes, and methodologies to assess the functional
relationships of microorganisms in their habitats. Diverse ecosystems will be
featured and genomics, engineering, and commercial applications of the metabolic
powers of microbes will be covered in the various sessions. The conference will
bring together leading experts in the field to present and discuss new,
fundamental research findings on microorganisms, their activities in the
environment, their ecosystem-level effects, and their environmental and/or
commercial applications. The intimate size of the conference encourages dialog
and exchange of ideas - even between students and senior scientists. The number
of young scientists (graduate students, postdocs, and junior scientists) that
attend the Applied and Environmental Microbiology GRC meeting has steadily
increased. The aim of this award is to further improve on this trend. To
accomplish this goal support form NSF is specifically targeted to assist
participation of students and young post-doctoral scholars. An important aspect
of the Applied and Environmental Microbiology GRC is that for most sessions a
young ?and upcoming? speaker will be selected from the Abstract submissions for
a short talk. Furthermore, the poster sessions are also lively and organized to
stimulate discussions that carry through the week.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term success of the Applied and Environmental Microbiology GRC is based not
only on the quality of the individuals who have served as organizers and
participants, but also on the fundamental importance of microorganisms to life
on Earth, the environment, various industries, and human health. The conference
has always had a diverse theme of topics, covering the metabolic, physiologic
and evolutionary diversity of microbial life, the complex roles that
microorganisms play in life on Earth, and the multitude of applications of
microbes in biotechnology, the food industry, agriculture, and medicine. Global
change, production of greenhouse gases, remediation of contaminated ecosystems,
water quality, the biological cycling of elements, and the symbiotic
relationships of microbes that affect agricultural production and our own health
are just a few of the areas covered by the conference that have a profound
impact on society. The conference series has in the past been a forum for the
consideration of critical or even controversial issues that have led to the
development of new technologies. In the typical Gordon Conference style, the
Conference sessions will be informal, off the record, and open to all
participants for the expression of their views. The Applied and Environmental
Microbiology GRC has a long record of stimulating advanced research in
industrial laboratories, colleges and universities, research foundations, and
government laboratories.