* 1118490
* CAREER: ClpXP Machinery Studied at the Single-Molecule Level
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Matthew Lang, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 08/31/2013
* USD 241,281.00

Protein integrity inside cells is maintained by a series of tightly regulated
processes that denature proteins, dismantle multimers, and solubilize
aggregates. A key component of this regulation in bacterial systems is the ClpXP
protease, which is composed of the ClpX ATPase and the ClpP peptidase, both
members of the Clp/Hsp100 chaperone family. ClpXP regulation is a highly
coordinated process by which ClpX recognizes a substrate that has been labeled
with a specific amino acid sequence, mechanically unfolds it into a linear
polypeptide, and ultimately translocates it into ClpP for irreversible
proteolysis. While the sequence of this process was recently established, the
molecular details of the mechanical cycle are poorly understood. This project
aims to elucidate the mechanochemical mechanism by which ClpXP uses ATP to
mechanically unfold and translocate substrates. To this end, single molecule
fluorescence and optical tweezers-based assays will be developed and employed
for detailed measurements of ClpXP motility. Such quantitative studies of this
machinery will explore the strength of the enzyme-substrate interaction; the
forces and speeds at which ClpX unfolds and translocates a variety of different
substrates; the efficiency by which ClpX converts ATP into mechanical energy;
and the intermolecular coordination of ClpX with ClpP. These results will
provide the first direct observation of protein-mediated mechanical unfolding
and will yield insight into other cellular processes and mechanisms associated
with proteolytic degradation. This project will explore a new class of
biological machinery distinguished by high force landscapes and biomechanical
denaturing and digestion of cellular proteins. In addition, the novel motor
motility track uniquely runs on a polypeptide backbone, in contrast to other
well studied motors that move along filaments of actin and microtubules or
polymers of DNA and RNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific impact of this project will be complemented by an educational
component focusing on the development of hands-on biophysics laboratory training
for undergraduates. Laboratory modules will be developed and implemented to
leverage the undergraduate optical traps developed by the PI with the classical
kinesin motility assay and a new ClpXP motility assay. These educational
initiatives will provide students with direct training experience in biological
motor motility assays and biophysics instrumentation and will be adapted for
summer laboratory courses and through the development of a web-based wiki
portal. Combined with these educational and outreach activities, this work will
advance the study of mechanical forces in biology and contribute to the
understanding of Nature's molecular machinery.