* 1118679
* Collaborative Research: Community College Undergraduate Research Initiative (CCURI)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* James Hewlett, Finger Lakes Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,664,911.00

The Community College Undergraduate Research Initiative (CCURI - www.ccuri.org)
is a national consortium of community colleges, four-year schools, government
agencies, and private organizations dedicated to the development,
implementation, and assessment of a sustainable model for integrating an
undergraduate research (UR) experience into community college biology
curriculum. In partnership with the Council on Undergraduate Research (CUR),
CCURI has developed a fully-integrated model for integrating undergraduate
research at a community college. This project aims to: 1) Expand a modified
version of the CCURI model to 16 additional community colleges; 2) Implement a
comprehensive evaluation of the CCURI model on student learning, competency, and
retention in STEM; 3) Measure the impact of the CCURI model on developing
institutional capacity at the 16 additional community colleges that are
committed to developing an undergraduate research program; and 4) Disseminate
the modified CCURI model of integration and the customized versions of the model
as they exist at the institutional partners within CCURI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is responsive to the recommendations for
biology education reform called for in both Vision and Change: A Call To Action
(NSF/AAAS) and the BIO 2010 report (NRC). CCURI is working toward a fully
validated strategy that community colleges can look to in understanding how to
initiate reform. The CCURI model is novel in that it was developed from a Root
Cause Analysis of the unique barriers that community colleges face in sustaining
UR programs. The project includes economic impact metrics as a tool for
evaluating a Community College Faculty Model and leverages a partnership with
Tennessee Tech &amp; their CAT instrument to capture gains in critical thinking
skills - an outcome with implications beyond biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is creating and sustaining a national network of Community Colleges
committed to bringing the UR experience into biology curriculum. The model is
helping community colleges overcome the unique barriers that have prevented them
from employing the power of the UR pedagogy in the education of approximately
45% of all U.S. undergraduates including underrepresented groups and students
who are the first generation of their family to attend college. The results from
the extensive evaluation plan is being widely disseminated and used to refine
the model for integrating the UR experience at a community college.