* 1118143
* Stability and Change in Neandertal Technology from MIS 9 to MIS 3 in Central Italy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Sylvain SORIANO, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 147,521.00

The stability and uniformity of Neandertal (Middle Paleolithic) technology is a
commonplace assumption. The development of local traditions and temporal
variation has been documented only for the later phases of the Middle
Paleolithic and in some regions only. Regional patterns in tool manufacture and
typology may be seen as culturally determined yet the widespread assumption is
that Neandertal societies and traditions were essentially uniform and static.
Differences in the mental capacity of Neandertals and of modern humans might
explain why Neandertals became extinct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
advance the debate about differences in the cognitive capacities of Neandertals
and early modern humans and will help to isolate the specific capabilities which
make the human species unique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has expanded
the Neandertal chronological range to at least 400,000 years ago and their
geographic range as far as possibly southern Siberia. Their cognitive abilities
and subsistence practices have been extended to include planning of communal
hunts, hafting and the use of glues that require heat treatment, long-term
organization of knapping activities, the exploitation of small game and aquatic
resources, the use of mineral pigments and the habitual use of fire. Yet the
conventional view that Neandertals did not have a capacity to form innovative
plans of action and copied technical behavior from one generation to the next,
with little variation beyond adaptations to ecological conditions, persists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present it is impossible to fully support or refute the
conventional view of Neandertals. To break this impasse, these claims must be
empirically tested. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Paola Villa
and an international team of colleagues will carry out technological analyses,
supported by experimental replication, of lithic assemblages from three late
Acheulian, eight Middle Paleolithic and three Aurignacian sites, dating from
330,000 to 30,000 years ago in a single region (Central Italy). The assemblages
will be used to establish rates of stability and/or change in tool forms, use of
particular knapping methods and objectives of tool production over this long
time span. These assemblages are all made on exactly the same kind of flint
pebbles, of high quality but very limited in the size of products. This constant
eliminates one major, external, factor of variability between assemblages which
makes it difficult to evaluate the inventiveness and significance of
technological changes through time. There are no other sequences in Europe
documenting the use of the same kind and morphology of raw material over three
hundred thousand years. Comparisons with pre and post Neandertal assemblages
will be made to assess Neandertal technical abilities compared to those of
modern humans and of presumed pre-Neandertals. Dating by multiple techniques
will be done for assemblages which lack or have insufficient radiometric dates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program includes Italian and French
archaeologists, a geologist, a paleontologist, and three dating specialists from
Australia and England. The project will bring to the international scene the
rich but still incompletely known Italian prehistoric record of the Middle and
Upper Pleistocene and will broaden the participation of students from multiple
universities. Upon conclusion of analyses, thousands of artifacts curated and
ready for other analyses will be available to other researchers.