* 1118704
* Fluids in Continental Fault Zones: Evidence From Neomineralized Clays
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ben van der Pluijm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 230,372.00

Newly-grown clays in fault rock preserve the isotopic signature of fluids that
were present during faulting, and will be used to constrain the plumbing of
shallow fault systems and the dominant source of fluids. Examining fluid
infiltration and circulation of crustal fault systems tests the hypothesis that
fluids originating at the surface are the dominant phase in strike-slip fault
and normal fault systems. This research project will use paired oxygen and
hydrogen isotopic measurements on newly-grown illite from a suite of detachment
(normal) fault systems in southwestern United States and continental strike-slip
faults (San Andreas Fault, Alpine Fault, North Anatolian Fault). These faults
contain neomineralized clays and are well-studied examples of major continental
fault systems. The field approach utilizes surface sampling and recent drill
core, while the laboratory works involves stable and radiogenic analyses,
supported by various sample characterization
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying fluid circulation in natural fault
systems is fundamental to understanding the role of fluids within the upper
crust, which has major implications for the strength and seismogenesis of
faults, and the formation of economic deposits. The approach in this study can
be applied to many fault systems around the world to examine the relative
contributions of metamorphic (deep) and meteoric (surface) fluids, so it has
excellent potential for broad application. This field and laboratory project
includes graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Michigan, and
involves international collaboration with several field and laboratory experts.
The training of young scientists contributes significantly to tomorrow's needs
for human capital in science, math and engineering fields. Results will be
published in the professional literature and inserted in appropriate public
outreach and teaching setting, as well as scientific presentations by team
members.