* 1118525
* Collaborative Research: Hypothesis Testing of a Mediterranean-style Closure of the Paleo-Tethys Ocean
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Carmala Garzione, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 230,482.00

The generation and destruction of ocean basins on geologic timescales associated
with Earth's plate tectonic system is a fundamental process that strongly
influences climate patterns and ocean circulation, the location and timing of
mountain building events, and the evolution and distribution of organisms. This
project is testing the hypothesis that the Paleo-Tethys Ocean--an ancient ocean
basin between Eurasia and Gondwana--closed in a tectonic style analogous to the
modern ongoing closure of the western Mediterranean Sea. This hypothesis is
motivated by the geographical proximity of ancient continent-continent collision
zones within Asia to the geologic remnants of the Paleo-Tethys Ocean and the
striking similarity of this tectonic assemblage to the modern western
Mediterranean region. The Mediterranean-style model we are testing is counter to
other tectonic models that suggest collisions between continents and high-
pressure metamorphism of continental crust marks the demise of an ocean basin
and the end of oceanic subduction. In contrast, the Mediterranean-style model
involves the birth and rapid expansion of an ocean basin adjacent to the
colliding continents. In addition to explicitly testing a Mediterranean-style
closure of the Paleo-Tethys Ocean, alternative hypotheses will be implicitly
tested in this project. Hypothesis testing will involve the structural and
stratigraphic analysis of rocks in and around the Tibetan Plateau, and the
determination of ages and geochemical compositions of individual minerals and
rock samples. This project is a multi-disciplinary and collaborative research
effort between faculty, researchers, and students at the University of Rochester
and the West Virginia University along with scientists from the Institute of
Tibetan Plateau Research in the Chinese Academy of Sciences.