* 1118016
* Early State Formation and Expansion: Iklaina, a Secondary Center of the Mycenaean State of Pylos, Greece
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Michael Cosmopoulos, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 148,589.00

The transition from a world without states to a world dominated by states is one
of the most significant developments in human history since states constitute
the dominant unit through with international interactions occur. Although in
many parts of the world the study of this transition has been at the forefront
of archaeological and anthropological research, in Greece it has been slow to
develop despite the fact that early Greek states have significant potential in
contributing new knowledge to the world-wide study of state
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although archaeologists agree that Mycenaean
states were formed through the unification of previously independent regional
polities, the specific mechanisms that affected this process are not clear. For
a long time, hierarchy and socio-political stratification were considered the
main forces driving state formation, an approach shaped by the fact that the
available evidence derived from a few main palatial capitals. Recent models
have, however, shifted the focus from the "center" to the "hinterland" and
highlighted the need for a systematic and interdisciplinary investigation of
non-palatial settlements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project Dr. Cosmopoulos
adopts a "bottom-up" approach to the study of state formation and expansion in
early Greece. With funding from NSF he will conduct a systematic and
interdisciplinary investigation of Iklaina, a secondary center of the Mycenaean
state of Pylos. Through a combination of survey, excavation, and scientific
analyses he plans to: 1) produce the datasets necessary to test existing models
about the emergence of Mycenaean states; 2) investigate the dynamic relationship
of centers to hinterlands; and 3) develop cross-cultural models useful in
understanding state formation and expansion in other parts of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project concern three
main areas:&lt;br/&gt;1) large-scale collaborative research: the project allows
scientists to coordinate their skills in a major research program and to
interact with colleagues from other fields and other countries. Furthermore, the
project builds on work conducted by previous projects in the area and combines
archaeological fieldwork (survey, excavation, scientific analyses) with the
study of the available textual and literary evidence. Finally, it applies
anthropological theories in the study of state formation in Greece.&lt;br/&gt;2)
education: the project serves as the training field for a large number of
graduate and undergraduate students. Since the inception of the project, 680
undergraduate and 33 graduate students (of whom about 70% women and 5% African
Americans) have been trained in archaeological theory and field
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;3) preservation of cultural heritage: because the area of
Pylos is increasingly being destroyed by developers, tourists, and looters, the
excavation, conservation, and proper guarding of the archaeological site at
Iklaina will salvage one of the most promising ancient sites of the area.