* 1118467
* Aerosols-Climate Interactions: Characterization of Saltation, Dust Lifting, and Dust Electrification in Important Dust Source Regions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 738,730.00

Aerosols produce a direct climate forcing by scattering and absorbing solar and
infrared radiation, and an indirect forcing by altering cloud processes. Since
human activity causes significant increases in the concentration of atmospheric
aerosols, it is important to understand the effects of aerosols on climate.
Despite considerable progress in our understanding of aerosols-climate
interactions, climate forcing by mineral dust aerosols is still one of the most
uncertain processes in current climate models (IPCC, 2007). Therefore, it is
important to study the lifting and transport of dust aerosols so that aerosol
climate forcing can be assessed accurately. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merits:&lt;br/&gt;Mineral dust aerosols are lifted (ejected into the atmosphere)
by saltation and transported away from the surface by convective plumes (in
particular, their updrafts), convective vortices (dust devils), dust storms
(dust lifting by gust fronts), and large-scale winds (wind-blown dust). So far
most research has focused on studies of dust lifting by large-scale processes
such as dust storms and wind-blown dust because they are the most important
contributors to the global aerosol budget. However, recent studies suggest that
small-scale processes such as convective plumes and vortices also play an
important role on the global mineral dust budget. This suggestion is consistent
with evidence that variations in the annual dust cycle of West African dust "hot
spots" are strongly correlated with variations in small-scale wind gusts
produced by dry boundary layer convection, but not with variations in the mean
surface wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fully understand aerosols-climate
interactions we must understand the basic physical processes involved in
saltation and their variability with soil and weather conditions. This project
will achieve this goal by studying saltation and dust lifting in Nevada, an area
where small-scale dust lifting processes are ubiquitous, the Owens Dry Lake, one
of the most important dust source areas in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The research has the potential to have a broad impact on
science and society. Besides studying an important scientific problem key to our
understanding of global climate change, we will make our data and models
available to the scientific community. We have an educational website that
provides simple physical explanations for the formation of convective plumes,
dust devils, and dust storms. The website will include descriptions of the
weather and climate of Nevada, the Owens Dry Lake. Finally, this project will
contribute to the training of graduate students.