* 1118741
* Collaborative Research: Magmatic Evolution of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii: Past, Present and Future
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Michael Garcia, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2015
* USD 267,420.00

Collaborative Research: Magmatic Evolution of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii: Past,
Present and Future&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Kilauea volcano is
the premier location to study basaltic magmatic processes. It is one of the best
monitored and most active volcanoes in the world. Field, petrologic,
geochemical, and geophysical studies have delineated its basic magmatic plumbing
system from the mantle source to the surface. Modern and ancient Kilauea lavas
provide essential clues for deciphering the nature of compositional
heterogeneity within the Hawaiian mantle plume and for assessing processes of
magma generation, transport and storage. Previous studies of historical and
prehistoric Kilauea summit lavas documented cyclic geochemical variations on a
time scale of decades to centuries. Historically, these compositional variations
correlate with factors such as eruption rate (more depleted sources appear to
have undergone lower degrees of melting and produced less magma) and rare,
explosive eruptions (e.g., 1924). Detailed investigation of the ongoing,
28-year-old, voluminous (&gt;3 km3) Pu?u O?o eruption has revealed shorter-term
trends in lava chemistry (years) that may be controlled by the melting of small-
scale compositional heterogeneities within the Hawaiian plume, including
recently depleted and Mauna Loa-like sources. Currently, Kilauea has two active
eruptions: Pu`u O?o (1983-present) on its east rift zone and a new eruption at
the volcano?s summit, Halema?uma?u (2008-present).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-
part study is proposed involving petrography, mineral chemistry, whole-rock
major and trace element abundances, and Pb, Sr, Nd and O isotope ratios to
investigate past, present and future compositional variations in Kilauea lavas.
Present and future variations: will involve two time series experiments using
lavas from the current Pu`u O?o and Halema?uma?u eruptions. First, time-series
petrologic and geochemical monitoring will document changes in eruptive behavior
and/or lava chemistry. After assessing the effects of crustal processes (e.g.,
crystal fractionation and/or magma mixing), these data will allow evaluation of
mantle processes. Second, the chemistry of juvenile glassy tephra from the
Halema?uma?u summit eruption will be compared with contemporaneous Pu`u O?o rift
zone lavas, and geophysical and other data collected by the USGS Hawaiian
Volcano Observatory, to better delineate the architecture of Kilauea?s magmatic
plumbing system. Sustained eruptions at two distant vent locations (summit and
rift zone) provide opportunity to track the movement of magma through the
volcano?s plumbing system as a function of time and space using lava chemistry.
This work will have implications for other basaltic volcanoes. Third, the last
200+ ka of Kilauea?s evolution will be assessed using lavas from the ~1.7- and
2.0-km long, continuously cored Scientific Observation Hole (SOH) drill holes.
The (SOH) core represents the poorly studied early shield stage of a Hawaiian
volcano, which was not sampled by the Hawaii Scientific Drilling Project (HSDP)
at Mauna Kea volcano. To better constrain ages for SOH core samples it is
proposed to obtain high precision 40Ar-39Ar ages for 14 samples. The results
will be used to model Kilauea?s volcanic growth rate and temporal geochemical
evolution. The chemistry of coeval Kilauea (SOH, early shield stage) and Mauna
Kea (HSDP, late shield stage) lavas will be compared to evaluate mantle source
and melting conditions for lavas extracted contemporaneously from the eastern,
Kea side of the Hawaiian plume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The
proposed research will involve (1) developing teaching modules for undergraduate
and graduate courses using the results from our Kilauea research to highlight
magmatic processes at an active volcano and emphasize cooperative learning and
development of higher order thinking skills, (2) mentoring a post-doctoral
researcher, and graduate and undergraduate students, (3) giving public lectures
to school groups and the local community on the eruptions of Kilauea, (4)
gaining a better understanding of volcanoes, which can adversely influence the
quality of life, and (5) increasing international and national scientific
cooperation through collaboration and utilization of facilities.