* 1118598
* Experimental Investigations of the Role of H2O in Subduction Zone Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Timothy Grove, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2015
* USD 397,810.00

Technical description:

Three projects will be carried out. 1) Experimental studies mantle melting in
the presence of H2O will determine the chemical composition of key minerals and
the composition of the melt. These results will be used to understand the
processes that transfer H2O from the subducted oceanic lithosphere into mantle
wedge peridotite. 2) A systematic investigation of shallower mantle melting from
1 to 2 GPa (30 to km 60 depth in the Earth), will be carried out. These
experiments will use mantle analog compositions and controlled variations in the
amount of H2O. Their purpose is to provide constraints for the development of
quantitative models of flux melting and reactive porous flow in the mantle
wedge. 3) Experimental studies on crustal- level fractional crystallization of
arc andesites to rhyolites. These experiments will be carried out at pressures
of 100 to 300 MPa over a range of oxygen fugacities under H2O-saturated
conditions and will calibrate an orthopyroxene-melt thermometer and hygrometer.
This thermometer-hygrometer will be widely applicable to andesite-rhyolite
magmas. 4) Parallel geochemical and petrologic investigations on andesite and
dacite lavas from Mt. Shasta and Newberry volcano in the Cascades, USA to
provide quantitative information on crustal differentiation processes. In all of
the experimental studies we will develop quantitative, thermodynamically based
analytical tools that allow estimation of melting/crystallization processes
where H2O is involved. The effects of H2O flux through the subduction zone
environment are of fundamental importance for understanding the chemical
evolution of the Earth's crust-mantle system over the last 4.5 billion years.
This information on the influence of H2O on melting and crystallization
processes will allow us to develop better models that couple mantle flow with
subduction. Ultimately, the research has relevance for the origin of the Earth?s
oceans and the evolution of the atmosphere.

Broader significance and importance: This work will advance our understanding of
the processes that lead to the formation of magmas in subduction zone
environments. H2O is a key ingredient in the formation of these magmas that
erupt from volcanoes (like Mt. St. Helens) or cool and crystallize at depth to
form the Earth's continental crust. By understanding water's influence on the
temperature and chemical reactions of this magma generation process, we will
gain a better understanding of where and how chemical elements are concentrated
in these magma and where and how much H2O is recycled through the Earth's
interior. This is a fundamentally important problem in Earth Science that has
implications for a number of practical matters. Two of immediate public interest
are: 1) the formation of ore deposits that concentrate elements of economic
importance (e.g. Cu, Zn, Pb) where they can be extracted and 2) H2O is the
active ingredient in producing the dangerous volcanic eruptions that are the
signature of subduction volcanoes: knowing the amount of H2O that can be
incorporated is fundamental fro understanding how these eruptions work.