* 1118114
* III: Small: Query and Goal Driven Entity Resolution Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2015
* USD 569,406.00

Data cleaning technologies, traditionally designed to improve quality of data in
back-end data warehouses, are fast emerging as a vital component of real-time
information access. As the Web evolves towards supporting interactive analytics
and basic search migrates from simple keyword retrieval to retrieval based on
semantically richer concepts (e.g., entities) extracted from web pages, the need
for "on-the-fly" cleaning techniques that can help alleviate data quality
challenges is rapidly increasing. This project explores three new innovations
that will help advance data cleaning towards becoming an embedded enabling
technology for real-time information access. The first innovation is "query-
aware data cleaning" which is based on the observation that the specificity of
the real-time task such as a query can be exploited significantly to bring new
optimizations to the data cleaning process. The second innovation is a data
cleaning framework that migrates from the "best-effort" adhoc setup of today's
systems into a principled approach that exposes and exploits a fundamental
tradeoff between the cost of cleaning and quality of results achieved. Finally,
since results of cleaning need to be fed to the end-user or analysis code, the
proposal postulates and addresses approaches towards how results processed
through data cleaning code can be presented to the end-recipient. The primary
contribution is mechanisms to hide the uncertainty in the data and determinize
the results while maximizing the end application goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is intended to bring transformative
improvements in interactive analytics and search on the web by facilitating
real-time data cleaning and data quality enhancements. The project also aims to
benefit the research community by incorporating mechanisms developed as part of
this research into the Web People Search Technology (WEST), enabling WEST to
become a real-time on-the-fly web people search tool. The goal is to support
WEST as a plug-and-play system wherein other researchers could embed and test
their data cleaning algorithms and tools. Finally, the planned research, system
development, and educational activities are going to significantly enhance the
educational experience of students, preparing them for a brighter future in the
today's knowledge driven society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information
see the project web site at the URL: http://sherlock.ics.uci.edu