* 1118971
* Algorithms for Threat Detection in Sensor Systems for Analyzing Chemical and Biological Systems Based on Compressive Sensing and L1 Related Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,09/30/2017
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,198,663.00

The investigators intend to generate new and effective mathematical algorithms
and methodologies in sensor systems for the detection of chemical and biological
materials. Next, they intend to transfer this technology directly to those
working towards reducing the threat to the homeland of biological and chemical
attack. The new techniques they will use come primarily from information
science, image science and physics, involving harmonic analysis, machine
learning, optimization and partial differential equations. In particular they
intend to provide useful algorithms for multi-component aerosol unmixing for
active sensing using LiDAR and for mixtures of vapors in passive sensing. They
will use ideas and algorithms recently developed, broadly speaking, from
compressive sensing and L1 related optimization which were applied to
hyperspectral imaging (recently used by Navy SEALS in the Bin Laden take down),
unmixing, template matching, anomaly detection, clustering, change detection and
endmember computation. They will improve relevant classical learning techniques,
such as support vector machine, using their optimization techniques. They will
also use ideas from machine learning with nonlocal means with prior information,
in order to segment and identify objects in data collected from all sorts of
sensors. Finally, they will factor in physics, such as plume dissipation, as
part of the prior information needed to do spatial segmentation and
identification.

The US government has been developing laser-based sensors for locating and
classifying aerosols in the atmosphere at safe standoff ranges for more than a
decade. There is a need to distinguish aerosols of biological origin from
indifferent materials such as smoke and dust. Often, mixtures of aerosols are
present and it is important to decide whether a threat exists. This project is
intended to resolve data containing such a mixture into their separate
components. Some success has already been obtained here by the investigators.
This is an example of what this work concerns. A chemical and/or biological
contamination might occur on the ground or in the air. The problem is to
determine the presence of and concentration of chemical and biological threats
and to track the dynamics of the cloud. The research done here is relevant to
all the sensor modalities used in this type of threat detection. These include
state-of-the-art LiDAR sensors, infrared radiometry and hyperpectral spensors.
Plume tracking through the atmosphere is particularly important in a potential
threat situation. The type of work proposed here is basic to our nation's
security, given the threat posed by chemical and biological WMD's.