* 1118301
* The first International Symposium on Thermal and Materials Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, May 29-June 3, 2011, Antalya, Turkey
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Yildiz Bayazitoglu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 03/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

1118301&lt;br/&gt;Bayazitolu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international symposium
entitled Thermal and Materials Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (TMNN-2011) will
be held on May 29- June 3, 2011 in Antalya, Turkey. It is envisioned to have
around 150 attendees. This proposal to NSF requests funds for eight graduate and
postdoctoral students and eight key leaders who will be attending the symposium
and are experts on this proposed emerging area of research and engineering.
Emphasis is being given to solicit participation from minority and
underrepresented groups. Each invitee will be expected to participate fully and
to submit a contributed paper to the symposium. Some will be asked to be the
panelists. The invited participant will receive partial travel support, which
will cover a portion of the estimated symposium travel expenses. The symposium
will host a special graduate and postdoctoral student co-authored poster session
which will be identified and marked as "Sponsored by NSF".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium
will explore potential advancements in the field of thermal and materials
engineering enabled by nanoscience and nanotechnology. It will play a role in
bridging the gap between chemistry, physics and engineering. It will contribute
to the goal of further understanding the wide diversity of length scales ranging
from the nano- to macroscopic scales. It will provide a unique platform for
researchers, high tech industry practitioners and educators engaged and
interested in nanoscience and nanotechnology to identify significant challenges
and opportunities in solving thermal and materials problems. The panel
discussions will help to identify short and long term research areas for
collaborations between the thermal and materials science groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Symposium will offer an opportunity to establish
international relationship and collaboration. The scientific and engineering
education and training needs related to thermal and material science
applications of nanotechnology are critical components of the symposium. It will
give opportunity to the graduate students to be leaders in
organizing/participating in technical sessions. The symposium organizers will
ensure a diverse representation of attendees would be present, including
underrepresented groups, females, students and young professionals. The workshop
proceedings and the special journal issue will be broadly disseminated through
various channels.