* 1118037
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: EEDAG: Exploring Energy-Efficient Parallel Tasks Generation and Scheduling for Heterogeneous Multicore Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Zizhong Chen, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 02/28/2013
* USD 68,868.00

This project addresses optimizing energy efficiency in the execution of parallel
algorithms. High energy cost is a salient constraint when running large scale
parallel applications on the next generation of supercomputers that contain
heterogeneous multicore processors and interconnections, motivating a rethinking
of conventional approaches to modeling, designing and scheduling parallel tasks
by taking energy-efficiency into consideration.

In this collaborative research, this team explores energy-efficient parallel
task design, scheduling, and implementation and develops an power profiling tool
(PowerPack) that can measure decomposed runtime power consumption of different
computing components (e.g. processors, memory, networks and disks) when running
large scale parallel applications.

The results of the research will be widely disseminated by maintaining an active
project website, publishing peer-reviewed journal and conference papers, making
the code available to other researchers, and presenting the research results in
professional meetings. The availability of the research outcomes will provide
ample opportunities for other researchers to further study the energy-efficiency
of parallel applications. Through the collaboration of Texas State University ?
San Marcos, Colorado School of Mines, and the Marquette University, PIs promote
teaching, learning, and training by exposing graduate and undergraduate students
to technological underpinnings in the fields of high performance computing in
general and energy-efficient computing in particular. The close partnerships
with a number of universities, data centers and national laboratories will also
facilitate the broad dissemination of the proposed energy-efficient parallel
tasks designing and scheduling techniques as well as the developed power
profiling toolkits.