* 1118530
* EcoMobile: Blended Real and Virtual Immersive Experiences for Learning Complex Causality and Ecosystems Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Christopher Dede, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,489,657.00

Researchers at Harvard University are studying whether middle school instruction
about ecosystem science can be made more engaging and effective by combining
immersion experiences in virtual ecosystems with immersion experiences in real
ecosystems infused with virtual resources. Project personnel are developing a
set of learning resources for deployment by mobile broadband devices that
provide students with virtual access to information and simulations while
working in the field. The EcoMobile project is testing the hypothesis that
student engagement, self-efficacy, and understanding of life science standards
will be enhanced if students using a four-week inquiry-based curriculum that
provides immersion experiences in simulated ecosystems employ smartphones,
tablets, and other mobile devices to collect and share data, access on-site
information, and visit geo-referenced locations while investigating real
ecosystems. Target audiences are middle school students and teachers, curriculum
developers, and education researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is using
quasi-experimental methods to collect data on the usability of the blended
environment approach, student gains, and relationships between the two modes of
learning. Pilot-test middle school teachers are implementing the EcoMobile
curriculum and a comparison curriculum that does not employ mobile devices in
the field. Using a variety of assessment instruments and methods, researchers
are measuring changes in students' knowledge, attitudes, and self-efficacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Blending virtual and mobile device-enhanced real world
learning experiences can potentially enhance student-directed inquiry, enhance
learning, and students' ability to understand and solve complex environmental
problems. EcoMobile encompasses the types of learning strengths and preferences
many students today bring to school, based on their use of social media, mobile
devices, and games. Employing virtual and augmented reality learning
environments in science classes may broaden the pool of science in science
careers by enhancing their engagement in science learning, self-efficacy, and
knowledge of science and technology.