* 1118822
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Mathematical Challenges in Distributed Quickest Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,11/30/2012
* Lifeng Lai, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 11/30/2012
* USD 190,748.00

The aim of the proposed research is to advance the state of the art of quickest
detection by developing mathematical and statistical tools for systems
consisting of large numbers of sensors with heterogeneous change times across
sensors. Three related yet increasingly complicated and practical models will be
considered. First, the assumption that the change times are the same at all
sensors will be relaxed. The goal is to design quickest detection algorithms for
the scenario with direct links between the sensors and the fusion center but
with different change times. Next, the assumption that the access point can
observe signals from all the sensors simultaneously will be relaxed. The goal is
to develop quickest attack detection and localization algorithms for the
scenario in which the fusion center can access only a subset of sensors at any
given time. Finally, the assumption that there is a direct link between each
sensor and the fusion center will be relaxed. The heterogeneity and sparsity of
sensor observations will be exploited to develop quickest attack detection and
localization algorithms for this scenario.

The proposed research is expected to make substantial contributions to both
applications and theory. On the application level, the proposed research has the
potential to substantially improve the efficiency and robustness of chemical and
biological threat detection algorithms. It is meant to develop low complexity
algorithms that will be useful for implementation. On the theoretical level, the
proposed project will advance the state of the art of sequential analysis and
contribute new approaches to the general methodological base for optimal
stopping and control problems for quickest detection. The proposed work has
widespread potential applications not only in the detection of chemical and
biological threats but also other areas as well. For example, in medical
diagnosis, there are often more than one symptom related to a disease and these
symptoms do not necessarily occur at the same time. The results of this research
can be used to improve the performance of medical diagnostic techniques. The
breadth of applications of the proposed research also makes this an ideal topic
for attracting students from diverse disciplines and backgrounds from applied
mathematics to engineering.