* 1118851
* Multiple Instrumental Case Studies of Inclusive STEM-focused High Schools: Opportunity Structures for Preparation and Inspiration (OSPrl).
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Barbara Means, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,164,195.00

The aim of this project is to examine opportunity structures provided to
students by inclusive STEM-focused high schools, with an emphasis on studying
schools that serve students from underrepresented groups. In contrast to highly
selective STEM-focused schools that target students who are already identified
as gifted and talented in STEM, inclusive STEM-focused high schools aim to
develop new sources of STEM talent, particularly among underrepresented minority
students, to improve workforce development and prepare STEM professionals. A new
NRC report, Successful K-12 STEM Education (2011), identifies areas in which
research on STEM-focused schools is most needed. The NRC report points out the
importance of providing opportunities for groups that are underrepresented in
the sciences, especially Blacks, Hispanics, and low-income students who
disproportionately fall out of the high-achieving group in K-12 education. This
project responds specifically to the call for research in the NRC report and
provides systematic data to define and clarify the nature of such schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is studying inclusive STEM-focused high
schools across the United States to determine what defines them. The research
team initially identified ten candidate critical components that define STEM-
focused high schools and is refining and further clarifying the critical
components through the research study. The first phase of the study is focusing
on 12 well-established and carefully planned schools with good reputations and
strong community and business support, in order to capture the critical
components as intended and implemented. Case studies of these high-functioning
schools and a cross-case analysis using a set of instruments for gauging STEM
design and implementation are contributing toward building a theory of action
for such schools that can be applied more generally to STEM education. The
second phase of the study involves selecting four school models for further
study, focusing on student-level experiences and comparing student outcomes
against comprehensive schools in the same district. Research questions being
studied include: 1) Is there a core set of likely critical components shared by
well-established, promising inclusive STEM-focused high schools? Do other
components emerge from the study? 2) How are the critical components implemented
in each school? 3) What are the contextual affordances and constraints that
influence schools' designs, their implementation, and student outcomes? 4) How
do student STEM outcomes in these schools compare with school district and state
averages? 5) How do four promising such schools compare with matched
comprehensive high schools within their respective school districts, and how are
the critical components displayed? 6) From the points of view of students
underrepresented in STEM fields, how do education experiences at the schools and
their matched counterparts compare? And 7) How do student outcomes compare?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses a multiple instrumental case study
design in order to describe and compare similar phenomena. Schools as critical
cases are being selected through a nomination process by experts, followed by
screening and categorization according to key design dimensions. Data sources
include school documents and public database information; a survey, followed by
telephone interviews that probe for elaborated information, to provide a
systematic overview of the candidate components; on-site visitations to each
school provide data on classroom observations at the schools; interviews with
students, teachers and administrators in focus groups; and discussions with
critical members of the school community that provide unique opportunities to
learn such as mentors, business leaders, and members of higher education
community that provide outside of school learning experiences. The project is
also gathering data on a variety of school-level student outcome indicators, and
is tracking the likely STEM course trajectories for students, graduation rates,
and college admission rates for students in the inclusive STEM-focused schools,
as compared to other schools in the same jurisdiction. Analysis of the first
phase of the study aims to develop rich descriptions that showcase
characteristics of the schools, using axial and open coding, to determine a
theory of action that illustrates interconnections among context, design,
implementation, and outcome elements. Analysis of the second phase of the study
involves similar processes on four levels: school, student, databases, and a
synthesis of the three. Evaluation of the project consists of an internal
advisory board and an external advisory board, both of which provide primarily
formative feedback on research procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
findings, as well as case studies, records of instrument and rubric development
and use, annual reports, and conference proposals and papers are being provided
on a website, in order to provide an immediate and ongoing resource for
education leaders, researchers and policymakers to learn about research on these
schools and particular models. An effort is also being made to give voice to the
experiences of high school students from the four pairs of high schools studied
in the second phase of the study. Findings are also being disseminated by more
traditional means, such as papers in peer-reviewed journals and conference
presentations.