* 1118047
* SHF:  Small: Improving single core performance via compiler-assisted out-of-order commit
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Alexander Veidenbaum, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,897.00

The performance growth in uniprocessor (single core) performance resulting from
improvements in semiconductor technology has recently slowed down significantly.
Sequential applications or sequential portions of parallel applications require
further advances to improve their performance. Today's processors complete
instructions in their program order, which is a major performance bottleneck
because any long-latency instruction, such as access to memory, delays
completion of all subsequent instructions. This project aims to achieve higher
single core performance by defining a new, compiler assisted mechanism for out
of order instruction completion. It investigates how the use of compile-time
program knowledge can be passed to the hardware and be used to simplify the
architectural checks required for such out of order completion. The architecture
of a standard processor is fully preserved and legacy software can execute
without modification.&lt;br/&gt;The out-of-order instruction commit mechanism
will use a novel compiler/architecture interface. The compiler provides
information about instruction ``blocks'' and the processor uses the block
information to decide which instructions can be committed out of order and when.
Some blocks are guaranteed to be data independent blocks which allows
instructions from different such blocks be committed simultaneously and out of
order. Other blocks have data or control dependencies and require in-order
execution and in-order commit. Micro-architectural support for the new commit
mode is driven by the block information, which significantly simplifies the
hardware. Exception handling is also simplified with compiler assistance. The
new commit mechanism will effectively increase the size of the instruction
window allowing more cache misses to be overlapped for both L1 and L2 caches.
The project will also investigate additional compiler and architecture
optimizations to further improve performance.&lt;br/&gt;