* 1118397
* Strategic Needs of Water on the Yukon (SNOWY)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Leah Mackey, Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2015
* USD 357,133.00

SNOWY is a collaborative project between Subarctic Indigenous communities in the
Yukon River Basin (YRB) and scientists from Colorado State University (CSU), the
US Geological Survey (USGS), the US Forest Service (USFS), and the grassroots,
non-profit organization, the Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council (YRITWC)
to combine qualitative and quantitative data on water quality and quantity of
the Yukon River. Building upon the existing partnership and water-quality
monitoring program between the USGS and the YRITWC, established in 2005 to
measure the effects of climate change on the biogeochemistry of the Yukon River,
SNOWY will provide a holistic view of how climate change is affecting Yukon
River communities by exploring the social/cultural/economic/spiritual
relationships of local people to the annual hydrologic cycle of the YRB.
Utilizing community capacity that was developed as a key component of the water-
quality monitoring project, SNOWY will collect snow and water data during the
winter, complementing the existing summer data collection, and create a database
that truly reflects the hydrology of the system. CSU and USGS scientists are
working with community members through meetings, workshops, and interviews in
order to a gain a more complete understanding of the social and environmental
changes in the YRB in recent years. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A key component of
the project is the "Healing Journey", a field trip taken by scientists and
community members to travel a portion of the Yukon River by dog sled and/or
snowmachine in the winter months. YRITWC has conducted a number of summertime
Healing Journeys in order to bring together community and scientific
understandings of the YRB and the changes taking place. Previous Healing
Journeys have been conducted in traditional open water transports, such as
canoes. The YRITWC has found that arriving via traditional transport creates an
instant rapport with local people who are then willing and interested to learn
more about the science that accompanies the trip. By employing this same
technique in the winter season the SNOWY?s 300-mile Healing Journey will begin
at Russian Mission, travel to the mouth of the Yukon and end at the community of
Chevak, a coastal community on a tributary of the Yukon River. Although many of
the research questions and hypotheses have been developed, the SNOWY team
anticipates that others will arise through community dialogs that will be
facilitated during the project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Yukon River communities
were involved in the conceptualization of this project and will be directly
involved in the research through training, data gathering, analysis, and the
sharing and exchange of knowledge, both scientific and indigenous that will take
place throughout the course of this project. Scientists and communities will be
working together in order to push the boundaries of current epistemological and
ontological thinking while creating real solutions to climate change impacts.