* 1118589
* RAPID: Election Monitoring in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Clark Gibson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2013
* USD 87,998.00

Does election monitoring reduce fraud? International observers use monitoring as
a core component of the effort to ensure fair elections in transitioning
democracies and post-conflict countries. Yet scholars and policymakers know
little about the actual impact and scale of monitoring given weak tests and
flawed research designs. In an effort to overcome these challenges, this project
employs more robust methodologies and tests new hypotheses to evaluate the
effect of monitoring during the February 18, 2011, Presidential and
Parliamentary elections in Uganda. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances
knowledge and understanding of election monitoring in several ways. By taking
advantage of cellular phone technology and an application designed specifically
for this project to facilitate the recording and transmission of vote tally
results, the principal investigator and collaborators will randomize the
presence or absence of monitoring across polling stations and district counting
centers throughout Uganda. By creating a random sample of 800 locations, this
study is the first to evaluate the impact of election monitoring at such a
scientifically rigorous level. The PI will test whether or not this intervention
reduces fraud in polling stations and district centers, whether incumbents have
greater control over fraud than do challengers, and whether there are
differences in fraud levels between polling stations and district centers. An
important benefit to the scientific community is the provision of an
experimental estimate of the causal effect of monitoring on election fraud.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes several broader contributions. The
study provides evidence to academics, policymakers, and citizens about the
promotion of free and fair elections. The project should also make an important
contribution to citizen welfare, in that robust evidence now indicates that
enfranchising disadvantaged groups raises political responsiveness, whereas
manipulating elections leads to popular resentment and often election-related
violence. Moreover, because Uganda resembles many developing democracies along
such key dimensions as institutional weakness, social diversity, and poverty,
the results of this project will suggest how well its fraud monitoring
technology is likely to work in other settings. If effective, the cellular
technology used in the project would furnish a cost-effective alternative to
conventional election monitoring. It could provide much greater coverage at
multiple levels, and could also be easily adapted to other service delivery and
corruption monitoring uses.