* 1118951
* Collaborative Research: Examining Formative Assessment Practices for English Language Learners in Science Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Min Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2016
* USD 122,165.00

This is a two-year exploratory study to identify critical aspects of effective
science formative assessment (FA) practices for English Language Learners
(ELLs), and the contextual factors influencing such practices. Three
institutions join efforts for this purpose: University of Colorado at Boulder,
University of Colorado at Denver, and University of Washington. FA, in the
context of the study, is viewed as a process contributing to the science
learning of ELLs, as opposed to the administration of discrete sets of
instruments to collect data from students. The study targets Spanish-speaking,
elementary and middle school students. Findings from this study contribute to
advance knowledge and understanding of FA as an inherent component of the
science learning process in linguistically diverse classrooms, and to define a
research agenda aimed at enhancing science teachers' ability to enact equitable
and effective assessment practices for this student subpopulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research questions guide the work: (1)
What FA practices are occurring in science classrooms that serve predominantly
mainstream students and in those serving predominantly ELLs?; (2) How are
teachers' FA practices for mainstream students different from or similar to
those used with ELLs?; and (3) How do contextual factors and teachers' cultural
and linguistic competencies influence FA practices? To address these questions,
two conceptual frameworks are used--one for characterizing FA events; the other
for examining FA events as a communication process. The study employs a mixed-
methods research approach with emphasis on case studies. The sample size
consists of three school districts in Colorado and Washington, 16 classrooms (8
elementary, 8 middle school), 16 teachers, and 96 ELLs. Classrooms are selected
to represent a particular combination of four factors: (a) teacher ethnicity,
(b) teacher formal academic preparation in teaching ELLs, (c) type of linguistic
student background, and (d) grade level. Students are selected through a
stratified random sample, identified by achievement level (i.e., low, medium,
high), and linguistic background (i.e., mainstream, ELL). Data collection
strategies to document the implementation of FA at the beginning, during, and at
the end of a science unit include: (a) classroom observation protocols, (b)
classroom video-recording, (c) video/artifact simulated recall, (d) assessment
artifacts, (e) student interviews, (f) teacher questionnaires, (g) teacher
interviews, (h) school principal interviews, and (i) school observations.
Reliability and validity of most of the data-gathering instruments is determined
through pilot studies. Data interpretation strategies include: (a) coding based
on the two conceptual frameworks, (b) scoring rubrics to identify levels of
effectiveness, and (c) narratives and profiles to describe FA patterns.
Publications and the development of a website constitute the main dissemination
strategies. A technical advisory board is responsible for formative and
summative evaluation. Key evaluation questions are: (1) To what extent does the
project enhance research on ELL FA practices through case studies?, and (2) How
effectively do the project dissemination activities facilitate understanding of
FA practices? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major project outcomes include: (1) a
description of the patterns of formal and informal FA practices for ELLs; (2) a
comparison of the FA practices observed in classrooms that vary on the
dimensions of teacher characteristics and linguistic diversity; and (3) an
empirically and theoretically informed set of findings and strategies for
supporting teachers to enact and enhance FA practices sensitive to cultural and
linguistic diversity. Three main products are developed: (1) a monograph
describing the FA practices observed across the different classrooms with
concrete examples; (2) a description of possible professional development
strategies to improve in-service FA practices for linguistically diverse
students; and (3) a research-informed approach for analyzing FA practices.
Besides filling the existing research gap on FA with ELLs, outcomes and products
serve as a foundation for a future research agenda and a comprehensive project
aimed at ensuring equitable science learning for all students, including ELLs.