* 1118491
* The Plant KDM1C Histone Demethylase Repressor Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Vitaly Citovsky, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2017
* USD 867,216.00

Intellectual Merit: Posttranslational histone modifications, e.g., methylation,
acetylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitination, play central roles in gene
regulation in all eukaryotic organisms, determining the active or inactive state
of the chromatin. Increasing evidence suggests that many such modifications do
not act alone, but function in concert with each other, by a general mechanism
known as histone modification crosstalk. One of the major, and perhaps the most
interesting, pathways for histone modification crosstalk is the coordination of
different histone-modifying enzymatic activities within the same regulator
complex, which, in addition to histone-enzyme interactions, involves
interactions between the enzymatic components of the regulator complex itself.
As an experimental system, this project uses the plant KDM1C-SUVR5-OLD repressor
complex. KDM1-based repressors play a key role in regulation of gene expression
during such diverse and important processes as acquisition of neuron-specific
traits in mammals and determination of flower timing in plants. Of all such
repressors known to date, both in plants and animals, the plant KDM1C-SUVR5-OLD1
complex is unique because it contains a deubiquitinase activity, which has never
before been observed associated with KDM1, and because one enzymatic activity
(OLD1) depends on another (SUVR5). The project, therefore, aims to uncover
aspects of chromatin-modifying repressor complexes that have not been observed
in other model systems. This is achieved by pursuing two focused specific aims:
(i) biochemical characterization of the KDM1C-SUVR5-OLD1 complex, and (ii)
identification and initial characterization of a protein interaction network for
activity of the KDM1C-SUVR5-OLD1 complex.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
research is integrated into the teaching of science at the junior educational
level, focusing on undergraduate students, who work on the projects and learn
scientific thinking and modern experimentation. Specifically, the project
anticipates involvement of three undergraduate students, who usually include
underrepresented minorities recruited both from Stony Brook and via partnerships
with Hunter College and Lehman College in New York City. In addition, the
project aims to train high school teachers via Stony Brook?s Center for Science
and Mathematics Education (CESAME), where the PI will teach a series of seminars
and a summer workshop on epigenetics based on the concepts and results of this
research. Finally, the project will train a postdoc to prepare this individual
for an independent career in academia, biotech industry and/or Government
agencies. Thus, this project promotes proactive outreach activities, which
recruit students into the science pipeline, prepare beginning scientists for
independent careers, and inform the public about science and technology.