* 1118677
* Promoting Spatial Thinking with Web-based Geospatial Technologies
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Alec Bodzin, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2015
* USD 438,161.00

This exploratory project will develop STEM spatial thinking skills of middle
school learners. The project will equip middle school teachers with well-
designed earth science investigations and support materials to promote spatial
thinking. This project will design, develop, and test curriculum materials that
use Web Geospatial Information Systems (GIS) that includes advanced
visualization and geospatial analysis capabilities. The project will enable
researchers to investigate how Web GIS can best be used to promote both spatial
thinking and earth science learning goals with diverse learners. The project
will also analyze how educative curriculum materials can prepare teachers to
implement Web-based geospatial science pedagogical approaches to teaching, and
document the impacts on student learning. Partners in the project include ESRI,
the NSF supported GeoTech Center, and national education organizations.

The curriculum materials will be developed using frameworks and design
principles for spatial learning activities that incorporate an innovative
spatial learning design model and the use of educative curriculum materials that
have demonstrably promoted learning at the middle school level. The curricular
modules will be readily adaptable for incorporation into existing middle school
science curricula. The spatial learning design model and the creation of a new
Web GIS will enable students to develop spatial thinking skills that are an
enhancement to learning earth science content. The project addresses a
deficiency in existing curricular materials in the earth sciences by taking
advantage of newly available Web GIS applications and tools. The project will
provide research-based science learning materials designed for diverse middle
school learners to promote spatial thinking. In addition, earth science literacy
will be enabled through the use of design principles and frameworks that include
robust educative curriculum materials to promote not only student learning, but
teacher learning as well. The learning experiences designed for students will
promote strong connections between national to global earth science issues while
concurrently instilling spatial thinking skills. The work will be enhanced
through a design partnership model for the development of all curriculum
materials that includes science educators, scientists, instructional designers,
and classroom teachers. The project will contribute to educational
infrastructure by creating a series of assessment instruments designed to
measure the effectiveness of Web-based geospatial learning and inquiry
instruction on the development of earth sciences content knowledge and spatial
thinking skills.

The project will advance knowledge in important and significant ways to help the
science education community understand how students develop spatial thinking
skills that are essential to learning science and other disciplines with new Web
GIS applications. The project will enable researchers to examine how Web-based
geospatial technologies can best be used in a middle school science curriculum
to promote learning with diverse learners. It will also elucidate how educative
curriculum materials and other professional development experiences can be
created to prepare teachers to implement geospatial science pedagogical
approaches. Further, the research conducted will reveal how Web GIS can be used
effectively to impact student learning outcomes. The focus on diverse learners
ensures that this project will impact a great number of students who are
traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines and careers. The project will
serve the education community more broadly and save other groups and commercial
publishers from the time and expense of creating a Web GIS with dynamic
applications such as Javascript APIs from scratch.