* 1118823
* A taxon-rich phylogeny of Galliformes: using multiple loci to resolve conflicts among previous studies
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Rebecca Kimball, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2016
* USD 445,829.00

This project will use multiple genes to produce a well-resolved evolutionary
tree for the avian order Galliformes, which includes the two most economically
important birds (the chicken and turkey), some of the most spectacular and
recognizable birds (such as peafowl and pheasants), and some of the most
important avian model systems (e.g., the chicken and Japanese quail). This order
also includes some of the most commonly hunted birds, many of which have been
the focus of management studies. Hunting, combined with other factors such as
habitat loss, has led to population declines, and many of these species are now
of conservation concern. Evolutionary relationships in this group are poorly
resolved, which has limited the ability to put the extensive information about
galliform species into a comparative framework and hindered decisions regarding
conservation priorities. In addition to producing a well-resolved phylogeny of
the Galliformes, the collection of large numbers of loci for many species will
allow us to explore several other issues, including several rapid radiations at
different evolutionary depths and the impact of factors that can cause
discordance between individual genes and the species history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data generated from this project will also be used to
develop classroom exercises for undergraduate courses in genetics and evolution,
allowing large numbers of students to conduct research in the classroom. This
will facilitate our efforts to improve science pedagogy and allow students to
contribute to cutting-edge evolutionary research. The data from this study will
be made broadly available through public databases and our own websites for
other researchers to use.