* 1118691
* Structure-Based Thermodynamic Properties of Feldspars
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Nancy Ross, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2017
* USD 398,341.00

Feldspar minerals comprise 60% of the Earth's crust. Therefore knowledge of
their thermodynamic and elastic properties is essential for understanding
petrological and geochemical processes at all scales from the microscopic to the
scales of mountain building. With the support of a previous NSF-EAR grant, our
research group has determined the elastic properties of one group of the
feldspar minerals, the plagioclase feldspars, whose compositions range from
NaAlSi3O8 to CaAl2Si2O8. These plagioclase feldspars comprise about half of the
feldspars found in the Earth's crust. The other half are the alkali feldspars
(NaAlSi3O8 to KAlSi3O8), for which there is very little equation of state or
elasticity data. What little data that does exist is mostly old, contradictory,
and exhibits no clear trends with either composition or structural state. We
will to address this critical gap in our knowledge base by determining high-
precision equation of state and structural data on alkali and ternary feldspars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new data, combined with the crystal-chemical concepts
developed in our previous research, will allow us to build the first structure-
based thermodynamic model for feldspars that will unite the description of their
bulk solid solutions and that of their dilute (trace element) regimes into a
single, consistent description. The resulting model will predict cation site
sizes and framework configuration as a function of pressure, temperature and
cation content. This in turn will allow elasticity, thermal expansion and the
volumes of mixing to be calculated for any pressure, temperature and
composition. The successful development of this model will not only allow
thermodynamic properties of feldspars to be predicted, but will also provide
insights in to the atomic-scale mechanisms that control cation partitioning
between feldspars, melts and fluids, and key constraints on seismic wave
velocities and anisotropy in the Earth's crust. Such a model will therefore be
of great use and interest to a broad range of earth scientists, including
mineralogists, petrologists, geochemists and geophysicists alike. The crystal-
chemical principles that we are developing to describe the response of feldspars
to P,T, and X should be equally applicable to other framework minerals,
including the industrially important zeolite minerals and technologically
important perovskites.