* 1118735
* Impact of African Dust on Cloud Properties During ICE-T Using On-line Single Particle Mass Spectrometry
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Kimberly Prather, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 682,695.00

This project involves deploying an Airborne Aerosol Time of Flight Mass
Spectrometer (A-ATOFMS) aboard the NSF/NCAR C-130 research aircraft during the
Ice in Clouds Experiment - Tropical Field Campaign (ICE-T) in the Caribbean
region in July 2011. In situ atmospheric ice nucleus (IN) measurements will be
made using single particle mass spectral signatures to determine the sources of
ice nuclei within these clouds. The composition of aerosols feeding the clouds
will be compared with those of cloud condensation nucleus (CCN) and IN residuals
within clouds to determine which particle sources are enriched as IN. An
additional ATOFMS will perform continuous aerosol measurements in a tropical
montane cloud forest in Puerto Rico as part of a large ground-based study
coordinated by the University of Puerto Rico. Measurements of aerosol size and
composition, as well as of cloud water and precipitation chemistry, will be
performed to obtain information on the variability of aerosol-cloud interactions
in the region. Finally, controlled lab studies will measure the IN properties of
mineral dust and terrestrial and marine-derived bioparticles. A primary goal of
ICE-T is to show that under given conditions, direct ice nucleation
measurement(s), along with measurements of individual particle chemistry and
size, can be used to predict the number of ice particles formed by nucleation
mechanisms in select clouds. The ground, aircraft, and lab studies aim to better
understand the impacts of different sources on cloud properties and
precipitation in the Caribbean region, including long range transported African
Dust, biological particles, marine sea spray, and
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In-situ measurements of the composition and
sources of IN coupled with other measurements of microphysics, meteorology, and
thermodynamics will provide unprecedented insight into the cloud impacts from
different sources of particles, with a particular focus on the role of dust and
bioparticles in ice nucleation processes in warm (&gt;-15 degrees C) maritime
clouds in a tropical region. The results will lead to a better understanding of
how mineralogy and aging of dust from the largest source region in the world
impacts clouds and precipitation in the Caribbean region, a highly under-studied
region with sensitive ecosystems. Results from the studies will be used to
constrain and improve models to better predict ice cloud formation on a global
scale. Students will be trained across disciplines of chemistry, physics,
modeling, atmospheric chemistry, and instrument development. These students will
have the opportunity to interact with a broad range of scientists and students
from multiple schools and organizations as part of ICE-T, as well as in the
Puerto Rico and Virgin Island area. A web page focusing on these studies will be
developed as well as a public exhibit at the Birch Aquarium focusing on ice
clouds and how they form in the atmosphere and impact climate and weather. A
mobile exhibit will be taken to local elementary schools to teach children about
clouds and climate. University of Puerto Rico students will assist with
measurements during the campaign as well as with subsequent analysis and
integration of the results. Project results will be used to educate the public
on how the aerosols chemistry can impact regional and global precipitation
patterns and climate.