* 1118625
* The Development of Empirical Models to Understand Educational and Occupational Choices
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Jon Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2011
* USD 240,870.00

The investigator is conducting a 4-year study of student decision making to
enter STEM professions by conducting a follow-up survey of a national sample of
30-year-olds. The investigator had previously conducted a national survey of
public school students in the 7th and 10th grades, which collected student
performance in mathematics and science, courses taken in high school and
college, personal attitudes toward science, and career plans. The investigator
now is following up these same students as they have aged and are beginning
careers at approximately age 30 to ask them in what field they are currently
working and what career decisions were made that affected their involvement with
mathematics and science. This longitudinal study of student performance is
providing new information about student decisions during their decision-making
about careers in science and engineering and particularly about their
experiences in undergraduate school. The background information contains
information on the student early educational and occupational expectations,
their parental background, their self-perception, and their activities while in
high school and college. The collection of career activities as an adult permits
the analysis of the influence of beliefs and plans made during secondary school
and college on adult choices. The survey will provide national estimates of the
statistical parameters of probabilities of selection and performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new data set
has a large potential for informing other researchers about the status of
student decision-making in science and engineering professions. The project
addresses questions of career choice that are central to the STEM program and is
likely to be useful for informing the NSF community about the strength of
factors that are associated with choosing science careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
national study are likely to be of wide interest to professional researchers and
policy makers in science and engineering. The study provides a broad based
analysis of choices faced by students facing career choices. The investigators
are seeking opportunities to provide results more directly to students and
administrators in undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;