* 1118866
* Rigorous Measures of Implementation: A Suite of Tools for Evaluating STEM Instructional Materials Use
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Dae Kim, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2014
* USD 453,395.00

The Center for Elementary Mathematics and Science Education (CEMSE) at the
University of Chicago will conduct a full-scale 2-year study to demonstrate and
further develop and test the theory upon which the suite of Fidelity of
Implementation (FOI) instruments is based by exploring the practical use of
these tools. This mixed-method study grows out of CEMSE's past NSF-funded
studies focusing on the development of innovative tools for evaluating the
implementation of reform-based K-8 mathematics and science instructional
materials programs. The goals of this project are: 1) operationalizing the
process of instrument adaptation to a locally-developed science program; 2)
further refining and developing the FOI instruments through field testing; 3)
exploring methodologies for instrument use in evaluating the effect of program
implementation on student outcomes; and 4) sharing, disseminating, and
communicating knowledge about measurement of implementation of science and
mathematics instructional materials through both online and site-based
collaborative discussions with practitioners, evaluators and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve three mid-sized
school districts located in Champaign, IL, Naperville, IL, and Newton, MA, that
use Everyday Mathematics (EM) and a reform-based science curriculum. Within the
participating districts, the investigators will use a purposeful sampling
strategy to select 17 to 20 elementary schools that best represent the district
in terms of school size, student demographics, and/or student achievement. In
year 1, the existing FOI instruments for EM will be administered to all K-5
teachers and school leaders in the participating schools. The instruments will
also be adapted, field tested, and revised for measurement of implementation of
the science curriculum. In Year 2, a revised set of FOI instruments for science
will be administered to participating teachers and school leaders. Data analysis
will include exploring the status and types of EM and science materials
implementation. Standardized state test scores and grades will be collected
within all participating classrooms to link status and types of instructional
materials use to student achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underlying this
study is a belief that efforts to improve evaluation of the implementation of
educational innovations are only truly effective when evaluation tools and data
are usable and useful to the audiences for which they are intended. There exists
a continuing need in the field for research instruments that describe, measure,
and explain specific aspects of mathematics and science instructional materials
implementation in order to understand their effectiveness and to inform ongoing
improvement efforts in STEM education. The need for more rigorous measurement of
mathematics and science instructional materials is also particularly relevant to
school and district leaders seeking to bring effective programs to their
schools. These FOI instruments will enable stakeholders to obtain data at a
level of specificity that can inform ongoing improvements and identify elements
of their curricula that are leading to the desired practices and outcomes. This
study will ultimately contribute to the broader field of STEM education by
furthering an understanding of the ways in which an innovative approach to FOI
measurement may be applied in school settings while creating and sharing
knowledge about the evaluation of implementation of STEM instructional
materials.