* 1118495
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment/RV Cape Hatteras
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Joseph Ustach, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2014
* USD 297,400.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;30 July 2011&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1118495&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Duke University&lt;br/&gt;PI: B.
Corliss&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: R. Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
four Shipboard Scientific Support items for Duke University for use aboard the
R/V CAPE HATTERAS; namely a new integrated navigation system, 20-foot storage
containers, gravity core stand, and ?auto-render/recover? for an existing trawl
winch. It also includes funding for a group purchase of engineering support to
begin bringing vessels into compliance with emergent UNOLS Research Vessel
Safety Standards (RVSS), Appendix B requirements. All items will either enhance
safety or provide greatly improved support capabilities to
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact and Intellectual Merit:
The PI addressed the Broader Impact and Intellectual Merit of the proposed
equipment specifically for the R/V CAPE HATTERAS as well as the broader Fleet.
The research projects supported have been individually peer-reviewed for
scientific merit. During operations, the CAPE HATTERAS routinely exposes
graduate and undergraduate students to seagoing oceanography. The vessel is also
routinely open for tours for undergraduate, high school and middle school
students as well as civic groups like Scout troops and museums. The PI and
marine operations group have also investigated the use of bio-fuel on board the
ship and will be hosting the NSF-funded ?Green Ship Workshop? in early 2012. As
a regional vessel, the R/V CAPE HATTERAS was involved in the rapid scientific
response to the Deep Water Horizon oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico in
2010, and is scheduled to support nearly 70 NSF-funded days in CY 2011.