* 1118702
* LTREB Renewal:   Population Growth and Viability of American Ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* James McGraw, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

American ginseng is a widespread, but uncommon to rare, understory plant of the
eastern broadleaf forests of North America, and serves as an excellent model for
rare species more generally. Plant censuses were begun in 1998 on a set of
ginseng populations in a diverse array of environments to address important
ecological questions regarding the effects of overbrowsing, invasive species,
landscape change, climate change, and commercial harvest on population
sustainability. The current award extends long-term data collection for American
ginseng. Mathematical models based on census data will be developed to project
long-term population growth and viability in response to infrequent events
(either detrimental or beneficial); the tradeoff between directional change and
stochastic variation; synchronicity of demographic patterns over space; and the
likelihood of extinction of small populations. These phenomena typify vexing
problems that cannot be addressed from typical short-term studies or studies of
a limited sample of populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has diverse
broader impacts. Roots of this culturally and economically important plant are
harvested from the wild by rural Appalachian residents to supply the Asian
traditional medicine market, and contribute to the local economy. Student
training opportunities will be offered annually to support career development of
young scientists. Census data will be shared with the scientific community, and
linkages with the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service provide direct policy input
annually. Finally, a public web site will be updated regularly to explain the
research effort and its principal findings.