* 1118144
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Exercise of Political Authority at Callar Creek, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Sarah Kurnick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 19,977.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Richard M. Leventhal, Sarah Kurnick will conduct
archaeological excavations and analyses at the ancient Maya site of Callar
Creek. Callar Creek, located in the Mopan Valley of Belize, was occupied by the
ancient Maya from approximately 900 B.C. to 900 A.D. The site includes several
residential structures, three pyramidal mounds that would have supported temples
or shrines, and four plazas. Four large limestone blocks found at the site may
be the remains of monuments. Based on its size, location, features, and layout,
Callar Creek was likely the home and administrative center for a low-level
elite.

Research focusing on the nature of political authority among the ancient Maya
is important for a number of reasons. First, the study of political authority
among early complex societies provides historical depth and geographic breadth
to studies of political authority in the contemporary world. An understanding of
the operation of authority among the world's early complex polities provides
insight into the operation of authority in modern complex polities. Second,
studies of political authority speak to the larger issue of social inequality;
political authority is one type of social inequality, one type of asymmetrical
social relationship. Inequality is a prominent and persistent feature of our
own, other, and past societies. Understanding, explaining, and demystifying
social inequality have been, and will continue to be, important aspects of
research in the social sciences.

Ms. Kurnick will recover and analyze data suggesting what strategies were used
by the elites at Callar Creek to acquire and maintain their political authority,
and how those strategies changed over time. Specifically, she proposes - and
will test for evidence over time of - three strategies that the Callar Creek
elites may have used to acquire and maintain their authority: communal
gatherings, ancestor veneration, and extra-local connections.

In addition to its academic merit, this project will bring economic and
educational benefits to the modern community of Callar Creek. The project will
provide employment opportunities and practical training to individuals living in
an economically impoverished area. The project will also provide opportunities
for community members to learn about archaeology in general and about the
archaeology of Callar Creek in particular. These activities will increase local
awareness of archaeological resources and archaeological stewardship. The
overall goal will be to demonstrate the crucial distinction between the benefits
of archaeology and the destruction caused by looting. The results of this
project will be made available to the scientific community through presentations
at professional conferences and through papers published in peer edited
journals. A planned website will increase the project's public visibility.