* 1118555
* Advancing Methodological Knowledge in STEM Education Research: An Empirical Investigation of Design Parameters for Planning Cluster Randomized Trials in Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Joseph Taylor, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2016
* USD 907,452.00

Recognizing the need for powerful tools to enhance studies in science education,
the project is developing a set of resources to assist researchers in the
planning of cluster-randomized trials of science education interventions. The
goals of this full-scale project are to develop the statistical resources to
design and conduct rigorous cluster-randomized trials (CRTs) in science
education research; increase the accuracy of the range of parameters needed to
conduct power analyses; and develop statistical resources for the science
research community available through a free power analysis software package.
Curriculum developers and researchers from Biological Sciences Curriculum Study
and Western Michigan University team-up to address this lack of statistical
resources specifically for cluster-randomized trials for science education
researchers and evaluators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing that the majority
of the work on power analysis estimates has been conducted in mathematics and
reading, the research team is developing of a set of estimates of parameters
specifically for science education research that increases the accuracy and
improves the efficiency of CRTs. Results from the meta-analysis of research on
science education interventions and a multi-level analysis of intra-class
correlations (ICC) and covariate outcome correlations (R^2) data provide a
foundation for establishing estimates for power analysis. This effort to develop
more accurate estimates of ICC, R^2, and effect size (ES) will improve the
internal validity of CRTs in science education research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By empirically establishing estimates for the full range
of parameters needed to conduct a power analysis for CRTs, researchers and
evaluators will be able to find estimates of the parameters necessary to plan
rigorous CRTs in science education. Access to this statistical resource through
a free power analysis software package, increases the likelihood that accurate
estimates of all three parameters (ICC, R^2, ES) will be used in research
planning. Improving the accuracy of power equations has broad impact on the
planning and conducting of large scale science education research.