* 1118150
* Modeling of Mosquitoes Carrying Transgenes or Genetically Modified Bacteria in Preventing the Transmission of Mosquito-Borne Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Jia Li, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The investigator develops various mathematical models for mosquito populations
and disease transmission dynamics in this project. This includes models for
transgenic mosquitoes, which are resistant to infection by mosquito-borne
diseases, and have distinct fitnesses, some of which have advantages over the
others. Combined epidemic models are used to study the interactive dynamics of
the mosquitoes, characterizing the fact that transgenic mosquitoes have a
selective advantage over non-transgenic mosquitoes, and to investigate the
effects of transgenic mosquitoes on the disease transmissions. Modeling of
transgenic mosquitoes with various genes or strains, as well as modeling of two-
sex mosquito populations including both males and females, is also part of this
project. All models start with simpler forms, and gradually include more complex
structures to better describe the underlying biology. Within each model
category, the investigator determines different formulas for the birth and death
functions and the contact rates, which facilitates the ability to connect the
modelling with real data. With the population models for the mosquitoes well
established, various epidemic models for both human and mosquito populations
will be incorporated to study the transmission dynamics of the mosquito-borne
diseases. The investigator also focuses on modeling of the newly developed
paratransgenic technique, which attempts to eliminate a pathogen from mosquito
populations through transgenesis of a symbiont, i.e., a genetically modified
bacterium, that prevents the mosquitoes from transmitting the pathogen. The
dynamics of horizontal bacteria transmission, as well as vertical transmission
between mosquitoes, and their effects on the disease transmissions are
investigated. The goal is to understand the complexity of the dynamics of the
interacting wild mosquitoes and the mosquitoes carrying transgenes or
genetically modified bacteria, and predict the impact of releasing the modified
mosquitoes. Analysis and numerical simulation is combined to study qualitative
and quantitative features of the models, including existence and stability of
equilibria, existence of periodic and aperiodic oscillations through
bifurcations, and chaotic behavior and transient dynamics. Model parameters are
estimated or derived from real biological data and the mathematical analysis of
the models covers all parameter regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New developments
in biology allow researchers to genetically alter mosquitoes so that they are
resistant to malaria infection or other mosquito-borne diseases, such as dengue
fever and West Nile virus. A more recently developed new paratransgenic approach
generates mosquitoes carrying genetically modifies bacteria that impairs in the
transmission of pathogens in mosquitoes. The mosquito-borne diseases are
transmitted between humans by blood-feeding mosquitoes, and their spread and
control have been major concerns for public health. The introduction of modified
mosquitoes into wild mosquito populations could be an effective measure in
controlling mosquito-borne diseases. To explore this possibility, the
investigator, in collaboration with biologists, develops and analyzes
mathematical models that represent the population dynamics of wild and
transgenic mosquitoes. The models account for the spread of transgenes or
genetically modified bacteria through the mosquito population over multiple
generations, and predict the impact on the disease transmissions. They help
answer such questions as how effectively mosquitoes carrying transgenes or
modified bacteria would be able to compete for partners with their wild
counterparts, how long it would take for a new resistance gene or bacterium to
penetrate the mosquito population, and how effective it would be in preventing
the spread of the diseases. In this way, the results of the project can provide
useful guidance for public health measures and for disease prevention
strategies.