* 1118645
* Support for PAGES Varves Working Group 2nd Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Mark Besonen, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,008.00

This proposal requests funds from the NSF to support at least 15 U.S.-based
early career scientists (graduate students, postdocs, and new
faculty/researchers) to participate in a workshop in Corpus Christi, TX. This
workshop is titled "Learning from Other Communities," and will be focused on the
development of robust chronologies based on what can learned about the tools and
methodologies used by scientists who work with other annually resolved climate
archives (but not varved sediments). The workshop will feature keynote addresses
by a dendroclimatologist, an ice core scientist, and coral- and speleothem-based
paleoscience experts who work at annual resolution. The group will then discuss
how the presented 'best-practice' techniques in these fields can be applied or
adapted to varved sediments, and what quality criteria should be taken into
account with this different medium. The focus of this workshop on producing
robust chronologies will be of great benefit to a broad cross-section of varve
workers and projects. By removing as much time uncertainty as possible from
varved records, this will eventually translate into the greater usage and
recognition of varved sediment records as annual archives of past global
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide an excellent opportunity
for training and knowledge transfer from experienced varve scientists to a large
group of early career researcher working in the same field. This will be
facilitated by the workshop format, which explicitly promotes discussion and
idea exchange. A significant effort will be made to involve members of
underrepresented groups such as minorities, women, and persons with
disabilities. This workshop will also serve as a stepping stone toward the VWG?s
ultimate goal of moving varve records one step closer to gold-standard
paleoclimate records like tree rings. This will eventually improve paleoclimate
reconstructions by offering up another series of robust, well-controlled
paleoclimate records that may be considered. This workshop will provide a
tremendous amount of material that will eventually be incorporated into the
varves "Handbook" produced by the VWG. This "Handbook" of best practices for
researchers will be a significant effort that disseminates scientific knowledge
to the larger community for the benefit of all. Finally, this workshop will
provide an important opportunity for the local organizer/chair, an early career
researcher at Texas A&amp;M University?Corpus Christi. Specifically, it will
establish and/or strengthen educational alliances and opportunities by putting
the university "on the map" as a possible destination for graduate degrees in
paleoscience, especially high resolution studies. Currently, the university is
not known for this, but one of the primary goals of the local organizer/chair is
to start up a paleoscience program there.