* 1118473
* Collaborative Research: An eddy-permitting Arctic &amp; Sub-Polar State Estimate for climate research
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2011,08/31/2013
* An Nguyen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2013
* USD 135,548.00

Funds are provided to produce an eddy-permitting Arctic and sub-polar
North&lt;br/&gt;Atlantic state estimate (ASTE) for climate research, using basic
tools developed within the Estimating the Circulation and Climate of the Ocean
(ECCO) consortium. The coupled ocean/sea-ice general circulation model (MITgcm)
will be constrained by as many ocean and sea-ice observations as available and
practical. The target period is from 1992 to present. The fit will be achieved
through minimization of a least-squares misfit function (adjoint or Lagrange
Multiplier method). The coupled ocean/sea-ice adjoint model has been generated
by means of automatic differentiation (AD). A similar effort has been
successfully accomplished with the production of the Southern Ocean State
Estimate (SOSE). The domain of the ASTE covers the Atlantic northward of 26 N
and the entire Arctic, with the exception of the Pacific sector southward of
Bering Strait (66 N). The horizontal resolution is 7 to 12 km with 50 vertical
levels. The control space comprises the initial conditions of the coupled
ocean/sea-ice state, the time-varying surface atmospheric state, time-varying
open boundary conditions, and spatially varying model
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observational backbone used initially for
the ocean consists of: sea surface height from satellite altimetry, daily
satellite SST, mean geoid and time-varying bottom pressure from satellite
gravity and moorings, Argo float profiles, hydrographic data from WOCE and PHC,
available mooring arrays such as Line-W and RAPID/MOCHA, and current meters
available via AON/CADIS, PANGEAE (ASOF), and NSIDC (SCICEX). Sea-ice satellite
observations used initially will comprise: daily ice concentration, ice drift
velocities from passive microwave radiometry, scatterometry, and SAR imagery.
In-situ under-ice data will include ice-tethered profilers, ice mass balance
buoys, ice draft from submarine-borne upward looking sonar, as well as various
buoy and mooring data from the IABP and AON/CADIS archives. Extension to other
data sources includes tests of satellite retrievals of ice thickness or
freeboard data from combined radar and laser
altimetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their approach offers strict dynamical
consistency of the computed state estimate over the entire integration period,
enabling exact time-varying budget calculations relevant for climate studies,
such as the assessment of circulation shifts and their associated lateral heat
and freshwater changes on seasonal and longer time scales. In this sense, the
product differs significantly from what in the atmospheric context are called
?re-analysis? products. Another novelty of the product is its combined treatment
of the Arctic and the subpolar gyre, and the synthesis of all available data
types. Initial science foci will be on the connection between deep water
formation processes and the Atlantic meridional overturning, the freshwater
input at high latitudes and its pathways, and the interaction between Atlantic
Water, Arctic halocline formation, and sea-ice.