* 1118869
* First-Principles Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Silicate Liquids: Structure, Diffusion and Viscosity at Mantle Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Bijaya Karki, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2015
* USD 215,347.00

Silicate liquids are primary agents of chemical and thermal evolution in the
Earth as they form early magma ocean, and appear as magmas in the surface of the
planet and as partial melts in the crust and mantle. Magmatic processes are
responsible for the origin and ongoing formation of the oceanic and continental
crust, and for bringing to the surface one of our primary clues to the
composition of the interior in the form of xenoliths. Because of the contrast in
density, chemical diffusivity, viscosity, and bulk composition between silicate
liquids and their source regions, the generation and transport of magma is among
the most efficient geological processes leading to mass and heat transport.
Silicate liquids may have played an even more important role in the Earth's
early history when melting may have been more widespread and may have extended
to greater depths. A better understanding of planetary evolution thus requires
major advances in our knowledge of relevant melt properties at mantle pressure-
temperature conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, it is proposed to
apply a combination of first-principles computational and visualization
techniques to investigate structure, diffusion and viscosity of silicate melts
over broad range of pressure, temperature and composition. This approach, being
parameter free in the nature, is expected to provide the ideal complement to
experimental approaches, and can provide important insights into the fundamental
physical properties and behavior in structure and bonding. The specific
activities proposed include: 1) Expanding the range of composition towards
sampling natural melts (MgO-CaO-Na2O-K2O-Al2O3-TiO2-SiO2 system) with/out
volatiles (H2O and CO2). The calculated densities, enthalpies, and structures as
a function of pressure and temperature are expected to enhance our understanding
of buoyancy, bonding, speciation of volatile components, polymorphism, and
thermodynamics of mixing in a multi-component melt system. 2) Investigating the
transport properties of silicate melts through first-principles predictions of
the self-diffusion and viscosity coefficients. Atomistic visualization of the
position-time series will allow us gain insight into the microscopic mechanisms
of compression and transport phenomena, and into the complex dependence of
diffusion/viscosity on temperature, pressure and composition. 3) Continuing the
study of structure and compression mechanisms of silicate glasses as a way of
gaining additional insight into the energetics underlying liquid structure, and
in order to enrich contact with the extensive experimental literature on
geologically relevant compositions in the vitreous state. The unifying theme of
the proposal is the first-principles simulations of large systems needed to
explore realistic compositions, to accurately compute dynamical properties and
to successfully capture the essence of glass structures. The PI has local access
to sufficient resources to carry out such intensive simulations. The proposed
research is essentially an exploitation of ideas and techniques of computational
science to challenging problems in the investigation of Earth materials. It will
have impact on a number of fields including geochemistry, petrology, geophysics,
computational mineral/materials physics, and scientific visualization, and it
will train students to have a multidisciplinary experience and expertise.