* 1118786
* Integrated Analytical-Computational Analysis of Microstructural Influences on Seismic Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Scott Johnson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2015
* USD 298,171.00

The magnitudes, orientations and spatial distributions of elastic anisotropy in
Earth?s crust and mantle carry valuable information about gradients in thermal,
mechanical and kinematic parameters arising from mantle convection, mantle-crust
coupling and tectonic plate interactions. Relating seismic signals to
deformation regimes requires knowledge of the elastic signatures (bulk
stiffnesses) of different microstructures that characterize specific deformation
environments, but the influence of microstructural heterogeneity on bulk
stiffness has not been comprehensively evaluated. The objectives of this project
are to: (1) scale up a preliminary method to determine the bulk stiffness of
rocks using integrated analytical (electron backscatter diffraction) and
computational (asymptotic expansion homogenization) approaches that fully
account for the grain-scale elastic interactions among the different minerals in
the sample; (2) apply this integrated framework to investigate the effect on
elastic anisotropy of several common crustal microstructures; (3) integrate
time-dependent microstructure modeling with bulk stiffness calculations to
investigate the effects of strain- and process-dependent microstructure
evolution on elastic anisotropy in mantle rocks; and (4) disseminate open-source
software for the calculation of bulk stiffnesses from electron backscatter
diffraction data and creation of synthetic (computer generated) microstructures
that can be used in sensitivity analyses among other applications. Because
commonly used methods, such as the Voigt, Reuss and Voigt-Reuss-Hill averages,
for calculating bulk rock stiffnesses do not account for elastic interactions
among the constituent minerals, they exhibit marked, non-systematic differences
from stiffnesses obtained using asymptotic expansion homogenization.

These objectives are important because the results would substantially improve
understanding of the nature of seismic anisotropy in the Earth's crust, which is
composed of rocks dominated by low symmetry minerals with complex structures.
Traditional methods for performing these calculations do not easily incorporate
these effects. This project will develop an elegant, easily-implemented
alternative method for anisotropic materials. The scientific results and
computational tools that result from this project will have global application
across a number of solid Earth and engineering disciplines. Open-source codes
developed in this project will made available through existing open-source ELLE
platform. Classroom exercises developed for Earth Science and Mechanical
Engineering courses that employ this software will be make available to the
community, probably through the Science Education Resource Center website at
Carleton College.