* 1118808
* Biocultural Collections: Establishing Curation Standards; 9-13 July; St. Louis Missouri
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Jan Salick, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 03/31/2013
* USD 49,755.00

Biocultural Collections include plants and animals used by people, products made
from them, and information and archives about them. They are numerous and
diverse, including biological specimens, valuable natural products (e.g.,
medicine, food, fibers, resins) and cultural artifacts (e.g., clothing, baskets,
weaponry, tools) from around the world. Existing Biocultural Collections are
poorly curated and lack established standards for preservation, data-basing, and
exhibition. As a result they are largely inaccessible for research, reference
and use. The Biocultural Collections Workshop will remedy longstanding neglect
of these valuable resources and facilitate their use by gathering experts to
develop and publish Biocultural Collection Curation Standards that meets the
needs of the greatest number of people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of the Workshop will be to make popular Biocultural Collections available to the
public, teachers, students, underrepresented groups, conservationists and
development professionals. Plants and animals with diverse economic,
subsistence, cultural and historical uses are the foundation of BC, and thus the
collections have value for a community of users far greater than those in the
basic sciences. These collections are employed in many forms of applied
research, conservation, natural resource management, development, and education.
Standardization of and improved access to Biocultural Collections will greatly
augment the depth and breadth of our knowledge of useful plants and animals and
will make these collections more meaningful to a broad audience.