* 1118077
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: An Argumentation-based Framework for Security Management
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Karl Levitt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 279,032.00

Computer users are increasingly faced with decisions that impact their personal
privacy and the security of the systems they manage. The range of users
confronting these challenges has broadened from the early days of computing to
include everyone from home users to administrators of large enterprise networks.
Privacy policies are frequently obscure, and security settings are typically
complex. Missing from the options presented to a user is a decision support
mechanism that can assist her in making informed choices. Being presented with
the consequences of decisions she is asked to make, among other information, is
a necessary component that is currently lacking.

This work introduces formal argumentation as a framework for helping users make
informed decisions about the security of their computer systems and the privacy
of their electronically stored information. Argumentation, a mature theoretical
discipline, provides a mechanism for reaching substantiated conclusions when
faced with incomplete and inconsistent information. It provides the basis for
presenting arguments to a user for or against a position, along with well-
founded methods for assessing the outcome of interactions among the arguments.
An elegant theory of argumentation has been developed based on meta rules
characterizing relationships between arguments. Rules for argument construction
and evaluation have been devised for specific domains such as medical diagnosis.
This project investigates argumentation as the basis for helping users make
informed security- and privacy-related decisions about their computer systems.
Three specific aims are addressed: 1) Implementation of an inference engine that
reasons using argumentation, 2) Facilitate security management through an
argumentation inference engine, a rule base specialized for security management,
and sensors providing security alerts all enhanced with an interactive front-
end. 3) Reason about the consistency and completeness of domain knowledge, as it
evolves. To understand the kinds of domain-specific inference rules required,
diverse security applications are studied, such as determining if an attack
imperils a particular system, finding the root cause of an attack, deciding on
appropriate actions to take in the presence of an uncertain diagnosis of an
attack, and deciding on privacy settings. Emerging from this project will be a
prototype towards the practice of usable security. The team is working with
organizations responsible for the security administration of large enterprise
networks and will make the prototype tools available to these organizations. The
team is working with everyday users from a cross-section of community members.
Curricular modules that cover the intersection of argumentation and security are
being developed and shared.