* 1118644
* Collaborative Research: Drought as a trigger for rapid state shifts in kettlehole ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Sara Hotchkiss, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,902.00

This project will use the sediment record of kettlehole ecosystems to study
ecological responses to prolonged or extreme drought events. These ecosystems
are widespread in previously glaciated landscapes. Relationships among drought,
peatland establishment and expansion, and lake-ecosystem dynamics will be
examined using paleoecological techniques along a landscape gradient in northern
Wisconsin. Research will test the hypotheses that 1) peatland development occurs
suddenly rather than gradually, triggered by drought variability, 2) basin
morphology and landscape position determine whether peatlands develop, and 3)
the rapid development of peatland leads to abrupt changes in remnant lakes,
producing changes in rates of carbon storage within kettle systems.

Warming temperatures associated with global climate change are expected to lead
to more frequent and intense droughts in many mid-latitude regions. These
predictions present a challenge to ecologists and resource managers; yet
alarmingly few datasets exist to provide a basis for understanding ecosystem
responses to these anticipated changes. This research will provide critical,
long-term perspectives on the role of hydroclimate variability in triggering
abrupt and permanent state shifts in ecosystems. Such threshold responses are
difficult to anticipate or predict, and the research will provide a foundation
for evaluating the relative sensitivity and vulnerability of ecological systems.