* 1118593
* OPUS: A synthesis of succession trajectories, rates and processes on Mount St. Helens
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Roger del Moral, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 178,545.00

The dramatic eruption of Mount St. Helens on May 18, 1980 created a complex
landscape within which recovering ecosystems could be studied. This
Opportunities for Promoting Understanding through Synthesis (OPUS) project will
synthesize 31 years of permanent plot data collected since the eruption of Mount
St. Helens. This synthesis will focus on basic questions concerning primary
succession such as: what factors govern recovery rates, how important are random
effects in governing the direction and rate of recovery, do sites with different
initial colonists have alternative trajectories of recovery or do they converge
to a similar vegetation type? Resolving these questions will directly inform
emerging ecological theories about how alternative biological communities may
persist and can be applied to planning effective restoration
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will increase our understanding of
primary succession, the process by which new surfaces or destroyed ecosystems
recover. Both natural disasters and intense human disturbances create barren
surfaces. Therefore, the results of this synthetic study of primary succession
at Mount St. Helens will have direct relevance for management of other disturbed
sites such as those with mine tailings. In addition to the technical analyses, a
book intended for a broad audience of non-specialists will be prepared. It will
describe the recovery of vegetation on Mount St. Helens and explain how this
exquisite system provokes a passion to preserve the natural world.