* 1118890
* Curricular Learning to Optimize Science Education: C.L.O.S.E. the Gap in Introductory Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Scott Freeman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2016
* USD 299,987.00

This project is testing the hypothesis that a highly structured course design,
developed and tested in one quarter of the 3-quarter introductory biology
sequence for majors at the University of Washington (UW), can be implemented by
instructors who teach introductory biology at three institutions diverse as to
mission (from community college to an R1 institution) and class size (from 40 to
700). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Recent work by this group (Haak
et al (2011) Science 332
1213-1216,http://www.sciencemag.org/content/332/6034/1213.abstract) has shown
that the highly structured course design--which combines intensive active
learning in lecture-free class sessions with daily and weekly formative
assessments in the form of on-line quizzes--increased overall student
performance and lowered the achievement gap between students from disadvantaged
versus advantaged backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening participation:
The current goal is to determine if the course materials can produce similar
results in the hands of other instructors, working with other student
populations (at Eastern Michigan and Eastern Washington Universities and at
Everett (Washington) Community College). The course content at these
institutions overlaps completely or substantially with Biology 180 at the
University of Washington, the course that is already supported with evidence-
based, high-structure materials. When the project is completed, data will be
available from institutions ranging from selective to open enrollment, from R1s
to community colleges, and with class enrollments from 700 to 40. The efficacy
of the materials in the hands of an instructor with minimal teaching experience-
specifically--a post-doctoral research associate or a newly hired, tenure-track
research faculty member of the UW Department of Biology--is also being
investigated within the same course to enable comparison of materials on
performance in the same student population, when delivered by experienced versus
inexperienced faculty.