* 1118942
* Transforming Teaching through Implementing Inquiry (T2I2)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2011,10/31/2011
* Laura Bottomley, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Darryl N Williams
* 10/31/2011
* USD 997,171.00

Transforming Teaching Through Implementing Inquiry (T2I2) is a full research and
development project that explores the use of cyberinfrastructure to
significantly enhance the delivery and quality of professional development (PD)
for grades 8-12 engineering, technology, and design educators. The goal of the
project is to study whether the use of highly interactive cyberinfrastructure
increases this target audience's: 1) understanding of engineering design
concepts and ability to effectively teach them 2) understanding of how to
address student learning needs 3) ability to manage, monitor, and adjust the
learning environment 4) use of self assessment to enhance teaching ability and
5) engagement in a community of practice. These issues are of particular
interest because of the limited resources in place to prepare pre-service
engineering and CTE teachers, as well as a lack of in-service PD.

The content for the PD is grounded in the materials and processes of two
projects reviewed by the National Research Council's (NRC) report review
committee: Technology Education: Learning by Design for Middle Schools" and
"Engineering by Design for High Schools." By incorporating an object-oriented
generic system design (learning objects), the cyberinfrastructure is set to be
reusable, adaptable, and scalable. These learning objects allow for
customization of the learning experience, whereby learning facilitators or
learners themselves can configure the system based on their specific needs.
Delivering learning objects in an online framework enables teachers to develop
and grow in a network community.

A mixed methods approach is used to determine effects of professional
development. Student achievement is measured by comparing each site's state
assessments in the following areas: the curriculum's technology, engineering,
and design assessment, end-of-grade mathematics assessment, and end-of-grade
science assessment. Both formative and summative evaluation strategies inform
the development and implementation of the project. As such, the project will
advance theory, design, and practice in middle and high school engineering,
technology and design-based classrooms.