* 1118884
* Evolutionary convergence or parallelism?  Examining recurrent patterns of phenotypic evolution in marine scallops
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jeanne Serb, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Mindell
* 07/31/2015
* USD 611,000.00

How fast do organisms evolve in nature and what patterns of change are commonly
observed? This project addresses both of these fundamental questions using an
integrated approach to examine patterns of morphological change in a large group
of non-vertebrate taxa (scallops). A primary goal is to use DNA sequence data to
reconstruct the relationships among nearly 200 scallop species. Cutting edge,
three-dimensional scanning technology will then be used to measure differences
in shell shape (which relate to scallop ecology), and the tree of relationships
among species will be utilized to retrace the history of morphological
diversification in the group. Patterns of repeated evolution (convergence) will
be identified, and the rate of morphological evolution will be compared among
groups to determine how fast organisms change in different ecological settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides considerable educational experiences
for undergraduate and graduate students, including research excursions to the
Smithsonian Institution, reciprocal training between laboratories with distinct
research emphases, and a research-in-education exchange that includes students
from a small college and students attending a large research university. The
project will employ six persons, including two graduate students, and two
undergraduates. Every effort will be made to communicate research findings via
articles and public presentations, all of which will include student
participants.