* 1118429
* Easterly Wave-Itcz Interaction and Tropical Cyclone Formation over the Atlantic
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Zhuo Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2015
* USD 401,954.00

A large number of Atlantic tropical cyclones, especially the most dangerous
hurricanes, develop from easterly waves over the Atlantic Main Development
Region (MDR: 10-20N, 20-80W), along the northern edge of the Intertropical
Convergence Zone (ITCZ). The close proximity between the ITCZ axis and the wave
track allows ITCZ-wave interaction on different time scales. This project aims
to study the interaction between the ITCZ and easterly waves over the Atlantic
and the impacts of their interaction on subsequent storm development. In
particular, easterly waves will be examined as a "connecting link" between the
large-scale circulation and tropical cyclone formation. The statistical aspects
of the link are relatively well-known, but the dynamical and thermodynamical
mechanisms are not. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of observational
analysis and numerical modeling that focus on a set of testable hypotheses on
ITCZ-wave interaction and tropical cyclone formation. The investigators will use
insights from their recently developed marsupial framework to examine how the
variability of the Atlantic ITCZ affects tropical cyclogenesis in the Atlantic
MDR by altering the existence and morphology of the wave "pouch". The emphases
are on the structure and evolution of the wave pouch, and ITCZ-wave interaction
in a multi-scale framework. The wave pouch is a region of approximately closed
Lagrangian circulation within the wave's critical layer and is shown by our
previous studies to be a necessary condition for storm formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work are in advancing our
understanding of the impacts of the large-scale circulation on tropical cyclone
formation and variability, which can ultimately contribute to improved tropical
cyclone forecasts and to studying tropical cyclone activity in a changing
climate. The proposal will train and support one graduate student.