* 1118469
* Collaborative Research:  Best Predictive Small Area Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Thuan Nguyen, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 85,800.00

Surveys usually are designed to produce reliable estimates of various
characteristics of interest for large geographic areas or socio-economic
domains. However, for effective planning of health, social, and other services
and for apportioning government funds, there has been a growing demand to
produce similar estimates for small geographic areas and subpopulations,
commonly referred to as small areas. This research project aims at developing a
new method of small area estimation that potentially will lead to a dramatic
improvement in accuracy over the traditional methods in practical situations.
Model-based small area estimation utilizes statistical models, such as mixed
effects models, to "borrow strength." In particular, the empirical best linear
unbiased prediction (EBLUP) is a well-known model-based method that has had
dominant influence in small area estimation. From a practical point of view,
however, any proposed model is subject to model misspecification. When the
proposed statistical model is incorrect, EBLUP is no longer efficient or even
effective. In such cases, a new method, known as observed best prediction (OBP),
may be superior. This project involves several important research topics on OBP,
including theoretical developments, assessment of uncertainties under weak model
assumptions, and implementation of the OBP via user-friendly software. The
research largely will expand the results of our earlier studies, and contribute
to making the OBP method more effective, practical, and easy to
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research introduces a completely new idea and
method to model-based statistical methods in survey sampling. It is expected to
impact other scientific areas where statistical methods have been used for
prediction problems. The project will develop and freely disseminate R code to
implement the OBP method. The education component of the project will introduce
the OBP method into courses at the investigators' institutes. These courses are
expected to draw students and researchers from statistics, biostatistics,
genetic epidemiology, animal and plant sciences, educational research, social
sciences, and government agencies. The project is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey and
statistical methodology.