* 1118550
* Maize Transposable Elements: Discovery, Description and Functional Characterization
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Susan Wessler, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,501,205.00

PI: Susan R. Wessler (University of California - Riverside)&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Jeffrey L. Bennetzen (University of Georgia), R. Kelly Dawe (University of
Georgia), Ning Jiang (Michigan State University), Phillip SanMiguel (Purdue
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Byron Freeman (University of
Georgia, Georgia Museum of Natural History)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transposable
elements (TEs) are the most abundant component of all characterized genomes of
higher eukaryotes and the genome of maize is recognized as having the most
dynamic TE component. As such, it is the organism of choice for understanding
how TEs contribute to gene and genome evolution. In addition to identifying all
TEs in maize, this project will pay particular attention to the characterization
of TEs such as Pack-MULEs and Helitrons that routinely capture and amplify gene
fragments and thereby confound gene annotation. This project will generate a
comprehensive and rigorously annotated TE database that will greatly assist all
future maize genome annotations. Computational analysis will serve to identify
candidate active TEs whose mobility will be validated using the transposon
display technique in conjunction with a wide spectrum of maize genomic DNAs.
This project will, for the first time, extend the analysis of TEs to the
pericentromere, a region that in other sequenced genomes has been unfinished
and/or unannotated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of this project
and the familiarity of maize provide outstanding opportunities for student
training and for connections between the research community and the broader
public. This project dedicates over 10% of its resources to this mission with
the centerpiece being the development of web-based and traveling museum exhibits
that describe the history of maize as a crop, as a model organism for genome
research, and as a key component of many Native American cultures. To this end,
collaborations have been established with the University of Georgia Museum of
Natural History, the Smithsonian Institution and the U.S. Botanic Garden.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to Project Outcomes&lt;br/&gt;All information from
this project will be made freely available to the Maize Genome Sequencing
Project and to long-term repositories such as MaizeGDB
(http://www.maizegdb.org/). Software and other tools generated will be freely
available at the project website (accessible via
http://www.plantbio.uga.edu/wesslerlab/).