* 1118676
* Collaborative Research: Drought as a trigger for rapid state shifts in kettlehole ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Robert Booth, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 252,379.00

This project will use the sediment record of kettlehole ecosystems to study
ecological responses to prolonged or extreme drought. These ecosystems are
widespread in previously glaciated landscapes. Relationships among drought,
peatland establishment and expansion, and lake-ecosystem dynamics will be
examined using paleoecological techniques along a landscape gradient in northern
Wisconsin. Research will test the hypotheses that 1) peatland development occurs
suddenly rather than gradually, triggered by drought variability, 2) basin
morphology and landscape position determine whether peatlands develop, and 3)
the rapid development of peatland leads to abrupt changes in remnant lakes,
producing changes in rates of carbon storage within kettle systems.

Warming temperatures associated with global climate change are expected to lead
to more frequent and intense droughts in many mid-latitude regions. These
predictions present a challenge to ecologists and resource managers; yet few
datasets exist to provide a basis for understanding ecosystem responses to these
anticipated changes. This research will provide critical, long-term perspectives
on the role of hydroclimate variability in triggering abrupt and permanent state
shifts in ecosystems. Such threshold responses are difficult to anticipate or
predict, and the research will provide a foundation for evaluating the relative
sensitivity and vulnerability of ecological systems.