* 1118562
* Microstructure in Marble: Evolution of Strength in Natural and Laboratory Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Brian Evans, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2015
* USD 434,818.00

Strain localization is common in crustal orogenic belts, where shear zones are
often found within carbonate rocks. Many field studies indicate that
localization is accompanied by striking changes in such aspects of rock
structure as grain size, lattice (crystallographic) preferred orientation, major
and accessory phase chemistry, pore geometry, and phase dispersion. Previous
laboratory studies indicate that creep strength changes over large intervals of
strain, and that grain size, grain shape, and lattice preferred orientation
evolve concurrently. Recent work also showed that the kinetics of
recrystallization scaled with the rate of work done during deformation, that
lattice preferred orientation could be strongly affected by the shape and
dispersion parameters of accessory phases, and that Mg solid solutes influenced
both grain-boundary mobility and the transition from diffusion to dislocation
creep. In order to understand localization and evolution of strength during
natural deformation, the size of each effect and the relative kinetics of the
candidate mechanisms must be known. This project will make observations of
deformation microstructure in carbonate rocks from shear zones in the Swiss
Alps, and in samples deformed in the laboratory and in collaboration with
workers at the Universities of Liverpool and Manchester, UK. Mechanical tests
will include simple-shear, torsion, and conventional triaxial loading of natural
and synthetic marbles at strain rates of 10^-2-10^-6 ^-1, confining pressures
less than 300 MPa, and temperature between 500-1000 K. Two new techniques,
microstrain mapping, and sequential microanalysis at high shear-strains, will be
used to understand the kinetics and partitioning of strain amongst the various
deformation mechanisms.

By combining thorough fieldwork, careful experiments, and detailed observations,
the aim is to bridge some of the gaps between laboratory and field studies. In
addition to increasing knowledge of tectonics and mechanical properties of
rocks, the laboratory work will improve the database for the mechanical behavior
of carbonate rocks, which are of considerable interest in such engineering
applications as enhanced recovery of oil in limestone reservoirs, sequestration
of carbon dioxide in fractured and sedimentary carbonate formations, and
designing engineered underground structures.