* 1118646
* Evolution of Duplicated Pathways and Networks Following Genome Doubling
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Corrinne Grover, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2017
* USD 727,087.00

Intellectual Merit. A central finding of modern plant biology is that plant
lineages often originate from and diversify following hybridization between
species and subsequent doubling of the hybrid genome. This biological reunion
among two different genomes sets in motion a wide spectrum of genetic and
genomic phenomena with that occur through unknown mechanisms and have largely
unknown functional and evolutionary consequences. To advance understanding of
the dynamics and outcomes of genome doubling, this project will study the
consequences of genome merger and doubling on pathways and networks. Using the
cotton genus (Gossypium) as a well-developed model for studies of whole-genome
doubling, this study will focus on two different pathways and networks. For the
anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway, multiple relationships among mutational
processes, changes in gene expression, and metabolite accumulation will be
clarified. Using a second, more complex network involving flowering time,
experiments will address responses of a network to the intense directional
selection practiced by early cotton domesticators as the wild species was
transformed by humans from a wild, photoperiod-sensitive, perennial plant into a
day-length neutral, annualized row crop. Remarkably, this process was replicated
for two different species, providing a unique opportunity to test the
repeatability of the response to selective breeding. The research entails three
complementary experimental approaches. First, using novel technologies, all
genes for the key proteins involved in the core anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway
and the approximately 70 proteins involved in the flowering time network will be
isolated and sequenced from the progenitor genomes, as well as from domesticated
and wild forms of two different cultivated species of cotton. Second, changes in
gene expression will be detailed for each evolutionary stage in the process,
including hybridization, genome doubling, and human selection during crop
improvement. Third, the consequences of genome doubling on metabolite
accumulation will be studied for the anthocyanin pathway. Synthesis of these
three data sources will reveal the interrelationships among mutations, gene
expression, and metabolite accumulation, during the evolutionary processes of
species divergence, inter-genomic hybridization, and genome doubling.
Collectively, these studies will provide a novel perspective on an important
process in plant biology, with broad conceptual generality and applicability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Multiple activities are planned that
target inclusion and training of students from underrepresented groups and
provide research experiences for students and K-12 educators. The project has a
special focus on a seven-week summer research experience for teachers program,
which provides 7th -12th grade biology teachers with an opportunity to enhance
their understanding of scientific inquiry while introducing them to cutting-edge
science. Teachers will learn theory and methods in workshops and conduct
independent projects associated with larger on-going projects. They will receive
hands-on training in modern laboratory techniques, including those associated
with gene sequence and gene expression analysis, metabolite accumulation, and
bioinformatics. Also, teachers will meet weekly under the guidance of selected
experienced master teachers to discuss transfer of their research experiences
into the 7th -12th grade science classroom. To provide teachers with a deeper
understanding and appreciation evolutionary biology, Wendel will lead a teacher
training study group each summer, with the explicit focus of incorporating
molecular genetics perspectives into the teaching of evolutionary biology. At
the end of each summer session, teachers will prepare a plan for implementing
research-based education modules in the classroom.