* 1118613
* Biophysical Studies of Metalloenzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Brian Hoffman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 911,361.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Biological nitrogen fixation - the reduction of N2
to yield two moles of ammonia (NH3/ NH4+) that are available as plant nutrient -
is catalyzed by the metalloenzyme, nitrogenase. The agronomic, economic, and
social significance of nitrogenase can be appreciated by recognizing that the
lives of about two-thirds of today's human population depend on plant growth,
which relies on biologically fixed nitrogen generated by nitrogenase. The other
third depends on nitrogen fixation by the industrial Haber-Bosch process, but
this process is a significant component in the world's energy usage, demanding
approximately 1 percent of human energy consumption. Whether the biological
process can be more effectively exploited for human benefit remains an urgent
question, and thus it is imperative that an understanding be achieved of the
means by which organisms manage to activate and cleave N2 at ambient temperature
and pressure. This project is addressing these questions through the use of
electron-nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) and electron spin-echo envelope
modulation (ESEEM) spectroscopies to characterize catalytic intermediates that
form during the process of nitrogen fixation by nitrogenase. ENDOR/ESEEM studies
uniquely provide information about the electronic properties of the substrate-
binding/reduction active site, and supply detailed structural information
regarding metal-bound substrates, intermediates, and products. No other
technique offers this information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The outreach program associated with this project can be viewed
(roughly) as a pyramid. At the apex are intellectual/scientific contributions to
the discipline itself, and to the research community. Supporting these
intellectual endeavors are contributions to the training of post doctoral
scholars and graduate students, not only for this project but throughout the
country and the world. The foundation level involves the encouragement of
undergraduates and even high-school students, especially of women and
underrepresented minorities, to participate in the scientific enterprise.