* 1118368
* Conference: 37th Northeast Bioengineering Conference, Troy, NY, April 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Shiva Kotha, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 03/31/2012
* USD 14,000.00

1118368, Kotha

Intellectual Merit Rapid advances in engineering are facilitating an enhanced
understanding of biology and providing novel transformative solutions to
biomedical problems. The NEBEC will provide a multidisciplinary forum for
dissemination of these advances in biomedical engineering at all levels, and
facilitate the sharing of knowledge across interdisciplinary barriers. The
conference serves as an open forum for discussion of new directions, ideas and
approaches in research and education. To provide a setting to reinforce existing
contacts and in establishing new collaborations, sessions will be organized
covering a broad range of topics related to: - Engineering of Stem Cells and
Biomaterials for Regenerative Medicine - Biomechanics - Biophotonics and
Biomedical Imaging - Bimolecular and Molecular Cell Engineering The NEBEC has
traditionally served as a platform for students to present their research and to
obtain constructive feedback. This conference also provides an opportunity for
students to discuss potential career choices with individuals from academia,
government, and industry.

Broader Impact The 37th NEBEC will have a broad impact for the Northeast
bioengineering community and for engineering education. The knowledge shared at
the conference by researchers from over 40 institutions in the Northeast will be
captured electronically and broadly disseminated via abstract books, CD ROMS,
and via the IEEE website. The conference?s emphasis on students, with multiple
opportunities for them to present their work and discuss current obstacles to
progress with leading researchers in an intimate setting, will better prepare
them for careers in both research and industry. One of the main goals of the
conference is to nurture exceptional students and to help develop an environment
to support future leaders in the field. In addition, the exposure to research in
diverse fields will help spawn innovations and create ground breaking
bioengineering technologies, and hence benefit the society at large.