* 1118858
* Completing, Validating, and Linking Learning Trajectories for K-8 Rational Number Reasoning Tied to the Common Core Standards
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Jere Confrey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,532,938.00

This project will build and validate learning trajectories (LTs) in mathematics
for fraction, ratio, and for decimal and percent to represent learning by grades
3-7 students. A system will be developed to automate data collection for field
testing assessment items to determine students' attainment of proficiency
levels. Three LTs will be produced and validated along with over 125 assessment
items for each of these three trajectories. These assessment items will be
useful for diagnosing student learning. Technologies such as mobile phones,
tablets, and computers will be used to deliver, analyze, and report diagnostic
data on students. The learning trajectories will be available both
electronically and in print. The levels of proficiencies will be provided with
the outcome spaces, the exemplary items, the student work, and videos of student
responses. Publications will provide data on analysis of the diagnostic items
and assessments. The project will be done by researchers at the North Carolina
State University in collaboration with RoleModel Software Inc.,and the
University of Maryland.

The learning trajectories will be developed through literature reviews, whole
class teaching experiments, clinical interviews, and large-scale assessments.
Students in grade 3 will be observed and interviewed while engaging in work on
fractions, ratios, decimal, and precents. Some of these students will be
observed longitudinally over the two years. Other students from grades 4 through
8 will be interviewed. For each of the three trajectories, about 150 assessment
items will be developed and field tested with a large group.

Three learning trajectories will be developed and made available electronically
with supporting materials. The learning trajectories will be done in
coordination with the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) in mathematics. Because
the learning trajectories and materials will be informative to teachers who will
be implementing the CCSS, the work has the potential to appeal to and reach a
very large audience. Publications will provide data on analysis of the
diagnostic items and assessments. The researchers will seek ways for a greater
audience to have access to the software for accessing and retrieving items.