* 1118796
* Diamonds and Other Ultra-high Pressure Minerals From Paleo-suboceanic Mantle - possible Mantle Recycling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Harry Green, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2014
* USD 259,159.00

Diamonds and other ultra-high pressure minerals from paleo-suboceanic mantle -
possible mantle recycling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. According to
geochemical characteristics ophiolites (including podiform chromitites) are
classified into two groups formed at either divergent plate boundaries or via
back-arc spreading at convergent plate boundaries (i.e., supra-subduction zone
settings). Podiform chromitites play a significant role in understanding the
processes of melting in the suboceanic mantle, and constitute valuable ores.
Origin of podiform chromitites has been attributed to: (1) crystallization from
ultramafic magmas similar to banded chromitite in cumulate rocks; (2) residual
material from partial melting in the upper mantle; (3) products of
crystallization of mantle-derived partial melts as a result of melt/rock
interaction near the Moho boundary; (4) diapiric transport (along with
associated dunite and harzburgite) of materials from the core-mantle boundary
via mantle plumes, and (5) formation in the deep mantle (where Cr-spinel
originally formed as a high-pressure polymorph). However, recently the magmatic
origin (3) of podiform chromitite is questioned by many scientists after the
discovery of in-situ ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) mineral inclusions (diamond, Fe-Ti
alloy, coesite pseudomorphous after stishovite, TiN, cBN, TiO2 II, and relict
high-pressure polymorph of chromite with Ca-ferrite structure) in the chromitite
of the Luobusa massif, Tibet. These inclusions all formed at high-pressure,
corresponding to depths of &gt;250?380 km. A two-year project is proposed to
investigate unusual UHP minerals from the Luobusa chromitites to understand
their relationships with host chromites and the depth and age of their
formation. This work will include microstructural analysis, trace-element and
isotope analyses, and characterization of fluid/melt and solid/fluid
nanoinclusions in both UHP minerals and host chromite. The project will focus on
two working hypotheses: (1) the UHP minerals from podiform chromitite were
created at low pressure but have been subducted deeply and recycled to their
current locations; (2) part, at least, of the chromitites were formed within a
presumably deep channel of a paleo-supra-subduction zone and later modified by
boninitic melt near the Moho. Detailed petrographic, high-resolution scanning
and analytical transmission electron microscopy, focused ion beam (FIB), and
nano secondary-ionization spectrometry (nano SIMS) for C,B,N,Os,Re isotopic
analyses are proposed to investigate the nature of the UHP minerals. The results
will open a new window to study xenomorphic UHP mineral assemblages that have
not previously been observed in mantle-derived rocks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The proposed project promotes utilization
of advanced scientific technologies available to University of California
faculties through long-term collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory. The project will support a graduate student and two undergraduate
students. The students will be taught how to work with FIB, nanoSIMS, SEM, and
TEM, which together represent a frontier of 21st-century science and
technologies. The project promotes a female scientist acting as PI. Integration
of national laboratory (LLNL) facilities into academic research and education
will strengthen ties between scientists and society, and promote understanding
of the Earth?s interior and the dynamics of its internal processes. It will
encourage student innovation that, in the future, will impact the
competitiveness of the United States in science and technology.