* 1118237
* CAREER: Improvisation in Response to Extreme Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2010,09/30/2012
* David Mendonca, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2012
* USD 45,940.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award consists of integrated research and education programs designed to improve
how society understands, plans for and supports improvisation in response to
extreme events. Extreme events such as natural or technological disasters
challenge society's capabilities both for planning and response. As indicated by
the long history of extreme event decision making, a key to successful planning
and effective response is flexibility. One approach to achieving flexibility is
improvisation: a combined behavioral and cognitive activity that requires
creativity under tight time constraint in order to meet performance objectives.
The central challenge of the research program is to improve understanding of
improvisation by developing and testing cognitive-level theory about when and
how improvisation occurs in emergency response. The first goal of the research
program is to produce cognitive-level theory about improvised decision making,
derived from a combination of archival research, experimentation and interaction
with practitioners. The theory will be expressed in computer-executable form and
evaluated via experimentation with emergency response practitioners. The second
goal is to integrate the computable theory into a prototype group decision
support system, whose impact on decision making will be evaluated via
experimentation in a computer-based environment. The central challenge of the
education program is to develop and evaluate techniques and technologies to
support learning about when and how to improvise in emergency response. The
first goal of the educational program is to provide training to emergency
response practitioners in making, analyzing and supporting improvised decisions.
The second is to introduce high school, undergraduate and graduate students to
careers in the field of emergency response. The third is to enable graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in the research and education programs.
The fourth is to disseminate the results of both programs to research and
practitioner communities and to society at large. Integration of research and
teaching programs throughout the project will be achieved through the sharing of
knowledge and activities both face-to-face and in a virtual community, with
oversight of the work shared between the principal investigator and an external
Advisory Board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this work are in
applying the science of modeling to create knowledge at the intersection of
cognitive science, decision making and the field of emergency management,
thereby addressing the need to develop interdisciplinary approaches to managing
extreme events. The resulting cognitive theory will extend existing scholarship,
provide the basis for future studies and be incorporated into educational
activities, the efficacy of which will be assessed as part of the research. The
broader impacts of this work are in contributing to society's ability to plan
for and respond to extreme events. The research program will improve
understanding of when and how improvisation occurs, producing results that will
be translated into educational materials for students across a wide
socioeconomic range. The education program will draw on the research to engender
appreciation for and interest in the field of emergency response among high
school and university students in an urban setting. Finally, results of the
research and education programs will be broadly disseminated to research and
practitioner communities and to society at large.