* 1118755
* Engineering Design Process Portfolio Scoring Rubric (EDPPSR)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Leigh Abts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 799,886.00

Currently there are numerous opportunities for students to participate in
design-based experiences organized by local schools and clubs, government
laboratories and national organizations. While these programs can inspire
students' interest in STEM, there are no commonly accepted frameworks to
benchmark learning and instruction in order to study students' growth in STEM
knowledge and skills or their self-efficacy and persistence to pursue STEM or to
recognize their achievements based on common measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this proposal, "Engineering Design Process Portfolio Scoring Rubric
(EDPPSR)" is to test the efficacy of the EDPPSR scoring system that could be
applied to differentiate levels of performance in the domain of the engineering
design based projects. The intent of the study is to determine the reliability
and validity of the EDPPSR across student work produced in diverse contexts
(formal versus informal, low versus high stakes, high school versus college) and
under different conditions (individual versus group work, self-initiated versus
assigned, etc.). The proposed study is a critical step in the scale-up of a
validated and reliable scoring tool that could be used to evaluate design-based
projects and to inform instructional practice. Specifically, the EDPPSR is
proposed as the format for a future engineering advanced placement exam.
&lt;br/&gt;The research questions which will guide the project are:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Which types of artifacts provided as portfolio entries may constitute evidence
of proficiency in each ESPPSR element?&lt;br/&gt;2. How will artifact types be
likely to differ within/across diverse contexts and conditions?&lt;br/&gt;3. Do
the rubric criteria address any content extraneous to the engineering design
process or are any irrelevant to the construct?&lt;br/&gt;4. Do criteria
accurately and fully address all elements of the engineering design
process?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A validated and reliable ESPPSR could potentially
lead to students gaining admission, recognition or even undergraduate placement
credit for their project-based activities and could impact the recruitment of
talented students into the STEM pipeline and could inform the recruitment of
students from under-represented groups.