* 1118238
* AOC: Improvisation in Emergency Response: Linking Cognition, Behavior and Social Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2010,06/30/2012
* David Mendonca, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2012
* USD 41,537.00

AOC: Improvisation in Emergency Response:&lt;br/&gt;Linking Cognition, Behavior
and Social Interaction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale disasters--
whether induced by human, technological, or natural causes--require society to
plan for and respond to substantial disruption. As agents of sometimes profound
change, disasters require integrated planning and response at multiple levels:
at the social level, their complexity requires coordination through
communication; at the behavioral level, time pressure creates the need for rapid
decision making about response activities; at the cognitive level, uncertainty
and rarity require creative thinking. Historical experience has demonstrated the
importance of improvisation--serial creativity executed under time constraint--
in responding to disasters, and how skill in improvising may complement skill in
plan following. Improvisation is often conceptualized as the joint product of
cognition, behavior, and social interaction. This project constitutes the first
large-scale study to investigate improvisation at the nexus of cognitive,
behavioral, and social phenomena in emergency response. The three main goals of
this work are expected to lead to improved scientific understanding of
improvisation in emergency response, thereby informing educational and policy
initiatives to improve how society plans for, responds to, and learns from
disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal is to explain the cognitive,
behavioral and social dynamics of improvisation in emergency response. This will
be accomplished through an integrated multi-disciplinary analysis of data from
two important U.S. disasters: the 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal
Building in Oklahoma City, OK (OKC); and the 2001 attack on the World Trade
Center in New York, NY (WTC). To provide continuity with prior studies, research
questions are first developed for the individual phenomena and then for the
links between them, leading to an integrated, event-based model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal is to present and make publicly available
the machine-readable data and tools produced by the research project. The
richness, quality and historical importance of the source materials--as well as
the data sets to be generated from them--will make them excellent candidates for
further analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third goal is to develop and
evaluate tools, techniques, and other materials to support training and policy
making regarding improvised response to disaster. This will be accomplished
through educational programs for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
practitioners, and through the involvement of an international collaborator in
the policy field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In accomplishing these goals, this
project will develop, implement, and evaluate a multi-level, multi-disciplinary
model of improvisation during emergency response. By synthesizing theory and
analytic techniques from a wide variety of fields, this work will lead to
knowledge at their intersection, thus addressing the need for cross-disciplinary
approaches to the study of human response to disaster. The theoretical advances
resulting from this research will be translated into implications for training
and policy, and will benefit from the inclusion of an international perspective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this work will provide guidance on how data
sources such as those used here may be incorporated into the design of tools to
support society in planning for, managing, and learning from human responses to
disaster.&lt;br/&gt;