* 1118155
* Collaborative Research:  Human Responses to Late Pleistocene Coastal Environmental Change in Portuguese Estremadura
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Jonathan Haws, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 130,962.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Jonathan Haws (University
of Louisville) and Dr. Michael Benedetti (University of North Carolina
Wilmington) will lead a three-year geoarchaeological study along the coast of
central Portugal. The project brings together an international team of
archaeologists, geologists, paleoecologists, and physical geographers to study
Neanderthal and early modern human responses to environmental change during the
Paleolithic. Portugal is recognized as a key location in archaeological,
paleobotanical, and oceanographic studies, and coastal landscapes are
increasingly recognized as a key setting for understanding Neanderthal
extinction and establishment of modern human populations in Western Europe. This
study will establish new evidence of Paleolithic settlement in coastal wetlands,
beaches, and dune fields to test hypotheses about this important transition in
human history. Haws and Benedetti are focusing efforts on the Estremadura coast
north of Lisbon, where a unique geologic history has preserved sedimentary
evidence of the Paleolithic coastline including several Neanderthal sites. In
particular, extensive Pleistocene sand deposits in the region record landscape
response to abrupt cold and arid phases of the last glacial
stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will foster a deeper
understanding of coupled anthropogenic and geomorphic system responses, and will
shed light on human decision-making in the face of dramatic environmental
change. Thus, on an overarching level the results stand to inform environmental
policy and planning decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This geoarchaeological
project is built around two main objectives: (1) conducting detailed excavations
at newly-discovered coastal Neanderthal sites (Praia Rei Corti√ßo and Mira
Nascente) and a cave site near the coastal margin (Gruta das Pulgas); and (2)
establishing a chronology of coastal geomorphic response to climate and sea
level change in the study area. The methods employed will include analysis of
stone tools, animal bones, paleosols and sediments, palynology, and geochemical
fingerprinting of ancient depositional environments. Age control will be
established by radiocarbon dating of organic matter and optically-stimulated
luminescence of quartz sand grains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archaeological and
geoscience objectives of this project are complementary; both test emerging
models of response to climate change in physical and human landscapes. The
archaeological component addresses models of technological efficiency,
subsistence strategies, and use of coastal resources in the Paleolithic.
Geodynamic models involve the relative importance of climate change versus sea
level fluctuations as controls on hillslope erosion, fluvial aggradation, and
aeolian dune building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
include collaborative partnerships between the American research team and
colleagues at the University of Algarve in Faro, Portugal. The project offers a
combination of scientific engagement and cultural enrichment for student
participants, including first-generation college students from working poor and
rural backgrounds in Kentucky and North Carolina. With the support of the
participating universities, these students will develop independent research
projects and co-author papers and presentations of results. The project also
raises the profile of American research teams in international Quaternary
science, and contributes to the long-term goal of connecting paleoenvironmental
research efforts across the North Atlantic basin.