* 1118074
* HCC: Small: Proprioceptive Displays to Engage Blind Users into Healthy Whole Body Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Eelke Folmer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2015
* USD 410,220.00

Lack of physical activity is a serious health concern for individuals with
visual impairments. In particular, children with visual impairments have limited
access to physical education, recreation, and athletic programs for a variety of
reasons including fear of injury, safety concerns of parents and teachers, and
lack of sighted guides with whom to exercise. The PI's hypothesis is that video
games, which have been identified as a contributing factor to the increasingly
sedentary behavior of children in general and associated higher levels of
obesity, may provide a solution. A new genre of "exergames" use upper and/or
lower-body gestures (such as steps, punches, and kicks directed at virtual
targets), to provide players with an immersive experience that engages them in
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity that is high enough to yield health
benefits. The PI's goal in this project is to investigate how proprioceptive
displays can be designed and built to facilitate exercise games for blind
adolescents. Proprioception, the ability to sense the position and orientation
of one's body and its parts, is an interoceptive sensory modality distinct from
exteroceptive sensory modalities such as sight, touch, and hearing, and has
remained largely unexplored as a modality of feedback. In performing a gesture
we generally combine visual and proprioceptive information, but once the
location of a target has been memorized proprioceptive feedback alone is
sufficient for relating the position of the user's limb to the target. Since the
location of a target primarily is acquired visually, gestures are difficult to
perform for users with visual impairments. This project will test the hypothesis
that whole body gestures can be performed by blind users in exergames when
target direction is acquired using a proprioceptive
display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In prior work, the PI has explored single
proprioceptive displays for acquiring the direction to a target in a horizontal
plane by having users scan a horizontal line with a hand-held orientation aware
device; a vibrotactile cue was used to indicate when the device was pointed at
the target, with target direction conveyed to the user using proprioception.
Preliminary results have demonstrated that blind users can perform an upper body
gesture aimed at a target in a plane where direction to the target is acquired
using a proprioceptive display. This project will significantly advance our
understanding of proprioceptive displays by: (1) quantifying spatial and
temporal resolutions of discrete proprioceptive displays; (2) developing
efficient scanning strategies for conveying points in a plane (directions to
points in a space) using an analog proprioceptive display and determining the
effectiveness of using multiple proprioceptive displays; (3) investigating the
efficacy with which whole-body directed gestures can be performed using
proprioceptive displays; and (4) establishing whether rhythmic sequences of
whole-body directed gestures performed using a proprioceptive display can be
memorized using audio cues. Through generation of empirical data with exergames
that involve whole-body gestures, this project will develop a fundamental and
transformative understanding of proprioceptive displays in order to articulate a
set of principles for their design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Children with visual impairments have significantly higher levels of obesity and
often exhibit delays in motor development caused by a general lack of
opportunities to be physically active. Through development of open-source
exergames that can be played using commercial off-the-shelf controller
technology without the aid of a sighted guide and with minimal risk of injury,
this project will increase existing exercise and socialization opportunities for
members of this vulnerable population. More generally, because proprioceptive
displays can be implemented using low cost technology that is often already
present in mobile devices, these displays may ultimately facilitate the
development of robust ear- and eye-free forms of interaction for everyone (e.g.,
for motor rehabilitation or sports training). This research will directly
involve both graduate and undergraduate students, and the PI will use this work
as the basis for compelling design projects in his courses. The PI will also
develop outreach efforts such as summer camps for K-12 students with visual
impairments (and other minorities) in order to attract them to computer science
and STEM.