* 1118325
* Converting AOT to CCN for Studying the Impact of Aerosol on Cloud and Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Zhanqing Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Aerosols affect the climate system by changing cloud characteristics in many
ways and with a high degree of uncertainty. Using 10 years' worth of Atmospheric
Radiation Measurement (ARM) ground-based measurements of a variety of aerosol
and meteorological quantities at the Southern Great Plains (SGP) site, robust
relationships were found between aerosol concentration, cloud height and rain
frequency. To extend the study from a single location with limited types of
aerosols, we will analyze world-wide surface Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET)
aerosol data, together with matched satellite-retrieved cloud and precipitation
products, to further investigate the impact of all kinds of aerosols and
meteorological conditions on clouds and precipitation. While the AERONET
provides the most reliable and consistent retrievals of aerosol optical
thickness (AOT), it is cloud concentration nuclei (CCN) that is more directly
related to cloud formation, development and precipitation. Many previous studies
used AOT as a proxy for CCN, because there are much more observations of AOT
than those of CCN. These two quantities describe different aerosol attributes so
a thorough understanding of their relationship is warranted, which is lacking at
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1) investigate factors that influence the relationship between AOT
and CCN, such as ambient relative humidity (RH), the particle size distribution
and hygroscopic properties of aerosol particles;&lt;br/&gt;2) develop more
robust AOT-CCN relationships by accounting for major influencing factors and
apply them to AERONET AOT data to obtain better estimates of CCN at AERONET
sites;&lt;br/&gt;3) match estimated CCN data with satellite cloud and
precipitation data from CloudSat to study the impact of aerosols on cloud and
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will make use of extensive
measurements from AERONET, field experiments, and satellite missions. Tasks 1
and 2 will rely on measurements of aerosol properties, ambient meteorological
conditions and CCN collected in field campaigns conducted in many parts of the
world. Numerous factors will be examined, such as air mass, particle size
distribution, soluble fraction, etc., and their influences on both optical and
hygroscopic properties of aerosols will be assessed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;1) A comprehensive analysis
of how AOT and CCN are affected by aerosol properties and the ambient
environment that have been most widely employed for studying aerosol radiative
and microphysical effects;&lt;br/&gt;2) The improved relationship between AOT
and CCN will enable the extension of widely available AOT from ground-based and
space-borne sensors to study the impact of aerosols on cloud and precipitation,
as many have done but without rigorous investigation of their
relationship;&lt;br/&gt;3) Further investigation and understanding of the impact
of aerosols on cloud and precipitation on global scales for different types of
aerosols under diverse meteorological conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;1) With an improved knowledge and understanding of the AOT-
CCN relationship, modelers would be better informed and motivated to explore the
use of global satellite AOT products to fill the void currently present in
studying the impacts of aerosols on global climate;&lt;br/&gt;2) The research
will provide interdisciplinary training opportunities in measuring aerosols,
data analysis, and modeling for undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows;&lt;br/&gt;3) This study will have an immediate impact on
the teaching of cloud physics, atmospheric chemistry, climate and environmental
courses.