* 1118603
* Gordon Research Seminar and Conference 2011: Photosynthesis June 11-17, Davidson College, Davidson, NC
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Krishna Niyogi, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Ringe
* 05/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed meeting for the 2011 Photosynthesis
Gordon Research Seminar and Conference (GRS)/(GRC) will be held June 11-17, 2011
at Davidson College in Davidson, NC. The 2011 Photosynthesis GRS and GRC will
present cutting-edge research focusing on topics of emerging importance in
photosynthesis research that urgently need to be addressed. Photosynthesis is
the biological process that converts solar energy into chemical energy,
providing the raw materials for growth, development, and reproduction of
photosynthetic microbes and plants, which are sources of food, fiber, and fuel
for humans. The goal is to inspire the photosynthesis research community to
address these pressing scientific and societal problems. The specific objectives
of the 2011 Photosynthesis GRS/GRC are: (1) to provide a forum for presentation
and in-depth discussion of the latest, cutting-edge research on photosynthesis,
(2) to promote interdisciplinary interactions and collaboration in
photosynthesis research, and (3) to advance the careers of junior scientists and
to inspire the next generation of photosynthesis researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The 2011 Photosynthesis Gordon
Research Seminar and Conference anticipates significant participation by
graduate students and postdocs from underrepresented groups. The Chair of the
Gordon Research Seminar is a female graduate student who is a member of an
underrepresented group, and she will actively recruit participants from
universities that serve diverse populations. In addition, approximately 10
junior investigators will be selected as GRS speakers from submitted abstracts,
and eight of the 33 invited GRC speakers and discussion leaders are graduate
students, postdocs, or Assistant Professors. The representation of female
speakers and discussion leaders at the GRC exceeds the typical percentage of
Photosynthesis GRC attendees, and one of the GRC speakers has a major physical
disability.