* 1118326
* 2011 Coastal Ocean Modeling Gordon Research Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* John Wilkin, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2012
* USD 17,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Gordon Research Conferences have an excellent recipe for
success, developed over decades and hundreds of conferences across the
scientific disciplines. The Gordon Foundation provides substantial cost sharing
and infrastructure support, and additional contributions are solicited from
private foundations and federal agencies. Program chairs, elected by the
community, form a program committee which invites leading researchers to present
critical summaries of a range of important problems and to highlight the latest
developments. Discussion leaders have also been recruited to stimulate and
moderate discussion among the participants. Most people who attend the
conference report that it is the best science conference they have attended in
the past year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This particular Gordon conference on Coastal
Ocean Modeling is held every four years in a retreat setting (this year at Mount
Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA). It brings together a diverse group of
academic, federal and international researchers to share the latest discoveries
and identify new challenges in coastal ocean modeling. Many of the topics
explored in this conference (e.g. advances in numerics, nearshore modeling,
mesoscale processes, ecosystem dynamics) are directly relevant to NSF research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The most important broad impact of
the conference is the establishment and nurturing of relationships between
senior researchers and students/junior researchers. Because nearly half of the
conference time is allocated to informal interactions among participants, and
because Gordon Research Conferences are held in retreat-like locations, there is
unparalleled opportunity to build these relationships and exchange ideas among
people in not only different age groups, but also in different sub-areas of the
field, or in different geographic regions.