* 1118025
* SHF: Small: Measurement and Analysis of Regional Process Variations using Existing and Minimally Invasive On-Chip Embedded Resources
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* James Plusquellic, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Precisely controlling the physical parameters of an integrated circuit (IC)
fabrication process is becoming more challenging in advanced technology nodes.
This lack of control manifests as increasing levels of variations in power and
delay in product chips. Unfortunately, regional or within-die variations have
increased sharply in recent technologies, and many are dependent on the context
of the design layout region. The traditional methods of tracking process
variations, e.g., those that utilize scribe line test structures, have become
increasingly less effective for predicting power and delay variations within
chips that they are adjacent to. This has driven the need for embedded test
structures, i.e., those incorporated directly into the product IC. This research
is designed to address the deficiencies in the current state-of-the-art of
embedded test structure design by focusing on designs that are truly embedded
and leverage as much of the existing chip infrastructure as possible. For
example, power islands will be investigated as a means of obtaining regional
leakage variations and non-invasive modifications to the scan chain architecture
will be investigated as a means of measuring regional delay and power
variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key emphasis of the proposed work is to
improve the correlation of embedded test structure measurements with actual chip
parameters, e.g., by developing test and measurements techniques that are
carried out under actual operating conditions. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in the design and test of fabricated chips, which will
enhance their educational experience thus preparing them for a more
technologically educated workforce for the IC industry.