* 1118243
* Preliminary Design of the Cerro Chajnantor Atacama (CCAT) and its Enclosure
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2011,03/31/2016
* Jonas Zmuidzinas, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Philip J. Puxley
* 03/31/2016
* USD 4,750,000.00

The Cerro Chajnantor Atacama Telescope (CCAT) is planned as a 25-meter telescope
operating at millimeter to short sub-millimeter wavelengths and located in
northern Chile close to the site of the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
Array (ALMA). At an elevation of 18,500 feet the telescope would take advantage
of the exceptionally dry air for high frequency observations. Instrumentation
containing advanced detector arrays would exploit the telescope's large field of
view for surveying wide areas of sky to detect an abundance of high redshift
galaxies, to image nearby galaxies and molecular clouds and to discover and
study Solar System bodies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCAT was called out in the
National Academies? Astro2010 Decadal Survey as the highest priority medium-
scale project for the decade. CCAT would be a public-private partnership with
significant institutional and private investments from Cornell University, the
California Institute of Technology, the University of Colorado, a consortium of
Canadian universities, the German universities of Bonn and Cologne and
potentially other domestic and foreign partners. Astro2010 estimated the total
construction cost of CCAT to be $140 million ($37 million as the Federal
investment) and annual operating costs of $11 million ($7.5 million Federal).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has developed a conceptual design for CCAT
using institutional and private funds. Funding through this award advances the
design and development of the telescope and its enclosure to the level of
construction readiness. The CCAT partners intend to provide ongoing
institutional contributions to move all other elements of the project to a
comparable level of design maturity.