* 1118340
* Collaborative Research: Long-Term Dynamics and Resilience of Terrestrial Plant and Animal Communities in the Bahamas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Janet Franklin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2016
* USD 249,976.00

Extremely well-preserved plant and animal fossils from flooded limestone caves
or "blue holes" in the Bahamas provide unparalleled evidence of environmental
change over the past five or more millennia. A diverse assemblage of fossil
plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates recovered recently from blue holes on the
island of Abaco reveals a unique prehistoric terrestrial ecosystem with
tortoises as the top herbivores and crocodiles as the dominant predators (rather
than mammals, as on continents). This research project will examine long-term
ecological change on the islands of Abaco and Eleuthera in order to assess how
prehistoric and contemporary plant and animal communities responded to long-term
environmental fluctuations, including cultural impacts following the arrival of
humans about 1,000 years ago. This project is motivated by two broad, related
sets of research questions. First, what were the relative influences of climatic
changes vs. human influences in this well-controlled island research setting,
and how does this study offer methodological and interpretive insights for
distinguishing between these causes in ecological studies elsewhere?
Coordinated, multidisciplinary reconstructions of long-term environmental change
will consider whether terrestrial ecosystems in the northern Bahamas were
resilient in the face of climatic fluctuations but experienced profound impacts
with cascading effects following the prehistoric arrival of humans. Dated
records of charcoal, pollen, spores, plant macrofossils, and animal fossils will
indicate rates of biotic change both before and after human arrival. The second
motivating question is: What are the impacts of modern land use on terrestrial
biotic communities? The composition and distribution of existing plant and
animal communities will be assessed, because they reflect altered resilience as
a legacy of both prehistoric and historic land use. The interpretation of long-
term trajectories of ecological change on Abaco and Eleuthera will facilitate
the differentiation of the biotic effects of climate change vs. the combination
of climate change and human impacts in the Bahamas, with larger implications for
separating these causes elsewhere around the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide a basis for predicting the responses of Bahamian and other
island ecosystems to climatic and human-related perturbations. In particular,
the assessment and management of worldwide biodiversity loss depend on an
improved understanding of the dynamics of ecosystems at local and regional
geographical scales as well as short and long time frames. Analyses of Bahamian
terrestrial ecosystems will provide insights into changing resilience,
biodiversity, and ecosystem function resulting from a suite of disturbance
regimes, including extreme climatic events, hurricanes, fire, and land-use
change. Through a broad network of public and private collaboration in the
Bahamas, this project will enhance international scientific collaboration and
develop a rigorous program of formal and informal science education, including
internships for university students, public field trips and lectures,
participation by citizen scientists, and development of educational brochures.
The project also will generate an approach to conservation planning and land
management grounded in biogeographic and ecological history and prehistory.