* 1118337
* STIMULATE (Science Training Immersive Modules for University Learning Around Teacher Education)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/31/2010,05/31/2011
* Len Annetta, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 05/31/2011
* USD 21,412.00

Interdisciplinary (99) The STIMULATE project (Science Training Immersive Modules
for University Learning Around Teacher Education) is using next generation Web
technologies (Web 2.0) to create a three-dimensional gaming application that
provides learning materials and strategies to engage initial licensure science
teachers in real world classroom issues. The modules immerse the teacher in
scenarios once deliverable only through text-based case studies. The
intellectual merit of the project is grounded in a growing body of research
focusing on formal education and the learning potential of rapidly emerging
gaming technologies, including Multi-User Virtual Environments (Dede, 2000; NMC,
2007) and the use of metaphorical and analogical thinking in STEM learning
(Jenkins, 2007). In addition, the project is building on several current NSF
projects DRL-0525115, DRL-0455819, and DUE-0602801. A research component of the
project is examining emerging forms of game play interaction taking place in
virtual worlds to determine how to effectively engage learners in order to
deepen their understandings of science pedagogy. The broader impacts of the
project lie in the potential to provide pre-service teachers with early
(virtual) classroom experiences that can work in combination with their
subsequent live student teaching experiences. Ultimately the project expects the
modules to find use in teacher professional development settings as well.