* 1118106
* III: Small: Parallel Similarity Comparison and Duplicate Detection with Incremental Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Tao Yang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2016
* USD 515,732.00

All-pairs similarity comparison is one of the core algorithms in many data-
intensive mining and search applications such as near duplicate detection among
web pages, spam detection, advertisement click analysis, similar news/fresh
content grouping, and recommendation for similar product purchases and search
queries. Conducting similarity search on large datasets is time consuming and
becomes more challenging when data are being updated continuously. It is
important to develop high performance algorithms and software to meet the
increasing speed demands in many consumer and business applications using
similarity computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies efficient and
cost-effective parallel algorithms when data are being updated periodically or
dynamically. Techniques for partitioning data and balancing computation on a
cluster of machines are developed to optimize input/output operations,
communication, and computing resource usage. As data are often updated
continuously, leveraging previously computed results to handle updated data can
eliminate a large amount of unnecessary operations and speedup the entire
computation process by an order of magnitude. The project develops efficient
software on a cluster of machines. The project starts with incremental duplicate
detection for web data analysis and search, and continues to work on similarity
comparison in several other applications. Performance of developed software is
evaluated in those applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the
potential to develop fully-optimized solutions with significantly reduced cost
and increased speed for a variety of big data applications that perform
similarity analysis. Developed software will be made available for application
developers or data engineers to conduct large-scale computation without
involving the complexity of managing parallelism. The project web site
(http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/projects/psc/) is used for dissemination of results. The
educational plan contains research mentoring, undergraduate and graduate
instruction improvement, and outreach activities such as working with high
school students.