* 1118559
* Workshop: Grand Challenges for Bio-Nano Integrated Manufacturing - A Bi-lateral Workshop between US and China; Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; April 11-13, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Wei Sun, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2012
* USD 25,200.00

This grant provides partial funding for a joint workshop with the National
Science Foundation, the Chinese Society of Mechanical Engineering and Tsinghua
University to facilitate the research collaboration between US and China in the
field of integrated bio-nanomanufacturing. This bi-lateral workshop will be held
in Beijing, China; April 11-13, 2011. The objective of this bilateral workshop
is to bring together multi-disciplinary researchers to review the recent
advances, challenges and future directions on Bio-Nano Integrated Manufacturing,
its science, engineering, the novel processes, and the emerging applications in
the field of engineering, biology and bioengineering. The tentative workshop
topics include, but are not limited to: 1) Identify grand challenges for
integrated bio-nano manufacturing for fabrication of biological machines,
integrated cellular system, and advanced cellular models for biological, disease
and drug studies; 2) Review enabling techniques on integrated bio-nano
manufacturing, the manufacturing science, engineering, modeling, the novel
processes; 3) Vision the future research and development on integrated bio-
nanomanufacturing and explore synergies and collaborative opportunities at the
interface of bio and nano manufacturing and its integration; 4) Opportunities
for education curricula to train next generation of researchers, scientists,
engineers and workforce in emerging integrated bio-nanomanufacturing.

The outcome of workshop will define challenges for bio-nano manufacturing and
its integration for fabrication of emerging biological cellular systems and
advanced cellular models in a broad 3D biology, disease, drug discovery and
tissue science and engineering application. The workshop will also facilitate
developing enabling techniques on integrated bio-nanomanufacturing, the bio-
nanomanufacturing science, engineering, modeling, the novel processes, and
provide guidance for federal agencies to vision the future research and
development on integrated bio-nanomanufacturing.