* 1118127
* TC: Small: Risk Aware Query Processing in Mixed Security Database Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 09/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

During database query processing, data migrates across different system
components each of which may offer different levels of security guarantees and
may be susceptible to different attacks. If the underlying data (or part of it)
is sensitive, data migration, especially from secure components to those that
are relatively insecure could increase risk of data loss. This proposal takes a
"risk-based" approach to security wherein instead of designing approaches to
prevent attacks, the proposed research controls flow of data during query
processing through various components in such a way to strike a balance between
risk of exposure and system performance. Risk-aware query processing techniques
is explored in two settings: (a) A stand-alone database server where data on
disks is stored encrypted (and is hence secure) but is loaded in plaintext into
memory during query processing. (b) Cloud computing environment where, during
peak load queries (and corresponding data) are shipped from (relatively secure)
private storage to be processed at (relatively insecure) public cloud
infrastructure, a phenomena known as cloudbursting. In both these settings,
techniques to co-optimize query execution to simultaneously minimize both
disclosure risks as well as performance costs are explored. The research offers
a complementary approach to traditional techniques based on preventing attacks
to support practical security in the context of database
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to help launch a new direction
to database security research that explores techniques to limit risks (instead
of only preventing attacks). The research, if successful, will make cloud-based
data management solutions more secure increasing the rate of their adoption even
for applications that have substantial data confidentiality concerns. Finally,
the planned research, system development, and educational activities are
expected to significantly enhance the educational experience of students.