* 1118595
* SBIR i6: Commercialization of a Nano-Optic Device in Collaboration with Agile Innovation Process
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Byounghee Lee, NanoLambda, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 02/29/2012
* USD 100,000.00

NanoLambda, Inc has requested support for a one year membership to the Agile
Innovation System that was recently selected as the recipient of the Economic
Development Administrations Region 1 i6 award.

In collaboration with the "Agile Innovation Process" project team, this proposal
will complete the monolithic fabrication of the nano-optic filter array
structure directly onto the CMOS detector array on a wafer scale, to form a
spectrometer-on-a-chip. The proposed ultra-compact and low-cost spectrometer-on-
a-chip can be used in various applications such as mobile/wearable health
monitoring and high-resolution color sensing.

As part of a winning team for the i6 Challenge Award program, Innovation Works
and Carnegie Mellon University will collaborate with NanoLambda to more
effectively move federally funded research towards successful technology product
commercialization.

The proposed ultra-compact and low-cost spectrometer-on-a-chip can be used in
various applications such as mobile/wearable health monitoring and high-
resolution color sensing. Consumer electronics manufacturers and portable
medical device vendors can be potential customers. Considering the
manufacturability of the proposed technology and the readiness of the markets,
it is feasible to commercialize the technology within 2 years. The proposed
activities will contribute to not only ensuring the high quality of color in the
consumer electronics industry but also advancing personalized point-of-care,
environmental monitoring, and homeland security. The proposed project will also
contribute to the maturation of the "Agile Innovation Process" project of the i6
challenge winning team in the region.