* 1118434
* The Evolution of Community Ritual and Effects of State Expansion in Central Mexico at La Laguna, Tlaxcala
* SBE,BCS
* 12/08/2010,08/31/2011
* David Carballo, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 19,193.00

With most of the world's population living in cities, archaeological studies of
the processes by which early towns became cities, and how cities expanded and
impacted rural areas, are critical to understanding the deep roots of social
complexity. Supported by the National Science Foundation, Dr. David Carballo
will undertake two seasons of investigations at the prehispanic archaeological
site of La Laguna, Tlaxcala, in collaboration with Dr. Luis Barba and other
researchers from Mexico's National University (UNAM). The project is focused on
elucidating the evolution of ceremonial space, the integrative and divisive
aspects of community ritual, and the rural impacts of urbanization and state
expansion through excavations, chemical studies, and artifact analyses at this
regional center in the Central Highlands of Mexico. During the later Formative
period (ca. 600 B.C. - A.D. 100) this dynamic chapter in the history of the
region witnessed the urbanization of three cities surrounding La Laguna and the
political expansion of one of these -Teotihuacan - throughout much of central
Mexico and farther abroad in Mesoamerica. The positioning of La Laguna as the
largest town within a strategic communication corridor linking the Basin of
Mexico and the Gulf of Mexico influenced its autonomous development and likely
relates directly to its abandonment coinciding with urbanization and accelerated
political evolution in the region.

Documentation of the developmental trajectory and usage of La Laguna's
ceremonial center will provide an archaeological case study suitable for
assessing current inter-disciplinary models in the behavioral sciences
concerning the dynamics of group cooperation, collective-action problems, and
more "bottom-up" processes in the origins of complex societies. The
investigations will assess what aspects of community ritual were more collective
and integrative, and what aspects were more individualizing and competitive. A
related set of objectives are to determine whether the burning of ceremonial
structures and site abandonment were orchestrated by the inhabitants of the
community itself, consistent with more voluntary processes of urbanization, or
because of military conquest, and potential Teotihuacano control of the region.
These issues bear directly on the mode and tempo of ancient urbanization and
state formation, inter-regional exchange and interaction, and the dynamics of
power and resistance between an expansionistic state and a more rural periphery.

Methods of investigation and analysis include horizontal excavations to expose
floors for chemical analyses of the organic and inorganic residues associated
with past activities; the documentation of subterranean features corresponding
to cultural deposits; and stylistic and chronological analysis of architectural
sequences and artifact concentrations - the latter involving geochemical
analyses in order to reconstruct production and exchange relations.

Results from the project will be incorporated into thesis projects and provide
professional training for students studying in the US and Mexico. The project
involves close collaboration between US and Mexican academic and scientific
institutions, and a bilingual project webpage and final monograph will reach a
broad audience and make project data available to a wide array of interested
researchers.