* 1118399
* Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media and Associated Privacy Considerations:  Current Knowledge and Research Needs
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2013
* USD 233,575.00

Crises are complex and dynamic events in which the members of the public need
accurate, timely information about the event and what actions they should be
taking. Alerts are used to indicate that something significant has happened or
may happen. Warnings, which typically follow alerts, provide more detailed
information. The Warning, Alert, and Response Network (WARN) Act of 2006
established a national system using wireless communications. Since then, social
media have emerged as a new medium for alerts. The social aspect leverages the
trust people place in their connections and ae often viewed as more credible
than a mass alert or news report. Use of social media by other than social
contacts raises privacy issues, since they can be readily monitored, even though
the social media have certain privacy expectations. Although alert and warning
issues have been extensively studied and social media have been the subject of
research in computer science and the social sciences, relatively little is known
about the use of social media for national alerts and associated privacy
considerations. Developing a fuller understanding of the privacy issues and
other aspects of social alert systems will be the focus of two workshops at the
National Academy of Sciences. This will support an understanding of current and
emerging research issues and key needs. Emerging stakeholders will also be
identified and participate. Workshop summaries will be made publicly available
and disseminated broadly to emergency managers, as well as to the relevant
research communities.