* 1118206
* Assembly and Mechanics of the Mitotic Spindle
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Alexander Mogilner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2014
* USD 361,822.00

The mitotic spindle is a molecular machine that segregates chromosomes prior to
cell division. The traditional picture is that the spindle assembles as a result
of microtubules (long dynamic polymers) randomly capturing chromosomes. After
this, the spindle length is maintained by a balance of inward tension exerted by
molecular motors on the microtubules connecting spindle poles and chromosomes,
and outward compression generated by other motors on the overlapping
microtubules connecting the spindle poles. This picture is being challenged by
mounting evidence indicating that spindle assembly and maintenance rely on much
more complex interconnected networks of microtubules, molecular motors,
chromosomes and regulatory proteins. From an engineering point of view, three
design principles of this molecular machine are especially important: the
spindle assembles rapidly, it assembles accurately, and it is mechanically
robust, yet malleable. How is this design achieved with randomly interacting and
impermanent molecular parts? How does the spindle self-assemble? What determines
its mechanical properties? Mathematical and computational modeling will be used
to examine quantitatively the process of the capture of chromosomes by
dynamically unstable microtubules. Kinetics of the assembly are coupled with
mechanical forces, and interplay between forces, movements, chromosome capture
and assembly error correction will be investigated. Then a coarse grained
hydrodynamic-like model of a gel of short microtubules and molecular motors is
developed to elucidate the self-organization principles for meiotic and in vitro
spindles. The models are tested and refined by comparison of their predictions
with quantitative data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a novel
combination of mathematical analysis, computer simulations and model-driven
experiments to develop a novel quantitative model of the mitotic spindle-dynamic
molecular machine that the cell uses to segregate chromosomes prior to cell
division. Predictions of this model help reveal the mechanisms the cell uses to
segregate the chromosomes fast, accurately and in a mechanically robust way. The
assembly, error correction, and mechanics of the mitotic spindle are simulated
simultaneously, generating testable predictions for the experiment. Such models
are crucial for understanding not only the fundamental question of basic cell
biology, but also to fine-tune drug design strategies for numerous diseases that
stem from aneuploidy, i.e., an abnormal number of chromosomes.