* 1118481
* Collaborative Research:  Great Earthquakes, Megathrust Phenomenology and Continental Dynamics in the Southern Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* James Foster, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2017
* USD 439,959.00

The overall goal of the project is to understand the processes that created and
now drive evolution of the modern Andes. In order to do that, we must understand
the spatial and temporal variability of stresses generated in the upper plate by
coupling at the plate interface and by viscous drag of the asthenosphere.
Specifically, the project will focus on the 2010 Mw 8.8 Maule earthquake in
Chile, the earthquake cycle along the Nazca-South America plate interface,
orogenesis of the Andean system, and its relationship to crustal deformation and
mantle flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured around two main
themes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? How does megathrust phenomenology influence or
control the architecture, from forearc to backarc, of the Andean orogeny?
&lt;br/&gt;? How do geological materials, shallow structure and slab/mantle
dynamics influence or control the behavior and evolution of the megathrust?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI group will use GPS and INSAR to examine post-
seismic transients and combine these with co-seismic data. They will combine
many sources of GPS data (German - GFZ and US groups) that have been collected
from 1993 to present over the entire orogen in an effort to develop a synoptic
model. This includes data from 33 cGPS stations installed in Chile with NSF-
RAPID funds immediately following the Maule earthquake. The regional extent of
new analysis will include the rupture zone from the 1960 Mw 9.5 earthquake,
which still shows post-seismic transient deformation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the important geodynamic processes that the project
will address are (1) time-variable deformation in the aftermath of a great
subduction-zone earthquake; (2) improved models of plate interface rheology and
their implications for plate boundary earthquake cycles; and (3) interaction
between plate boundary and intraplate deformation over time-scales from decadal
to geological. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to GPS and InSAR observation of
surface deformation, the project brings to bear a number of state-of-the-art
observational and modeling approaches; earthquake location and source mechanism
determination; geological and geochemical constraints on uplift and erosion
rates; inversion for geometric and rheological parameters associated with the
plate interface; and large-scale geodynamic modeling. The investigator team is
highly qualified to take on these activities, and has a strong track record in
previous work in the area. They have developed a strong set of collaborations,
both in-country and with other international researchers working in the area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;