* 1118834
* Eclogites in the Yukon-Tanana Terrane, Canadian Cordillera: Subduction Erosion of the Overriding Plate?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Jane Gilotti, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 140,481.00

Over half of the active subduction zones on Earth are eroding in a process
whereby pieces of the overriding plate are removed and transported down the
subduction channel. Subduction erosion is very difficult to recognize in the
rock record, but eclogite-bearing continental crust from the Yukon-Tanana arc
terrane in the Canadian Cordillera is a good candidate. Locally well-exposed,
high-pressure rock units of the Yukon-Tanana arc are being studied to establish
the possible settings for eclogite formation. The ultimate goal of this project
is to advance our understanding of processes that occur along the interface
between the subducting slab and the overriding plate in collisional orogens. The
specific goals are to identify the genealogy, metamorphic evolution and tectonic
setting of the coherent eclogites and their host rocks, as opposed to m√©langes,
in Yukon-Tanana; and to evaluate the results in terms of plausible models for
subduction and exhumation channels. Detailed mapping is an essential part of the
project; the crux of the problem is to demonstrate shared metamorphic histories
for the eclogites and their host rocks. Quantitative mineral chemistry and
zoning data collected on the electron microprobe at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute are being combined with the results of phase equilibrium modeling to
produce detailed pressure-temperature paths. U-Pb geochronology utilizing the
USGS-Stanford sensitive high-resolution ion microprobe (SHRIMP) yields zircon,
titanite and monazite ages that are then linked to various points along the
subduction and exhumation path. Models for eclogite formation via subduction
erosion will be evaluated in light of the results. Our proposed idea that the
eclogites in Yukon-Tanana terrane formed via subduction erosion challenges the
assumptions that all high-pressure metamorphism forms in the subducting plate
and that subduction polarity in accreted terranes can be deduced from the mere
presence of eclogites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our collaboration involves
contributions from researchers from the United States, Canada, and German, and
involves important scientific and logistical support from the Canadian
Geological Survey and Yukon Geological Survey. The research results directly
pertain to the EDGES project, a collaborative effort among the federal, state
and provincial geological surveys of Canada to enhance mineral resource
exploration by understanding the terranes of the northern Cordillera of North
America. The project is providing important training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students at the University of Iowa in a STEM discipline, is
contributing to the broadening of underrepresented groups in science, and is
providing outreach efforts for K-12 students through the University of Iowa's
Natural History Museum.