* 1118320
* Functional Role of BYDV 3' RNA Translation Enhancer Element
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2013
* USD 257,500.00

Intellectual Merit: Long range RNA-RNA interactions are well documented for
virtually all mRNA. Most cellular mRNAs employ a 5' cap and a 3' poly (A) tail,
both of which play key roles in translation of the mRNA. However interactions
involving internal ribosome entry sites and 3' RNA elements are also beginning
to be identified in cellular RNAs, especially under conditions where overall
translation is compromised. A major deviation from the classical model of
translation occurs for those mRNAs (often viral) that lack either a cap
structure, poly (A) tail or both. One such virus is barley yellow dwarf virus
(BYDV), one of the most widespread and economically important viruses of barley.
BYDV contains an unusual RNA structure in the 3' untranslated region of the mRNA
that interacts with a stem-loop in the 5' untranslated region. This long-range
interaction promotes efficient translation of the viral mRNA, but the mechanism
is not well understood. This project will explore the interaction of the BYDV
RNA with eIF4F, a protein that controls the rate-limiting step for translation
initiation. The specificity of ribosome binding to the BYDV RNA will also be
determined by "toeprint" analysis. Taken together, these data will lead to a
better understanding of how viral mRNA is able to out-compete host cell
messenger RNA for effective viral infection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: These experiments will provide excellent training for students from
high school through graduate school in both biochemical and quantitative
measurements. Interactions will continue with faculty from a local high school
and from Borough of Manhattan Community College (a Hispanic serving institution)
to help improve research for faculty and their students. Many of the students
involved in the PI's research in the past have been from underrepresented
minority groups, and minority students will also be included in this project.
These students will contribute to a diverse and well-trained workforce in
science and technology. An additional activity will be the redesign of the
advanced lab curriculum to include inquiry-based research and to provide a
research experience for more students. The research will have broad scientific
impact through its use of a plant virus model for studying a key step in
regulation of gene expression. Plant viral diseases affect a significant number
of food crops world-wide and can have severe impact both on economic conditions
and food supply. There is a potential to use information from this research not
only to control viruses but also to develop systems to produce desired proteins
which are nutritionally beneficial or economically useful.