* 1118623
* Models for the ecological effects and evolution of dispersal
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* George Cosner, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 321,879.00

The goal of the project is to use mathematical models to gain insight into the
evolutionary causes and ecological effects of the dispersal of organisms. The
individual behavior of dispersing organisms influences the spatial distribution
of their population, which influences their ecological interactions with
resources, predators, and members of their own species. Those interactions in
turn influence the survival of individuals and populations, and hence create
selective advantages for individuals with superior dispersal strategies.
Selection results in evolutionary pressure on the dispersal behavior of
individuals. Mathematical models are used to understand and describe the complex
feedbacks at multiple scales involved in the ecology and evolution of dispersal
behavior. The primary modeling approach is based on systems of reaction-
advection-diffusion equations with variable and/or density dependent
coefficients. Such equations can be derived from the movement mechanisms used by
individuals, but they also make predictions about species interactions and
evolution. Thus, they provide a framework for addressing complex interactions
across different spatial and temporal scales and different levels of
organization. They present significant mathematical challenges but recent
advances in bifurcation theory and partial differential equations will
facilitate their analysis. The analysis also employs ideas from the theory of
dynamical systems. Patch models and integrodifferential equations with nonlocal
dispersal are used in addition to partial differential equations. Many of the
analytic approaches that work for reaction-diffusion-advection models can be
applied to them, leading to conceptual unification. Traditional dispersal models
typically view dispersal as an essentially random process that does not depend
on environmental conditions or the internal states of individuals, but there
have been numerous studies suggesting that conditional dispersal is common and
may be advantageous. Thus, the research focuses on models where the diffusion
and advection rates of individuals depend on environmental conditions and/or the
population densities of their species and species with which they interact. That
leads to new mathematical research on questions involving the dynamics and
equilibria of nonlinear systems of parabolic partial differential equations with
coefficients that vary in space and/or time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dispersal
of organisms influences the persistence and interactions of populations and
drives range expansions, biological invasions, and the colonization of empty
habitats. Thus, understanding dispersal is relevant to addressing questions
about biological conservation, invasive species, pest control, and other
environmental issues, including the response of populations to global change.
The ways that the dispersal patterns of organisms affect their interactions with
the environment and with other species are complex and subtle, so it is
difficult to assess the effects of variations in dispersal patterns on those
interactions. Also, since dispersal affects survival and thus leads to natural
selection, evolution may change the dispersal strategies of organisms inhabiting
changing environments. That process involves complex feedback loops which are
difficult to understand. The research addresses those problems by using
mathematical models to describe the ecological effects and evolution of
dispersal. The models are based on partial differential equations, which provide
a framework for describing how quantities change and influence each other over
space and time. Specifically, the models include terms describing random
movements, directed movements, and ecological interactions that may vary in time
and space and/or depend on population densities. The research provides new
information about the ways that these processes interact. Traditional models for
dispersal usually describe it as a random process that does not depend on
location or environmental conditions, so this research involves the development
and analysis of new types of models that may be relevant in studying various
phenomena in ecology and related areas.