* 1118723
* Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Woody Sutherland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 06/30/2014
* USD 165,714.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation on the R/V
Roger Revelle, a 273? general purpose Global vessel; the R/V Melville, a
279?general purpose Global vessel; the R/V New Horizon, a 170?, general purpose,
Intermediate vessel and the R/V Sproul, a 125? general purpose Regional vessel.
All four vessels are operated by Scripps Institute of Oceanography as part of
the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System research fleet. The
request includes five items listed by priority:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1)
Shipboard Network Upgrades&lt;br/&gt; 2) MicroK-100 Termperature
Bridge&lt;br/&gt;3) TrackLink 5000 USBL&lt;br/&gt;4) Lowered ADCP (2
systems)&lt;br/&gt;5) Pumps for AA-III AutoAnalyser
(3)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; The principal impact of the
present proposal is under criterion two, providing infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.