* 1118317
* Conference:  Ciliate Molecular Biology Conference to be held July 10-15, 2011 at the Orthodox Academy of Crete, Greece
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* ERIC MEYER, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The meeting for the Ciliate Molecular Biology
Conference will be held as a FASEB Summer Research Conference, July 10-15, 2011
at the Orthodox Academy of Crete, Greece. This is a major meeting of
experimental biologists working with ciliated protozoa. The objectives of this
meeting are to (i) disseminate new research information and ideas, (ii) share
technical innovations, (iii) organize further development of community
resources, and (iv) advance graduate and undergraduate research and education
initiatives. Approximately 120-150 investigators from the US and other countries
will come together to discuss recent scientific discoveries and technological
advances, and coordinate community efforts to develop new approaches to address
diverse biological questions of broad scientific interest. The primary goal of
the conference is to facilitate the open exchange of unpublished research
results and technological advances between investigators who are united by their
use of ciliates as model organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This biannual meeting represents the most important gathering
of cellular, molecular and evolution biologists working with ciliated protozoa,
and plays a critical role in sustaining the vitality of this productive research
community. The ciliate community promotes the participation of young scientists,
women and minorities in conference programs. A longstanding goal of the
conference is to promote the participation of young researchers and under-
represented minorities in science (including women). A large fraction of plenary
talks will be given by women, new investigators, postdocs and students. The
meeting provides an excellent opportunity for junior researchers to network,
share their findings, and build new collaborations.