* 1118772
* The Science and Mathematics Simulated Interaction Model (SIM)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Joanna Masingila, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 06/30/2015
* USD 473,721.00

The Science and Mathematics Simulated Interaction Model (SIM) will design and
clinically test simulations for mathematics and science teachers. The main
hypothesis is that mathematics and science simulations will identify strengths
and misconceptions in teachers' understanding of content and pedagogy, increase
teachersÂ¡ instructional capacity, and advance student achievement. The SIM will
be designed for both preservice (in training) and induction-stage (early career)
mathematics and science teachers. The eight different SIM simulations will focus
on common problems of practice, challenges, dilemmas, issues that mathematics
and science teachers encounter at the secondary level (grades 9-12). The
Syracuse University School of Education and SUNY Upstate Medical University's
Clinical Skills Center have partnered together in past simulation design and
research endeavors. Through their SIM partnership, these organizations now focus
on the first exploration of content-specific simulations. When designed and
clinically tested, the researchers expect the SIM to serve as an innovative
teacher development tool that helps novice mathematics and science teachers
effectively transition from preservice preparation to classroom practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart of the SIM is a series of live, one-to-one
interactions between novice mathematics and science teachers and standardized
individuals (SIs). Similar to medical education's use of standardized patients,
the SIM's standardized individuals are local actors who are carefully trained
and scripted to present to novice teachers distinct mathematics or science
problems, questions, or dilemmas. For example, how do novice mathematics
teachers navigate a conversation with a standardized student who questions the
relevance of advanced mathematics? Similarly, how do novice science teachers
navigate a difficult conversation with a standardized parent who questions the
teaching of evolutionary biology? Each teacher's simulation is immediately
followed by an individual debriefing and a written improvement plan in a highly
structured simulation to reflection to improvement plan cycle of assistance.
Each simulation cycle is coupled with a content-specific seminar designed to
support teachers' strengths and to address their content or pedagogical
misconceptions. The SIM is structured as an iterative design project, where the
initial design of the eight simulations will be clinically tested twice. 40
novice teachers (20 preservice and 20 induction stages) will take part in the
clinical testing process. SIM data strands include pre-simulation questions,
audio/video data of the simulated interactions between teachers and SIs, post-
simulation teacher video reflections, and written professional improvement
plans. The research team will focus on refining the simulations and identifying
the teachers' strengths and misconceptions based on 160 different simulated
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When complete, the SIM will consist of eight
simulations that effectively identify the content and pedagogical strengths and
misconceptions of secondary mathematics and science teachers. Initially, the SIM
will be implemented within the Syracuse University School of Education. SIM
products, processes, and all findings will be made available to all education
researchers and teacher educators through password-protected digital access. The
SIM's problem-based methodology challenges novice teachers to enact content and
pedagogy, while also helping researchers to accurately and meaningfully assess
teacher strengths and misconceptions in mathematics and science. As data are
gathered and analyzed for each SIM problem of practice, we anticipate the
formation of grounded theories and models of mathematics and science teacher
development. These data - gathered through a methodology that places novice
teachers in immediate, demanding, authentic situations - hold the potential to
yield broader understandings of how novice science and mathematics teachers are
transferring the content and pedagogy learned within teacher preparation into
actual teacher practice.