* 1118897
* Ready for Robotics: The Missing T and E of STEM in Early Childhood Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Marina Bers, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 532,862.00

The project investigates the use of robotics into early childhood education. It
address two objectives: to develop and evaluate a low-cost, developmentally
appropriate robotic construction kit specifically designed for early childhood
education (PreK-2) and to pilot a robotics-based professional development model
for early childhood educators to teach engineering and technology. A number of
research questions are included. To what extent did participating teachers
gained knowledge about robotics, engineering and programming, and pedagogies? To
what extent have they increased their familiarity of, comfort with, and
understanding of the use of robotics in early childhood? To what extent
participating in the institute can support the passage from knowledge to action?
What processes/standards are used by early childhood teachers to integrate
engineering and technology into their traditional curriculum? Do teachers adopt
the robotics kit and curriculum for their classrooms? How do they adapt it to
their own practices? What are the factors that predict successful outcomes in
terms of adoption and adaptation? To what extent has the teaching practice of
the teachers changed in a way that demonstrates understanding of the role of T
and E in early childhood education?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotics provides a
playful bridge to make early childhood programs more academically challenging
while honoring the importance of play in the developmental trajectory. The
assumption is that young children can become engineers by playing with gears,
levers, motors, sensors; and programmers by exploring sequences, loops and
variables. Robotics can be a gateway for children to learn about applied
mathematical concepts, the scientific method of inquiry, and problem solving.
Moreover, working with robotic manipulatives engages children in social
interactions and negotiations while playing to learn and learning to play.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For robotics to be successfully integrated into the early
childhood classroom, there are three factors that need to be considered: the
robotics technology needs to be developmentally appropriate and low-cost; and
teachers should be exposed to professional development. This project addresses
these issues. It contributes to the emerging field of robotics in education by
addressing the needs of an educational segment, early childhood, where there is
a lack of new technologies and approaches to teach technology and engineering in
a developmentally appropriate way.