* 1118050
* III: Small: Statistical Knowledge Translation and Knowledge Integration Using Markov Logic
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Dejing Dou, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2016
* USD 510,695.00

With the rapid proliferation of knowledge bases and their use in automated
inference in a variety of applications, there is a growing need for effective
approaches for (i) knowledge translation, i.e., the task of applying knowledge
learned or developed in one domain to another semantically different domain, and
(ii) knowledge integration, i.e., the task of building a unified knowledge base
from disparate sources. While the problem of data translation and integration
has received a great deal of attention in the literature, the problem of
knowledge integration remains relatively under-explored. Existing work on this
topic has focused on primarily logical frameworks which make it difficult to
take into account uncertainty in knowledge and in semantic mappings used for
knowledge translation and integration.

This project aims to use Markov Logic Networks to express both knowledge and
semantic mappings to obtain a unified probabilistic model for jointly
translating knowledge and refining semantic mappings. This provides a basis for
addressing the challenges of integrating heterogeneous knowledge with uncertain
mappings, assessing the correctness of translated knowledge, simplifying the
resulting models to obtain more compact approximate translations, and evaluating
the methods in realistic application scenarios.

The results of the proposed work are likely to be applicable in a number of
application domains that require integration or translation of knowledge across
disparate knowledge sources. The work strengthens and facilitates
interdisciplinary collaborations, provides enhanced research-based training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The knowledge translation
and integration software, and the benchmark data will be made available to the
broader community through the project web site:
http://aimlab.cs.uoregon.edu/SKTI/