* 1118713
* Evaluation of Intracrystalline Zoning and Grain-scale Intercrystalline Variations in the Oxygen Isotope Composition of Minerals in Metamorphic Rocks by Ion Microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* John Ferry, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2014
* USD 228,524.00

Metamorphic rocks are formed by chemical reactions among minerals at elevated
pressure and temperature deep in Earth's crust, usually associated with the
development of mountain belts like the Andes and Himalayas. The reactions
produce certain ore deposits, and they may release the important greenhouse gas,
carbon dioxide. A better understanding of metamorphic mineral reactions
therefore is of both scientific and practical significance. Because the process
of metamorphism occurs at great depth, however, it cannot be understood from
direct observation. How metamorphism works must be inferred from various kinds
of chemical analysis of metamorphic rocks that are exhumed to the Earth's
surface after they form. One of the most useful kinds of analysis is of oxygen
isotope composition. Because the isotopes of oxygen are variably separated by
different kinds and conditions of reaction, oxygen isotope composition contains
much information about the causes of metamorphic mineral reactions and how they
proceed. Until recently, oxygen isotope analysis were made of samples weighing
about a milligram composed of numerous mineral grains. Interpretation of data
therefore typically assumed that the grains are homogeneous in composition. With
the new generation of ion microprobes, however, analysis can now be made in situ
on a mass of mineral a million times smaller and with a spatial resolution
smaller than grain size. The principal goal of the project is to use an ion
microprobe in a systematic search for variations in the oxygen isotope
composition both within individual minerals and between nearby grains in
metamorphic rocks. If significant variations are present, as preliminary studies
indicate, the project will yield much new information. A second goal of the
project is to develop methods for translating the new information into a
quantitative understanding of mechanisms, conditions, and driving forces of
metamorphic mineral reactions.

The project will involve contact and regionally metamorphosed pelites,
psammites, and carbonate rocks from California, Vermont, and Scotland. Samples
will be screened using electron imaging techniques at Johns Hopkins University.
In situ oxygen isotope analysis will be made at a 10-micron spatial scale using
the Cameca ims-1280 ion microprobe at the University of Wisconsin. Analysis will
focus on silicate minerals for which there are data about both oxygen isotope
fractionation with other minerals and the rate of intracrystalline oxygen
isotope diffusion. The most important goal is to evaluate the frequency and
magnitude of intracrystalline and grain-scale intercrystalline variations in
oxygen isotope composition. Diffusion rate data will distinguish between
variations that formed when rocks were at their maximum temperature from
variations that formed as rocks cooled. A second goal is to determine whether
measured oxygen isotope fractionations between mineral pairs record the maximum
temperature of metamorphism, record cooling temperatures, or contain no
meaningful information at all about temperature. A third goal is to constrain
details about how metamorphic reactions proceed from the magnitude and spatial
distribution of variations in oxygen isotope composition at the grain-size
scale, including (1) how oxygen isotopes are redistributed among mineral
reactants and products, (2) the relative importance of mass transport by fluid
flow and diffusion during reactions, and (3) the degree to which conditions of
reaction depart from equilibrium. The project promises to put stable isotope
investigations of metamorphic rocks on a firmer foundation.