* 1118426
* Collaborative Research: Assessment of the Role of Water in Cratonic Roots and their Post-Archean Margins on the Strength and Longevity of Continental Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* David Bell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2014
* USD 35,634.00

Intellectual merit: This collaborative proposal requests funds for 3 years to
analyze water by Fourier transform infrared spectrometry (FTIR) in minerals from
peridotite xenoliths brought up by kimberlite magmas in cratons and their
margins. The key physical property evoked in this project is the hydrolytic
weakening of olivine (and potentially pyroxene and garnets) that occurs when
hydrogen (H) is incorporated as a trace element in mineral defects of these
?nominally anhydrous? minerals. The main purpose is to test in the Slave craton
(Canada) and the Siberian craton (Russia) whether the olivines at the bottom of
the lithosphere have low water contents (amount of H calculated as ppm H2O)
similar to what may be observed beneath the Kaapvaal craton (Peslier et al.,
2010a). If this is the case, the hypothesis that dry olivines at the base of the
lithosphere are in part responsible for a high viscosity contrast between a
strong lower lithosphere and a more deformable asthenosphere would be confirmed
as a general mechanism for craton longevity. If cratons other than the Kaapvaal
do not have dry olivines at the bottom of their lithosphere, then other
mechanisms will have to be proposed for craton longevity and the role of water
in cratonic root survival will have to be re-assessed. A second part of this
proposal is to explore the water distribution in mantle minerals at craton
margins, using xenoliths from post-Archean mobile belts surrounding the Kaapvaal
craton (Proterozoic Namaqua-Natal and Rehoboth terranes, South Africa and
Namibia), and at Kilbourne Hole (Phanerozoic continental rift, southern New
Mexico, USA), and decipher the role of water in the preservation of these
terrains? mantle roots. In all parts of the proposal, all peridotite minerals
(not only olivine) will be analyzed for water on well-characterized xenoliths in
terms of petrography, major and trace elements, and radiogenic isotopes. Ten
samples per xenolith suite will be selected, spanning the widest possible range
of equilibration pressures. The effect on water content of melting, metasomatism
or refertilization in the mantle, and water loss or gain during host magma
ascent will be assessed. This work will also provide information on hydrogen
speciation in mantle minerals. The water contents will then be incorporated into
laws of viscous creep of olivine assemblages to estimate their effect on mantle
rheology. This project will provide crucial data and constraints on Earth
geodynamics and continental lithosphere history and longevity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The analyses will be performed on a NSF-
funded FTIR. Two graduate students, and two undergraduate students will benefit
from this study. The graduate students will have enhanced their skills for
future employment in the geosciences by performing complex analytical tasks in
combination with comprehensive modeling of the data. Undergraduate students will
be included in the research via various available internship, senior thesis, and
work-study programs. Students from underrepresented populations (a large portion
of enrolled students at the University of Houston) will have important access to
state-of-theart equipment and cutting-edge research in petrology and
geochemistry. The collaboration is cross-institutional and international, work
will be presented at international conferences, and peer-reviewed papers will
come out of this study. The results from this work will be crucial for our
understanding of Earth?s mantle dynamics and will bring fundamental data to
scientists interested in geodynamic modeling, rock deformation, seismology,
mantle thermal conductivity and electrical resistivity, volcanology, and the
history of continents.