* 1118088
* III:Small: A Logic-Based, Provenance-Aware System for Merging Scientific Data under Context and Classification Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Bertram Ludaescher, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 09/30/2016
* USD 479,186.00

There is a rich research literature on information integration (e.g., on data
fusion, data integration, and data exchange, including schema matching, mapping,
and composition), knowledge-representation, ontologies, and semantic web
technologies. However, there has been little prior work on the related problem
of merging annotated datasets that already have largely compatible schemas, but
where data values of some fields can come from (or link to) different concept
hierarchies (taxonomies). Combining datasets into a single, consistent
representation is a prerequisite for addressing many important scientific
questions (e.g. those that rely on data to be expressed at broad spatial,
temporal, and taxonomic scales). In practice, scientists combine multiple
datasets manually, a time-intensive and error-prone process. In many application
domains (e.g., biodiversity, ecology, systematics) data are often annotated with
concepts from different but interrelated taxonomies. For instance, scientists
who wish to combine datasets that record the presence or absence of species at
given locations are often faced with datasets that draw species names from
different taxonomies. In such cases, merging datasets requires aligning the
different taxonomies. However, even for aligned taxonomies (i.e., where formal
articulation constraints are given), many different dataset merges are possible,
including inconsistent or incomplete ones. These in turn can yield different or
even contradictory outcomes in subsequent interpretations and downstream data
analysis. The primary goals of this project are to develop new techniques at the
interface of data integration, knowledge-representation, and reasoning, to
empower scientists by giving them new tools for merging and 'logically
debugging' taxonomies and annotated datasets. The proposed Euler toolkit will
include a formal framework with a broad range of constraints and data types;
novel provenance-based techniques to detect, explain, and repair inconsistencies
in taxonomy alignments; and new techniques to reduce uncertainty in alignments.

For further information see the project web site at the URL:
http://www.daks.ucdavis.edu/projects/euler