* 1118571
* Gateways to Algebraic Motivation, Engagement and Success (GAMES): Supporting and Assessing Fraction Proficiency with Game-Based, Mobile Applications and Devices
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Osman Balci, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,202,173.00

The Gateways to Algebraic Motivation, Engagement and Success (GAMES) project is
designing digital games for middle school students that will help them prepare
for success in Algebra. The games are intended to help students gain a deep
understanding of measurement and fraction concepts that are critical as they
begin to learn algebra. The design of the games is based on research on learning
fractions and research on engagement. The researchers at Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University are studying students' development of fraction
concepts, their engagement in the tasks, and the use of hand-held devices as a
useful platform for games. They are providing valuable information on how
students develop fraction concepts and contributing to the development of a
learning trajectory that will guide the teaching of measurement and fraction
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of the games is based on engagement
states that are known to facilitate learning, with specific attention to
cognitive, behavioral, and affective domains. The mathematical framework driving
the games is based on how students learn fraction concepts. Most grade 6
students think of fractions from a part-whole conception, but this is not an
adequate base for developing algebraic concepts. The games help students develop
splitting concepts by moving through activities that focus on sequencing,
partitioning, and iterating. The games are designed for iOS platforms that
provide ease of engagement and data collection flexibility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project offers a variety of products ranging from
theories to games. The research is building a conceptual framework that
identifies features of engagement that lead to learning, and contributing to the
development of a learning trajectory related to fraction concepts. The work will
produce a scalable model for developing and using digital games to increase
engagement and learning of middle school students. In addition, three games and
associated tasks are being developed for use with current curricula to enhance
students' understanding of fractions and prepare them for learning algebra.