* 1118408
* US-Mexico workshop on evolutionary genomics of non-model species: next-gen sequencing, data management and hypothesis testing, Irapuato, Mexico, July 19-21, 2011
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Kenneth Jones, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2013
* USD 49,841.00

This U.S.-Mexico award provides funding for U.S. participation in a workshop on
evolutionary genomics of non-model species, to take place in Irapuato, Mexico in
July 2011. The workshop will be held in conjunction with a larger event, the
annual meeting of the American Genetic Association. This award will enable 20 US
graduate students and four faculty to attend the workshop, and approximately 20
Mexican graduate students will join them at this workshop. The goal of the
workshop is to inform students of recent protocols in next-generation sequencing
in population genomics and phylogenomics, and to promote future collaborations
between US and Mexican graduate students and early-stage faculty. The focus will
be on the application of phylogeographic and phylogenomic methods to non-model
organisms, that is, moving beyond lab-model species. The workshop will also
consider the pros and cons of the different methods of next-generation
sequencing, depending on the type of question and project that they are applied
to.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this workshop on non-model organisms is
critical, considering the current world-wide loss of biodiversity. This workshop
will also help train current graduate students in the use of next-generation
sequencing methods, for which there is a great need. Student participants will
be recruited from a diverse group of applicants and should help develop a new
generation of genomics researchers. This experience will also expose the
students to research conducted in international settings, which is a major goal
of the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biology and the Division of Environmental Biology in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Americas Program in the Office of
International Science and Engineering.