* 1118880
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Development of Mediterranean Long Distance Exchange
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Rita Wright, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 18,868.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Rita Wright, doctoral candidate Matthew Spigelman
will study the technology and organization of ceramic production in Cyprus
during the Middle Bronze Age (ca. 1900-1500 BCE), when people on the island
first began to trade goods abroad. This work will focus on ceramics decorated in
the Red-on-Black style, which were produced in Cyprus and traded to Anatolia,
the Levant and North Africa. Provenance and technological studies will be used
to investigate if the technology and organization of ceramic production changed
as communities engaged in long distance exchange. The importance of the proposed
work rests on the fact that it will provide insight into how, at traditional
levels of technology, international economic networks develop and are
maintained. It also will shed light on how social inequality develops within
traditional societies.

The study will generate provenance and technological data using Instrumental
Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA), petrographic analysis, and Laser Ablation
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). This constellation of
techniques will allow for the determination of both where and how ceramics were
made. Provenance data, from INAA and petrography, will determine the chemical
signatures of Red-on-Black style ceramic production centers within Cyprus.
Conducting INAA on ceramics found abroad will allow them to be traced back to
their place of origin on Cyprus and identify those centers that were engaged in
production for long distance exchange. Technological data, from LA-ICP-MS, will
be used to investigate the range of techniques for producing the two color
decoration of Red-on-Black ceramics. The variability in the "recipes" practiced
within each technique provides evidence for the organization of production,
potentially ranging from households to large specialized workshops.

This project addresses the relationship between technology, the organization of
production, and the development of inequality and social complexity. It
contrasts with previous investigations by focusing on the role of craft
producers, rather than elites, in initiating technological and social change.
This work will provide graduate student training, enhance research
infrastructure, create linkages between laboratories in the United States, and
demonstrate the effectiveness of using archival data in conjunction with new
analyses. The results of the study will impact scholarship on the cross cultural
study of social change, the archaeology of the Eastern Mediterranean, and the
anthropological study of small group learning and craft production.