* 1118658
* Collaborative Research: Further Development and Testing of the Target Inquiry Model for Middle and High School Science Teacher Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2018
* Deborah Herrington, Grand Valley State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,105,406.00

This project scales and further tests the Target Inquiry (TI) professional
development model. The TI model involves teachers in three core experiences: 1)
a research experience for teachers (RET), 2) materials adaptation (MA), and 3)
an action research (AR) project. The original program was implemented with high
school chemistry teachers at Grand Valley State University (GVSU), and was shown
to result in significant increases, with large effect sizes, in teachers'
understanding of science inquiry and quality of instruction, and in science
achievement of those teachers' students. The scale-up and further testing would
involve adding physics, biology and geology at GVSU, and implementing the
program at Miami University (MU) with chemistry teachers. Three research
questions will be studied: &lt;br/&gt;1) How do the three TI core experiences
influence in-service high school science teachers' (i) understanding of the
nature of science; (ii) attitudes and beliefs about inquiry instruction; and
(iii) classroom instructional methods in two new applications of the TI model?
&lt;br/&gt;2) How does teacher participation in TI affect students' process
skills (scientific reasoning and metacognition) and conceptual understanding of
science in two new applications of the TI model? &lt;br/&gt;3) What are the
challenges and solutions related to implementing TI in science disciplines
beyond chemistry and in other regions? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design
is quasi-experimental and longitudinal, incorporating implementation with
research, and using quantitative and qualitative methods blended in a design
research framework. A total of 54 middle and high school science teachers are
being recruited for the study. The TI group is completing the TI program (N =
27; 15 at GVSU; 12 at MU) while the comparison group (same sizes and locations)
is not. The comparison group is matched according to individual characteristics
and school demographics. All teachers are being studied, along with their
students, for 4 years (pre-program, post-RET, post-MA, post-AR/post-program). TI
teachers are taking 15 credits of graduate level science courses over three
years, including summers. Courses include a graduate seminar focused on
preparing for the research experience, the research experience in a faculty
member's science lab during the summer, application of research to teaching,
action research project development, adaptation and evaluation of inquiry-
focused curricula, and interpretation and analysis of classroom data from action
research. Consistent feedback from professional development providers, other
teachers, and evaluation, including comparison with the previous implementation,
contributes to a design-based approach. Teacher factors being studied include
beliefs about the nature of science, inquiry teaching knowledge and beliefs, and
quality of inquiry instruction. Student factors being studied include scientific
reasoning; metacognition, self-efficacy, and learning processes in science; and
content knowledge and conceptual understanding. Only established quantitative
and qualitative instruments are being used. Quantitative analysis includes
between-group comparisons by year on post-tests, with pre-tests as covariates,
and multi-level models with students nested within teachers, and teachers within
sites, with the teacher level as the primary unit of change. Trends over time
between the treatment and comparison groups are being examined. The evaluation
is using a combination of pre/post causal comparative quantitative measures and
relevant qualitative data from project leaders and participants, as well as from
the comparison group, to provide formative and summative evaluation
input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the project include documentation and
understanding of the impacts on science teachers' instruction and student
outcomes of research experiences for teachers when they are supported by
materials adaptation and action research, and an understanding of what it takes
to scale the model to different science disciplines and a different site. The
project is also producing a website of instructional materials for middle and
secondary science.