* 1118456
* Drosophila TAF1 as a Model for Signal-dependent Alternative Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* David Wassarman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2014
* USD 465,210.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses how
developmentally- and environmentally-induced signaling pathways change pre-mRNA
alternative splicing patterns. The majority of pre-mRNAs in metazoan organisms
are subject to alternative splicing, making this a major mechanism for
increasing the functional and structural diversity of proteins encoded by the
genome. While there has been significant research progress in identifying the
cellular components responsible for alternative splicing, including trans-acting
proteins and cis-acting RNA elements, little is known about the signaling events
that control the process. The project will use TAF1 (TBP-associated factor 1) as
a model gene and Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism, to explore the
molecular mechanisms of signal-dependent alternative splicing. The TAF1 gene
encodes a subunit of the TFIID complex that directs transcription initiation of
most RNA polymerase II genes. The PI's laboratory has shown that alternatively
spliced TAF1 mRNAs encode proteins with different DNA binding activities.
Developmental signals during spermatogenesis direct alternative splicing of TAF1
mRNA, leading to production of a protein isoform that may activate the male germ
cell-specific transcription program. Thus, research on TAF1 is expected to have
a major impact on our understanding of how signaling pathways regulate
alternative splicing and cell type-specific transcription. The specific
objectives of the research are: 1) to determine how signaling pathways control
splicing regulatory proteins, 2) to determine how signaling pathways
coordinately control multiple splicing regulatory proteins, and 3) to determine
the cause-and-effect relationship between chromatin structure and alternative
splicing. To achieve these objectives, molecular, biochemical, and genomics
approaches will be used. Achieving these objectives will establish a paradigm
for signal-dependent alternative splicing and will permit investigation of more
complex issues, such as how developmental signals regulate alternative splicing.
The research is significant because signal-dependent alternative splicing is
likely to be an exceedingly common mechanism for regulating gene expression in
response to developmental and environmental stimuli, not only in the model
system Drosophila but also in humans and other animals. Moreover, the complete
pathway has not been described, so elucidation of a signal-dependent alternative
splicing pathway that controls TAF1 expression will provide a framework for
experimental investigation and understanding of how signaling pathways impact
expression of many other genes that are regulated by alternative
splicing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research activities will promote teaching and training, broaden participation in
science by underrepresented students, and enhance the research endeavor. The
research results obtained on alternative splicing will be used as case studies
in a graduate school course, Eukaryotic Molecular Biology. Graduate and
undergraduate students will receive training in molecular, biochemical, and
genetic approaches. They will present their research at regional, national and
international conferences and publish in peer-reviewed international journals.
These experiences will enable the students to substantially progress in their
research careers. The PI will actively participate in the training and mentoring
of underrepresented students. He will serve as faculty leader of a summer
undergraduate research program, as a mentor of undergraduate summer students in
his laboratory, and as chair of a committee to increase graduate program
diversity. In addition, the PI is co-PI of an NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) project aimed at diversifying the pool of students prepared
for admission and success to graduate training programs in biological sciences
across the nation. Finally, the PI will facilitate and contribute to the
development of a course called "Entering Mentoring" that is designed to assist
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in becoming effective mentors for
students from majority as well as minority backgrounds, and he will facilitate a
2-semester course called "Entering Research" that is designed to guide students
through the undergraduate research experience and prepare them for graduate
school research.