* 1119332
* Collaborative Research: An Agent-Based Simulation Environment for Predictive Longitudinal Modeling of High School Math Performance
* EHR,DRL
* 11/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Michael Strong, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 473,511.00

This collaborative proof-of-concept study involves The University of California
at Santa Cruz, The University of Texas at Austin, and the Los Alamos National
Laboratory. The PIs will test the efficacy of using agent-based simulation and
visualization models to identify the factors that predict mathematics
achievement for students from the 8th grade to the 12th grade and beyond. The
team are using a data set that includes 14 years of data on student grade
reports, coursework, demographics, teacher variables such as years of service,
professional development courses take, years of service, and other artifacts.
The investigators hypothesize that agent-based modeling can be used to improve
mathematics education. The research questions is What are the predictors of
success in mathematics of public school 8th grade students and beyond as
measured by a) mathematics performance (test scores) broken down by different
mathematical skills? b) enrollment in algebra class (8th grade and high school)?
and c) algebra and mathematics grades in 8th grade and high school? This
exploratory study will analyze data using three tasks. The first task involves
data assessment. The first task will involve discovering distributional
information in general. They will explore visual and analytical processes of
different variables so that different synthetic data can be simulated. The
second task involves collaborating with a statistical science team to
incorporate distributional information so that multivariate samples can be
generated to form synthetic populations to use to build the agent-based model.
The third task involves using the actual data from two large school districts to
understand and quantify variability in the data.

Education systems do not have a valid way to measure progressions of mathematics
education to evaluate outcomes associated with mathematics learning outcomes.
This project will provide a baseline understanding of student's progression in
mathematics achievement that is critical in helping educators and policy makers
set goals and standards for mathematics education within the United States.