* 1119237
* Collaborative Research: Dating Subduction Zone Metamorphism:  Testing the Effect of Pressure-temperature Path on Lawsonite Lu-Hf Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Jeffrey Vervoort, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2014
* USD 48,530.00

Subduction zones are places on the Earth where dense ocean crust descends (or
subducts) beneath more buoyant continental or oceanic crust. Active subduction
zones are responsible for most of Earth's large earthquakes and explosive
volcanic eruptions. Ancient subduction zones now exposed at the Earth's surface
provide important information on the processes, both physical and chemical,
occurring within active subduction zones. Determining the timing and rates of
past events in these ancient subduction zones, however, has proven extremely
difficult. This proposed research will develop a new technique to determine ages
on lawsonite, an important mineral that forms during metamorphism associated
with subduction zones. Dating lawsonite, therefore, provides geologists the
ability to determine the timing and rates of ancient subduction processes.

This research will develop and refine the technique of dating lawsonite by the
Lu/Hf method. Lawsonite forms at distinct pressure and temperature conditions
during the metamorphic history of a rock. Depending on the metamorphic
conditions, lawsonite may grow before or after other high-Lu minerals such as
garnet and epidote, which may effect the ability to date lawsonite by the Lu/Hf
method. This proposal will test the technique in the Franciscan Complex of
California and the Sivrihisar Massif of Turkey. The Franciscan Complex contains
Lawsonite-bearing rocks that are of similar metamorphic age but that preserve
different metamorphic histories. These rocks also contain both garnet and
epidote, making the Franciscan Complex an ideal place to examine lawsonite
growth with respect to these minerals. The Sivrihisar Massif contains garnet and
lawsonite-bearing rocks that formed under a large range of pressures and
temperatures and is therefore ideally suited to compare the relative closure
temperatures of Lu and Hf in garnet and lawsonite. The dating will be combined
with quantitative thermodynamic models to directly relate the ages to the
metamorphic history of a given sample. The results of this study can be applied
to other lawsonite-bearing localities and will further develop this powerful
tool for dating subduction zone metamorphism.