* 1119315
* The Deep Lithosphere Filter and the Growth of Continental Arcs
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2014
* USD 372,999.00

Understanding the processes involved in making continents is of fundamental
importance not only to understanding the whole earth system, but also to many
aspects of human society. Continental crust is formed at convergent margins
where an oceanic plate sinks below a more buoyant continental plate. Melting in
the mantle wedge region between these two plates generates magmas that rise and
ultimately become the building blocks for new continental crust. Much of the
recent scientific focus has been on the shallow aspects of continental arcs,
such as explosive eruptions at arc volcanoes and the formation of large ore
deposits, given their importance to modern society. However, all of these
shallow events are the end-result of processes that begin in the deep region
(the lithosphere) beneath continental arcs, an area that has received
comparatively less attention. For instance, the arc magmas that are sampled at
the Earth's surface are the end products of a complex differentiation path that
started where the mantle wedge underwent partial melting. Factors such as water
and carbon dioxide content of magmas, which bear directly on the explosiveness
of volcanic eruptions, are ultimately controlled by the amounts present in the
mantle source. Investigating the deep continental arc lithosphere is
challenging, but knowledge of what processes go on deep beneath continental arcs
and their relationships to what is observed at the surface is of paramount
importance to earth science.

Although the deep lithosphere cannot be observed directly, xenoliths (foreign
pieces of rock entrained by rapidly ascending magmas) that sample this region
offer a unique window into the lower crust and upper mantle. Importantly, mantle
xenoliths often represent melt residues, thus they are the complement to arc
magmas. Lower crustal xenoliths represent arc magmas that have fractionated at
depth ('cumulates') and may provide insights into the early differentiation
paths of magmas. Thus, the first objective of this proposal is to evaluate the
contribution of deep lithospheric fractionation to magmatic differentiation. In
particular, what is the chemical composition of deep cumulates, and what effect
does this have on the physical evolution of continental arcs? Because such
cumulates are rich in dense minerals like garnet, they may be responsible for
de-stabilizing the deep lithosphere beneath continental arcs. The second
objective of this proposal is to place the geochemical characteristics of deep
lithosphere xenoliths into the broad context of how continental arcs have
evolved over time. In particular, how and when does arc lithosphere thicken (or
thin)? Is thickening in arcs related to periods of unusually high magmatic flux,
and if so, does this place a limit on how rapidly the deep lithosphere can grow
beneath the arc before hitting the slab? Answering these questions requires
using a consortium of diverse tools, ranging from geochemical instruments to
physical modeling. All aspects of the study will contribute to a transformative
view of arc and continental crust evolution because deep lithospheric processes
were hitherto largely unrecognized as important for crustal differentiation.
This research will be conducted by undergraduates and graduate students.