* 1119819
* Disturbance Interactions, Management, and Implications for Future Carbon Sequestration
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Carol Wessman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 230,555.00

Natural disturbances are major factors affecting the carbon balance of
ecosystems because they disrupt carbon stocks and increase atmospheric
emissions. Disturbances of forests in western North America are expected to
increase in frequency, extent, intensity and variety. However, fundamental
questions remain about the effects of disturbance on carbon sequestration. The
goal of this project is to improve understanding of the consequences of multiple
disturbances on carbon sequestration in forests. Measured tree regeneration and
carbon contents, geographic information systems, and modeling will be used to
examine the outcomes of multiple interacting disturbances for carbon
sequestration. A forest growth model will be used to estimate biomass
accumulation and evaluate carbon sequestration across the landscape and under a
variety of management and disturbance scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cascading
large-scale disturbances such as drought, insect infestations, and fire will
interact to shape future forest landscapes and consequently carbon balances.
Forest management activities will also influence and be influenced by
disturbances. This research builds on a database of soils and regeneration in
northern Colorado that shows evidence of thresholds in forest recovery resulting
from disturbance interactions. The proposed project will lend valuable insights
into management options. A significant component of this work will be devoted to
the support of two Doctoral students and the participation of several
undergraduates. Every effort will be made to recruit graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented minority groups through the Colorado Diversity
Initiative in Science, Math, and Engineering. Research activities will be
integrated into ecological education using case studies as experiential learning
tools. This work will also be used in University of Colorado Landscape Ecology
courses for students in interdisciplinary decision making curricula. Dialog with
U.S. Forest Service offices in the Rocky Mountain Region will be maintained
throughout this project, with a workshop conducted for resource managers in the
final year of the project.