* 1119688
* The Effects of Pulsed Subsidies on Island Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Louie Yang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 699,263.00

Spatial and temporal variation in the availability of resources can have
profound effects on the structure and the dynamics of natural communities.
Resource pulses are short-term increases in resource availability; on islands in
the Bahamas, seaweed deposited during large storms represents an important
resource pulse, or subsidy, for predatory lizards. This project will combine
experimental and observational studies to determine how seaweed subsidies shape
island communities, which are comprised mainly of plants, herbivores, web
spiders, and lizards. Major goals are to understand how community responses
differ with the frequency and magnitude of seaweed pulses, the ability of
consumers such as lizards to aggregate in areas with pulsed resources, the
indirect effects of resources on predators' alternative prey, and the various
pathways - for example, predation versus nutrient enrichment - by which these
complex interactions are manifested. Experiments will be initiated that
manipulate both seaweed pulses and lizard densities to address these goals.
These field studies will be integrated with mathematical modeling in order to
develop a general theory of community responses to resource pulses.

Through partnerships with the University of California at Davis Bohart Museum of
Entomology and Friends of the Environment in the Bahamas, the project will
integrate outreach and education for K-12 students. Researchers will give
classroom presentations, train teachers to integrate science in their
curriculum, and develop and distribute teaching materials via the web. The
research will strengthen an international partnership via collaboration with a
Japanese scientist. It also will contribute to the development of a diverse
national scientific community and workforce by involving undergraduate and
graduate students from under-represented groups in the research process. Results
will contribute to a firmer understanding of the ecological consequences of
rapid environmental change. As anthropogenic disturbances such as overfishing
and eutrophication facilitate shifts towards algae-dominated marine ecosystems,
and as climate change causes more frequent and intense Atlantic storms, the
effects of marine resource pulses or subsidies on island and coastal communities
are predicted to intensify.