* 1119005
* Reconstructing the Late Cenozoic History of Surface Uplift and Climate Change in the Central Rocky Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2014
* Majie Fan, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2014
* USD 304,179.00

The Rocky Mountains are an extensive area of high elevation in the U.S.
continental interior. Today, elevations in the central Rockies reach up to 4
kilometers above sea level, while basin floors mostly lie at about 1.5
kilometers. But 80 million years ago the entire region was near sea level. It is
unlear to what extent present high elevations were generated during the last
mountain-building event (the Laramide Orogeny, ending about 50 million years
ago) or were formed during more recent surface uplift. Contrasting data sets
have led to two schools of thought regarding high plateau development in this
region: tectonic interpretations primarily focus on Neogene uplift due to
processes active in the Earth?s upper mantle, while climatic interpretations
suggest only a small amount of uplift has taken place, but instead the region
has undergone a significant amount of erosion caused by climate change during
the last few million years. This project provides new constraints on these
interpretations by combining sedimentology and stable isotope geochemistry of
upper Cenozoic sedimentary rocks in the central Rockies and adjacent Great
Plains. These data clarify when the basins formed and were integrated through
time, as well as allow reconstruction of changes in elevation and climate during
the last few million years. These data constrain (1) the occurrence and timing
of a change from river-laid to wind-laid deposits in the basins, possibly
related to regional changes in climate; and (2) the timing of surface elevation
changes by reconstructing the hydrogen and oxygen isotope ratios of ancient
water from volcanic glass and soil and lake carbonates and ancient air
temperature from clumped isotopes of these same carbonates. These results can be
used to evaluate and refine proposed mechanisms of formation of the high central
Rockies and help determine whether the Rocky Mountains have recently gained
elevation or are a long-dead mountain chain. Broader impacts of this study
include providing early career support for a female assistant professor. The
study also establishes an innovative methodology by integrating three sets of
stable isotope data with basin sedimentology to provide a means of
distinguishing climate change from surface uplift. In addition, this study
integrates with other similar, NSF-supported, research initiatives that cover
other areas of the western U.S. to paint a broader picture of recent vertical
movements of the land surface across the region. Lastly results of this study
are to be incorporated into an electronic presentation that will form part of an
installation at the Geology Museum on the University of Wyoming campus. The
museum is a frequent destination for middle and high school classes from across
the state, as well as a stop for other visitors. This presentation will provide
insight into the origins of high elevation across the state and region.