* 1119629
* Collaborative Research: Testing Hypotheses for Neotectonic Mantle-Driven Surface Uplift of the Colorado Plateau Region
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Karl Karlstrom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2014
* USD 324,101.00

This project will study how the Grand Canyon region is responding to surface
uplift driven by upper mantle convection. The goal of the research is to use the
continental-scale Colorado River system as a well exposed field laboratory and
sensitive gauge of the complex interplay between the processes of faulting,
volcanism, uplift, river dynamics, and climatic processes that, collectively,
are shaping the landscape of this classic region. The methods and approaches to
be used include a variety of dating techniques (Ar-Ar dating of basalt flows,
U-series dating of travertine cements, cosmogenic ages of gravels, OSL dates on
young terraces) that will be used to determine terrace gravel ages. These
deposits preserve past landscape positions and hence can be used to gauge
uplift, incision rates, and changing landscapes. The aim is to test the idea
that mantle flow and buoyancy modification are driving surface uplift and long
wavelength surface deformation of the Colorado Plateau by determining whether or
not there are spatial patterns in incision rate that mimic mantle anomalies.

This research will test the idea that the rugged topography of the Grand Canyon
and western United States are being re-shaped today by upper mantle convection.
This movement of mass and fluid is taking place hundreds of kilometers below the
surface and involves upwelling domains of hot buoyant asthenosphere that
consists of flowing rock, partial melt, and fluid, as well as downwelling
domains of cold dense North American lithosphere. The upwellings appear to be
responsible for 400-1000 meters of surface uplift that has taken place in the
Colorado Plateau region in the last 10 million years. This amounts to 25-50% of
the present average elevation of the region. This uplift is still ongoing. The
research plan involves integration of teaching with research and mentorship of
numerous graduate and undergraduate students, including Hispanic and Native
American students from the southwestern U.S.. The project will lead to improved
written and web materials on Colorado Plateau uplift and canyon carving that
will be linked to geoscience interpretation for Plateau Parks via the National
Park Service web pages and the newly opened Trail of Time Geoscience Education
Exhibition at Grand Canyon National Park.