* 1119091
* Complementary Methods for Equilibrium Sampling of Biomolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Daniel Zuckerman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 11/30/2016
* USD 1,083,891.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;Proteins and nucleic acids often act like small
machines, carrying out functions in the cell such as the synthesis of additional
molecules, communication/'signaling' among systems in the cell, and locomotion.
Such functions typically involve significant changes to the shapes of the
molecules. Computer simulation methodology for studying such molecular motions
will be developed in the current project. The new methodology will combine
advances in software and hardware. For example, new software is being developed
to exploit the 99.9% of computer memory that goes unused in typical current
simulations. The importance of this type of research can be understood in terms
of biomolecular timescales: although cutting-edge simulations on special
computers today can reach the microsecond scale or even beyond for small
systems, it is widely appreciated that key biochemical phenomena occur at
timescales of even seconds and longer - that is, one million times longer than
computational capacity. Until this computing gap is bridged, it will be
extremely difficult to systematically study the full range of biomolecular
motions which keep cells working.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;Besides research, the proposal targets science pedagogy in two
ways. First, the principal investigator will prepare a significantly expanded
second edition of his textbook, Statistical Physics of Biomolecules: An
Introduction. This book is written for modern interdisciplinary graduate
students (e.g., in biophysics or computational biology) who come from diverse
semi-quantitative backgrounds. It explains the physical principles underlying
biomolecular behavior. Second, the principal investigator will target a
significant deficiency in modern science education: science writing. A new
course and auxiliary web materials will be developed, geared toward modern
students saturated with "new media". The complexities of today's world demand
that science writing should be both informative and appealing.