* 1119321
* InterLACE: Interactive Learning and Collaboration Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Ethan Danahy, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,338,525.00

This project, under the Tufts University Center for Engineering Education and
Outreach (CEEO) designs, constructs, and field-tests a web-based, online
collaborative environment for supporting the teaching and learning of inquiry-
based high school physics. Based on prior NSF-funded work on RoboBooks, an
interactive digital workbook environment, the team is customizing the platform
to include scaffolds and other supports for learning physics, fostering
interaction and collaboration within the classroom, and facilitating a design-
based approach to scientific experiments. The InterLACE team hypothesizes that
technology seamlessly integrating physics content and process skills within a
classroom learning activity will provide a wide variety of student benefits,
ranging from improved learning outcomes and increased content knowledge to gains
in attitudinal and social displays as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis
for this work is based on research that indicates teachers believe proper
implementation of design-based, inquiry projects are time consuming and can be
difficult to manage and facilitate in classrooms without great scaffolding or
other supports. Using design-based research with a small number of teachers and
students, the PIs iteratively develop the system and supporting materials and
generate a web-based implementation that supports students through the various
stages of design inquiry. A quasi-experimental trial in the final years of the
project is used to determine the usability of the technology and efficacy of the
system in enhancing teaching and learning. Through the tools and activities
developed, the researchers anticipate showing increases in effective inquiry
learning and enhanced accessibility to meet the needs of diverse learners and
teachers, leading to changes in classroom practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
this project the PIs (1) gain insights that will enable them to refine the
InterLACE platform so it can be implemented and brought to scale in the near
terms as a support for design-based inquiry science projects, and (2) advance
theory, design and practice to support the design of technology-based learning
environments, and (3) understand how connecting students? hypotheses, ideas, and
data impacts their learning of physics content and scientific inquiry skills.