* 1119232
* The Influence of Quorum Sensing and Flow on the Organization of Biofilm Streamers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Ned Wingreen, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2015
* USD 632,342.00

Biofilms are complex living systems that are widespread in nature and
technology. For example, biofilms play critical roles in water purification in
streams and lakes, environmental quality during mineral processing (e.g. mine
drainage), quality control of manufacturing processes, etc. Thus, understanding
the structural and developmental features of biofilms has broad implications. In
the simplest characterization, biofilms are aggregates of bacteria and polymer
(the extracellular matrix), and they are commonly found directly attached to
surfaces. Hence, biofilms are generally regarded as flat mats of cells.
Nevertheless, filamentous biofilms, or bacterial streamers, that are attached to
surfaces but with thread-like structures extending into a flow, have been
observed in some systems. Little is known about the detailed structure of these
bacterial streamers, or how they form and mature. In most bacterial species
studied, proper biofilm formation relies on quorum sensing, a process of
bacterial cell-cell communication that depends on the production, release, and
population-wide detection of signal molecules called autoinducers. Since quorum
sensing involves diffusible molecules, a flow should significantly impact
various biochemical and biophysical processes through its impact on diffusion
and convection processes. Moreover, one of the important questions relevant to
quorum sensing and evolutionary stability is how quorum sensing and
extracellular polymer production survive the emergence of "cheater" cells that
sense but do not produce a signal. Therefore, this project will address the
biophysical, mechanical and physicochemical features of biofilm streamers, the
way these characteristics interact with a flow, and how quorum sensing, which is
critical to bacterial behavior and development, interacts with the flow to form
and organize the streamers. The project team combines expertise in engineering,
molecular biology, and physics and the research will inform both the physics and
microbiology of biofilm streamers, and the coupling of the two
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:, In addition to publishing their
findings in journals that span biology, engineering, and physics, the project
team will continue their multi-faceted outreach activities, including hosting
visitors from different disciplines and educational institutions, engaging
undergraduate students in research and giving talks at conferences, leading
professional development activities for undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral colleagues, and participating in mentoring programs for young
researchers from under-represented groups. Also, members of the team have
successfully incorporated research themes into "holiday" lectures for children
and parents that they have given over the past 9 years and which they will
jointly continue to develop and present. This research will have a direct impact
on our understanding of bacterial communities in flow, which is of widespread
interest in food processing, water treatment, agricultural management, and other
settings where biomass is present in flowing systems.