* 1119163
* Implementing the Mathematical Practice Standards: Enhancing Teachers' Ability to Support the Common Core State Standards
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Albert Cuoco, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 07/31/2017
* USD 3,008,251.00

The Implementing Mathematical Practices Standards (IMPS) is a four-year project
that is producing materials designed to help teachers see how the mathematical
practices described in the Common Core State Standards for mathematics can be
implemented in mathematics instruction. The goal of the improved instruction is
to help students adopt and value these critical mathematical practices.
Researchers at the Education Development Center are developing videos and print
materials that exemplify the mathematical practices and are working with
teachers in grades 5-10 to help them use the materials effectively. The research
questions of the project are focused on what features of the materials are most
helpful to teachers and what professional development characteristics facilitate
implementation of the mathematics practices in classroom instruction. The
external evaluation of the project is being conducted by evaluators at TERC who
are looking the process of developing materials and how the materials are
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The materials will include professionally-produced
videos exemplifying a particular mathematical practice being implemented in a
classroom as well as printed dialogues that are designed to help teachers
understand the practice and why it is critical for students to acquire that
mathematical practice. The exemplars of mathematical practices are being
developed based on pilot work and systematic advice from mathematicians,
mathematics educators and mathematics teachers in grades 5-10. The design
process is iterative and materials are refined based on feedback that is
received. Facilitators are being prepared to conduct professional development
and materials are being tested by more than 150 teachers in a variety of school
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Professional groups such as NCTM and NCSM have
called for materials that exemplify the CCSS mathematical practices. They have
argued that teachers need to understand how these standards can be achieved in
classrooms. IMPS systematic effort to design materials that exemplify the
standards and to test not only the materials but also the professional
development associated with the materials is responding to the national need.
The videos and dialogues will be available through broad dissemination.