* 1119077
* Histories of Large Silicic Magma Evolution at Changbaishan Volcano: Insights From Accessory Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Haibo Zou, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2014
* USD 88,768.00

Intellectual Merits: Huge explosive volcanic eruptions represent rare but
potentially calamitous hazards to mankind, yet our understanding of such
phenomena is relatively incomplete. Some of the youngest large-scale eruptions
occurred at the Changbaishan volcano (also named Baitoushan, Tianchi volcano)
that straddles the border of China/North Korea. Activity there closely resembles
the 7.7 ka climactic eruption of Oregon?s Mt. Mazama, and formed Crater Lake.
The great 1 ka Changbaishan eruption erupted ~100 km3 of peralkaline rhyolites
(comendites). This eruption decapitated the Changbaishan volcano cone, forming a
caldera over 5 km across. A major pre-caldera eruption of comendites took place
in 4 ka, and smaller postcaldera eruptions of comendites and trachytes took
place at 0.3 ka. Preliminary studies of comendites from the 1 ka eruption yield
a zircon crystallization age of 9Â±1 ka (isochron age), that predates the great
eruption by about 8,000 years. The main objective of this proposal is to
understand generation and evolution of large volume silicic magmatism at
Changbaishan and the significance of these older zircon ages. It is proposed to
conduct comprehensive ion microprobe 238U-230Th dating of accessory minerals
(both zircons and chevkinites) in comendites from the aforementioned eruptions.
Zircon crystals from young trachytes will also be dated by the U-Th method.
Complementary isotopic and chemical compositions of zircons, whole rocks and
selected major minerals will also be determined. These data will [1] allow
evaluation of the mode of formation of accessory minerals (e.g., by direct
crystalliztion of the erupted magmas or by recycling of older magmatic
components), and [2] age constraints for magma residence times in the underlying
crust. High-quality geochronological and geochemical data on the young large
volume Changbaishan peralkaline rhyolites is also desirable, owing to the rare
occurrence of such eruptions on Earth. The PI has previously collected large
samples suitable for separations of accessory minerals, and has extensive ion
microprobe experience and the necessary access to the UCLS instrument; these
factors should make this a highly efficient
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will enhance ongoing
international collaboration. It provides research training for a female Master
graduate student and two undergraduate students at an institution in an EPSCOR
state. Samples resulting from this project will be integrated in Igneous and
Metamorphic Petrology lecture and lab taught by the PI at Auburn University.
Results and data will be published in quality international journals and
presented at national meetings. The study will contribute useful knowledge of
potentially catastrophic eruptions near large populations.