* 1119454
* Trace Element Mobility in the Sub-Solidus: Accessory Mineral Stability, Fluids and the Role of the Rock
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Callum Hetherington, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2015
* USD 184,159.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This project addresses the role of chemical environment on
accessory mineral assemblages and trace element distribution as a consequence of
contact metamorphism of country rocks by the Ballachulish Igneous Complex (BIC),
Scotland. This area serves as an ideal natural laboratory to investigate
hypotheses concerning the role of fluids in controlling accessory mineral
stability and reactivity, development of mineral textures, and trace element
mobility during metamorphism. Determining the causes of chemical reactivity of
accessory minerals, and the consequences for trace element distribution and
mobility in rocks, is fundamentally important for the application of trace
elements in modeling geologic processes and the utility of accessory mineral
data to interpreting crustal evolution. Research results are expected to be of
great interest to geochronologists and petrologists who use accessory minerals
to understand and quantify geologic processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students in all
aspects of the research, including instruction and training in the application
and use of "state-of-the-art" instrumentation. Students will greatly benefit
from interaction with collaborators by diversifying their practical experience
and establishing the early stages of a professional network. Undergraduates will
be required to prepare poster presentations for Texas Tech Geosciences Research
Day, the Texas Tech Undergraduate Research Conference, and will be provided
opportunity to attend national scientific meetings. In addition, accessory
minerals are natural analogues of some synthetic materials being developed to
sequester toxic or harmful materials (e.g. radionuclides). This study will build
upon the existing body of experimental work to quantify the role that lithology
(chemical environment) has over the composition and behavior of geologic fluids
and their impact on mineral stability. Furthermore, many trace elements (e.g.
REEs) are economically important and development of improved models for their
behavior in the presence of geologic fluids will contribute to models for
exploration and development of these strategically important resources.