* 1119654
* Student Mathematics Learning Through Self-Explanation, Peer Tutoring and Digital Media Production
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2016
* Eric Hamilton, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 01/31/2016
* USD 503,399.00

This exploratory research and development project engages high-school students
as student-tutors who create screen-capture videos that demonstrate step-by-step
solutions to mathematical problems and explicate the use of interactive applets.
The project has three development goals (a model for creating the media, a model
for collaboration with teachers, and enhancements to a Lesson Study model) and
three research goals (to test conjectures about student change, to analyze
reconfigured roles for teachers and students, and to advance a theory of
personalized learning communities.) The project tests whether the mathematical
and communication skills of student-tutors improve in the process of making the
video materials. It also tests whether teachers and the student users of the
videos benefit from them. Further, the project will examine whether the process
of creating and disseminating the videos is replicable and
scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses design research methods as well
as both formative and summative evaluations to achieve the research and
development goals. The investigators pose a series of thoughtful research
questions and plan to use a variety of research methods to collect and analyze
data to answer them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is potentially
transformative. The advances in technology present opportunities and challenges
for improving student learning. Built on strong theoretical and empirical
foundations and prior work, the project takes full advantages of the
opportunities of tutoring using 21st-century technologies - marrying screen-
capture video with a model of student-delivered tutoring. The project will
contribute to an understanding of how teachers and student-tutors change and
exercise creativity through participating in digital media production. The
findings of the project will have broader impact in at least three dimensions:
(1) The videos created by students will be helpful for other students' learning;
(2) The research on engaging students in creating videos can not only help us
understand the effective use of technology, but also help us understand the
mechanism for developing students' generative thinking and creativity; and (3)
This project can provide insights about how to integrate 21st-Century technology
into regular classrooms.