* 1119022
* Support for the 2011 Annual Meeting of the Society for Mathematical Psychology
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Robin Thomas, Society for Mathematical Psychology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide partial support for the 44th Annual Meeting of the
Society for Mathematical Psychology to be held in Boston (Medford), MA at Tufts
University on July 15-19, 2011. The Society for Mathematical Psychology
Conference encourages the presentation of research in which mathematical,
statistical, or simulation methods play a significant role in the development of
hypotheses or the interpretation of experimental results in the behavioral,
neural, and cognitive sciences. In addition, accepted research papers focus on
theoretical developments clearly relating to substantive issues or methodologies
of obvious use in psychology, cognitive science, cognitive neuroscience, and
related areas and/or experimental results which bear directly on particular
mathematical or simulation models of aspects of human behavior. This year's
conference themes include: (1) Recent developments in the application of
multidimensional signal detection theory; (2) Modern models of recognition
memory; and (3) Applied significance of the foundations of probability theory. A
preconference half-day meeting focusing on recruiting and retaining women in
mathematical psychology will occur just prior to the start of the full Society
meeting. Following the main conference, there will be a full-day workshop on
building, fitting, and interpreting multinomial processing tree models from a
diverse set of perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical psychology brings
together social scientists, statisticians, mathematicians, and computer
scientists to work on problems critical to behavioral scientists. Much
transformational research has come from the mathematical psychology community,
including mathematical models of brain function, memory, and decision-making, as
well as the introduction of new methods for data analysis. While mathematical
models improve our understanding of human behavior and provide formal structures
for future scientific exploration, new and better methods for data analysis
allow us to derive more accurate and nuanced conclusions from behavioral data.
The annual meeting of the Society advances discovery and understanding. It
promotes training and learning of new models and methods for analyzing
behavioral data. It makes possible the broad dissemination of new findings
important in all areas of psychology, as well as economics, political science,
and sociology.