* 1119775
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Testing Mutualism Theory using Endophytic Fungi and Their Host Grass
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Thomas Bultman, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2016
* USD 391,758.00

The primary goal of this project is to determine if the interaction between
grasses and their fungal symbionts follows predictions from mutualism theory. To
accomplish this goal, the investigators will determine if an asexual fungal
symbiont is a stronger mutualist than a sexual one. Both can live within Canada
wild rye grass. The sexual and asexual symbionts will be assessed for the amount
of herbivore resistance they provide to their host through alkaloid production.
The project will employ molecular genetic and analytical chemistry approaches to
assess the regulation and expression of the fungal genes responsible for
alkaloid production. To complement these physiological approaches, the
investigators will determine the degree of genetic diversity in populations of
Canada wild rye and its asexual and sexual symbionts across a broad geographic
range, from Texas to Minnesota. Furthermore, field and mesocosm experiments will
be performed to determine how endophytes affect plant fitness within an
ecosystem level context. The project will contribute to the fields of symbiosis
and community ecology as well as result in the training of 26 undergraduate
students, approximately 30% of whom will be from groups typically
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. Students
will work as part of a multidisciplinary team, learning to develop hypotheses,
design and conduct experiments, analyze data, and report their findings.
Collaboration between the labs at Hope College and Indiana University-Kokomo
will be fostered through joint annual meetings. The impact of the proposed
research will be extended by publishing the scientific findings in ecological
peer-reviewed journals and by presentations at national scientific meetings.
Moreover, basic scientific knowledge gathered through this research will
contribute to the understanding and management of fungal endophytes in forage
grasses, where they can cause considerable economic loss due to harmful effects
of alkaloids on livestock.