* 1119801
* Collaborative Research, RUI: Systematic Investigation of Tropical Diversity in Orobanchaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Jeffery Morawetz, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 403,890.00

Parasitic plants obtain nutrients from host plants via a unique organ (the
haustorium) and, thus, may negatively impact the survival and reproductive
success of the host. Many parasites are completely dependent on their host,
having lost the ability to make their own food through photosynthesis. This
proposal focuses on a poorly known and diverse lineage of tropical parasitic
plants through field studies in diversity hotspots on three continents.
Variation in morphology and host preference will be documented and DNA sequence
data will be used to assess evolutionary relationships. This evolutionary
framework will be used to create a revised classification system and to
investigate transitions in modes of parasitism, such as the loss of
photosynthetic capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a
plant lineage which includes parasites that infest crops, resulting in annual
losses worth several billion $US. An introduction of witchweed (Striga asiatica)
was so damaging to the US corn crop that most tropical parasites are classified
as noxious weeds. However, USDA agents have no means of differentiating a
dangerous parasite from a harmless one. This project will provide an important
online resource to assist border agents, farmers, and researchers in identifying
noxious parasites wherever they occur, whether at points of entry into the US or
in their native ranges.