* 1119211
* The Earthquake Cycle and its Role in Permanent Vertical Deformation in the Western Solomons Arc from Coral Paleogeodesy of the Past Few Centuries
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Luc Lavier, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2014
* USD 343,466.00

Convergent plate margins are notorious for generating the largest historic
volcanic eruptions and the largest magnitude earthquakes. However, many
fundamental questions remain about the relationships between plate tectonic
convergence, the earthquake cycle of elastic strain accumulation and coseismic
rupture, and construction of the topography and structures characteristic of
convergent margins. This project focuses on the question of how the earthquake
cycle of elastic strain accumulation and release translates into longer-term net
tectonic deformation. The traditional view is that the forearc is somehow
ratcheted up and down during the coseismic phase of the earthquake cycle.
However, if interplate slip produces longer-term net deformation, then it is
unlikely that the mechanism is limited to coseismic slip on the seismogenic part
of the interplate thrust. Perhaps slip between asperities, slip on the
interplate thrust zone deeper than the stick-slip seismogenic zone, or aseismic
slip within the seismogenic zone may lead to permanent tectonic deformation of
the upper plate. The primary goal of this project is to determine the history of
vertical movements across a segment of the Western Solomons forearc from the
time of the last full-scale megathrust rupture until present and to infer the
geography and timing of components of vertical deformation that are permanent
versus those that are temporary elastic strain phenomena. The idea is being
tested in the Western Solomon Islands where coral-fringed islands occupy much of
the overriding plate from near the trench to approximately 100 km arc-ward.
Shallow living reef corals are used as living tide gauges that can record the
vertical changes that raise and lower corals through sea level either gradually
or abruptly. Corals killed by uplift are dated to within one per cent of their
calendar ages by uranium-series isotope analysis so that older vertical
deformation can be dated and mapped. Coral morphology, annual growth bands in
corals, and stable isotopic measurements will provide the details of vertical
motions. Besides having a geological history of vertical motions, a suitable
site has reef-fringed coasts overlying the area of a convergent margin for which
the history of vertical tectonic movements would address the idea that vertical
uplift in forearcs occurs at time-scales between seismic and orogenic
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convergent plate margins at island arcs, such as
the Solomon Islands, or at the edges of continents, as along the Pacific margin
of South America, have produced the largest earthquakes and some of the most
violent volcanic eruptions on record. Recent examples in Indonesia and Japan
demonstrate that scientists can be taken by surprise when convergent margin
earthquakes are even larger and more destructive than known for a particular
area based on the relatively sparse paleoseismic studies. Thus is it important
to understand more about the generation of such earthquakes. The crustal motions
that occur between and during large earthquakes at convergent margins represent
a window on the earthquake generation process that can help us understand how
tectonic plate convergence is accommodated by permanent deformation of the
margins vs. that which goes to generate large earthquakes, including unusually
large earthquakes produced when several adjacent seismogenic units rupture
together at the same time. This work has implications for interpretation of
crustal motions presently being monitored in great detail at seismically
hazardous areas such as the Cascadia margin of the northwestern US. Furthermore,
the temporary elastically powered earthquake cycle and permanent crustal motions
associated with plate convergence are a matter of fundamental significance to
the tectonic evolution of convergent plate margins and the development of
continental lithosphere.