* 1119944
* Microbiomes of Charophycean Algae: Revealing the Early Evolution of Land Plant Microbial Associations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Linda Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2014
* USD 375,000.00

Like humans and other animals, modern plants depend on and interact with their
microbiomes - communities of partner microorganisms that provide nutritional
benefits to their hosts. Molecular and fossil evidence indicate that symbiotic
microbes were critical to the ability of earliest plants to colonize land,
thereby forming the basis for complex terrestrial ecosystems that have existed
for the past several hundred million years. Yet our understanding of how early
plant-microbe partnerships arose is sparse because the microbial associations of
closely-related green algae are poorly known. Past study of such relatives has
revealed the origin of many molecular, biochemical, physiological, structural,
and reproductive features of the modern plants upon which humans depend. This
project uses state-of-the-art genomic sequencing and computer data processing
methods to infer microbial diversity and function in key algal-microbe and
plant-microbe partnerships. These data are expected to reveal fundamental
features of modern plant-microbe partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will extend knowledge of microbial diversity and function in natural ecosystems
and illuminate plant evolutionary history. Many new gene sequences useful to the
scientific community and new microbial species of potential utility are expected
to be discovered. The project links to diverse educational activities,
particularly the development of a new web resource designed for the general
public, students, and researchers.