* 1119380
* How Does the Mid-crust Accommodate Deformation in Large, Hot Collisional Orogens? Insight from the Himalaya-Tibet System
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* John Cottle, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 366,356.00

Hot, weak crust is a central component of new hypotheses about the evolution of
continent-continent collisions, and in particular may play an important role in
accommodating the greater than 3000 kilometers of convergence within the
Himalaya-Tibetan collision over the last 50 million years. Models that implicate
flow of semi-viscous midcrustal rocks south towards the front of the Himalayan
orogen, 'channel flow', are able to account for many geologic observations in
the Himalaya. However, alternative models of collision, particularly 'thrust-
wedge taper', demonstrate that the observed geology could have formed in the
absence of a low-viscosity midcrustal layer. Whether channel flow and thrust-
wedge taper models are mutually exclusive or whether they represent a continuum
of deformation in time and/or space within a single collisional system is of
crucial importance for explaining the evolution of the Himalayan orogen and, by
extension, for understanding the evolution of Earth?s many continent-continent
collision zones. A key difference in these contrasting models is the location,
nature and relationships of thrust faults within the Himalayan foreland;
specifically, the spatial and kinematic association of the Main Central Thrust
and the Ramargh Thrust. In the channel flow model of the Himalaya, exhumed
midcrustal rocks are predicted to act as a pervasively-deformed tectonic package
bounded at its base by a single major fault; the Ramgarh and Main Central thrust
are synthetic and coeval components of that diffuse structure. In contrast,
thrust-wedge taper models interpret the Main Central thrust and Ramgarh thrust
to be kinematically distinct, and formed in sequence within a foreland
propagating fold and thrust belt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These predictions are
being tested by analyzing samples at three key sites across the central to
eastern Himalaya via a combination of structural analysis, uranium-thorium-lead
accessory phase petrochronology coupled to thermobarometry, detrital
thermochronology and bulk rock neodymium isotope geochemistry. These data
provide essential information about the timing of the Main Central Thrust and
the Ramgarh Thrust, the timing of deformation and metamorphism in the midcrust,
and source characteristics of the rocks that give clues as to their pre-Himalaya
origins. These data also yield insight into the evolution in time and space of
the transition between deep crustal hinterland-style deformation recorded within
the core and the shallow foreland-style deformation recorded near the front of
the Himalaya. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports both graduate and
undergraduate students, providing them with hands-on research experience in both
field investigation methods and a variety of analytical facilities, particularly
taking advantage of state-of-the-art high-resolution and high-precision
electron- and ion-beam instrumentation at the University of California, Santa
Barbara. The project is also supporting the research efforts of two early career
researchers, and is contributing to the broadening of participation of
underrepresented groups in the earth sciences. This project is part of an
international scientific collaboration, bringing together researchers and
students from the University of California, Santa Barbara, Canada, Nepal and
India.