* 1119774
* OPUS: Synthesizing Recent Developments in Sensitivity Analysis for Use in Population Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 184,313.00

The Opportunities for Promoting Understanding through Synthesis program (OPUS)
supports the synthesis of research results produced over an extended period by a
single individual or a group of collaborating researchers. This OPUS project
will produce a book integrating a series of journal publications by the
Principal Investigator on the sensitivity analysis of population models.
Sensitivity analysis, the focus of this project, answers the fundamental
question, "what would happen if some specified aspect of a system was to
change"? Sensitivity analysis is essential to the development of robust models
in ecology used to study e.g., natural environmental changes, anthropogenic
impacts, the benefits of management strategies, and the response to evolutionary
modifications. Although our ability to model ecological phenomena is good, it
will never be perfect; even if it was, it would not be sufficient. There is
always the possibility that things could be different, and the certainty that at
some point they will be different. It is only through an analysis of model
sensitivity that we judge the significance of our uncertainty. This OPUS project
will increase the dissemination of powerful new mathematical methods for
sensitivity analysis, with applications to linear, nonlinear, stochastic,
deterministic, spatial, and subsidized population models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The book to be produced on this project will make these
new methods accessible to students, researchers, and managers concerned with the
conservation, demography and population dynamics of species, greatly extending
the range of models and questions that can be addressed and their value in
application. This project also will have broader impacts in the area of
education, both through the use of the book in university courses, and through
the presentation of workshops to ecologists, conservation biologists, and human
demographers.