* 1119297
* Software Infrastructure for Construction of Internally Consistent Thermodynamic Databases
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mark Ghiorso, OFM Research
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,132.00

Intellectual Merit. This is a proposal to develop open-source software tools for
the creation and maintenance of ?internally consistent thermodynamic data/model
collections? (ICTD/MCs). ICTD/MCs are intended to support assessment of phase
relations in geochemical and petrologic systems and form the basis of several
widely used thermodynamic modeling packages including MELTS, THERMO-CALC and
Perple_X. The continued improvement of those thermochemical modeling packages
depends principally on the ability to update and expand the underlying ICTD/MCs.
Presently, that process is time-consuming and requires considerable expertise
and technical ability in computer programming and numerical methods. The
proposal objectives are (1) to make the process of calibrating these ICTD/MCs
less cumbersome, (2) to incorporate, in a more intuitive way, modeling
constraints that arise in application of ICTD/MCs to real world problems and to
enable imposition of these constraints as inputs for calibration, and (3) to
provide tools that will motivate a larger community of researchers to
participate in the process of generating ICTD/MCs, thereby improving both
quality and applicability, and raising the level of understanding of phase
equilibrium modeling amongst geochemists and petrologists. The specific goals of
this proposal are to produce open-source, open-platform software tools to (1)
calculate and display phase equilibrium relations on pseudosections and on
temperature-, pressure-, and thermodynamic state function-composition diagrams,
subject to a variety of constraints (e.g., adiabatic, isochoric, isenthalpic) in
both open and closed chemical systems, (2) assemble and maintain calibration
data, such as that pertaining to experimental phase equilibrium reversal
brackets, calorimetric data on thermodynamic properties (e.g., heat content,
dynamic heat capacity, heat of solution) and physical property measurements that
are applicable to calibration of equations of state or cation-ordering
energetics in minerals, and (3) calibrate ICTD/MCs utilizing
numerical/statistical methods consistent with linear programming, regression or
Bayesian inference and provide tactile user feedback mechanisms that permit
forward predictions to be adjusted in a self-consistent manner and thereby
function as imposed constraints in the generation of alternate
calibrations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. A significant amount of
research and instruction in geochemistry and petrology relies upon thermodynamic
modeling applications like geothermometry, geobarometry and phase diagram/phase
equilibria calculators. These modeling tools are in turn based upon internally
consistent thermodynamic data/model collections. Yet, the calibration of these
ICTD/MCs remains a daunting exercise undertaken by just a few academic research
groups and for-profit corporations, largely because of the intellectual and
technical inertia associated with participation in the calibration activity. The
result of this situation is that users of thermodynamic modeling tools are
disconnected from efforts to expand and improve these tools; most users
unfortunately treat these tools as mysterious ?black boxes.? The research
proposed here aims to make the process of ICTD/MC calibration more accessible
and intuitive, thereby empowering a broader community of users to improve the
underlying thermodynamic framework. The proposed software infrastructure will
motivate users to focus on the quality of data sources and the realism of
predicted results rather than on the mechanics of the process of data
bookkeeping, the implementation of calibration numerics, and the analysis of
residuals. The proposed research will help users of thermodynamic modeling
software better understand how those models are generated, how they can be
improved, and what data or model enhancements are required to bring about that
improvement.