* 1119252
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Influence of Eocene Ridge Subduction on Magmatism, Deformation, and Basin Evolution, Pacific NW
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Jeffrey Tepper, University of  Puget Sound
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 66,483.00

We are utilizing multiple disciplines in the Earth Sciences to better understand
processes associated with the subduction of oceanic ridges at convergent plate
boundaries. In particular, we are studying a well-preserved example of ancient
ridge subduction in the Pacific Northwest, where we have an unprecedented
opportunity to document a 20 million year history of ridge subduction phenomena
from development of sedimentary basins to magmatism and metamorphism in the
middle crust. This ancient example thus offers a critical compliment to studies
of modern ridge subduction systems where deeper processes must be evaluated
indirectly. We are testing a model of the changing position of the ridge from
approximately 60 to 40 million years ago, a period that marks the transition
from the Mesozoic North Cascades arc to modern Cascadia. We are also addressing
several central questions for ridge subduction. 1) How do fore-arc sedimentary
basins respond to changes in stresses and strains that accompany ridge
subduction and jumps in the positions of oceanic ridges? 2) How is deformation,
such as faulting, partitioned in space and time across the continental margin
during ridge subduction? 3) What are the diagnostic geochemical features of
magmas within a convergent margin after ridge subduction. As part of our
research, we are using a geographic information system to reconstruct the
distribution of geological features during the interval of 60-40 million years.
We are making the digital paleotectonic and paleogeographic maps and data
derived from this study available to other researchers and educators in order to
allow others to build upon and supplement our efforts. In summary, this
multidisciplinary collaborative research should provide significant
contributions to understanding of processes associated with ridge subduction, a
fundamental plate tectonic process, and the effects of ridge subduction on the
Eocene tectonic evolution of the Pacific Northwest. Our project involves a
collaboration between several universities of diverse character, including San
Jose State University, University of Puget Sound, Northern Arizona University,
and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students is a critical component of this project. Several
undergraduate students are participating in the research. Their involvement
includes participating in the geologic fieldwork, conducting individual research
projects, traveling to other universities to use analytical facilities not
available at their home institutions, and the preparation of undergraduate
theses based on their research. The results are of the research are also being
integrated in geologic classroom curricula as part of an advanced undergraduate
course at the University of Puget Sound where students are studying the rocks
collected during this study as part of a semester-long class project. Results of
the research are being disseminated at professional society meetings (including
student presentations on their research) and the peer-reviewed scientific
literature.