* 1119915
* Collaborative Research: Testing species limits, phylogeographic concordance, and niche evolution in Madagascar's endemic small mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Robert Anderson, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2017
* USD 149,280.00

Theory predicts that geographically complex regions should harbor exceptional
biological diversity, and that past Earth history events such as climatic
fluctuations will affect the diversification and maintenance of genetic
variation. The island of Madagascar represents one such complex region. Only
four groups of native terrestrial mammals exist on Madagascar; each colonized
Madagascar a single time and then diversified to exhibit spectacular
morphological and ecological variation. This proposal focuses on the small
insectivore-like mammals, especially on those species distributed throughout
Madagascar's mountainous, humid-forest belt. The project will use DNA sequences
from multiple genes to determine how many genetically distinct sets of
populations exist within each species, and to provide an estimate of how long
ago they diverged. The researchers will use Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
to model the niche of each species using climatic data sets to estimate the
species' current ranges and to reconstruct their distributions during past
glacial cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the forces that shape
regional biodiversity is one of the key goals of modern biology. This project
will illuminate the importance of past climatic events in shaping present-day
patterns of biodiversity. It will reveal the extent of small-mammal diversity in
Madagascar's humid forests and identify areas containing unexpected genetic
variation, providing critical information for designing protected areas and
conservation strategies in one of the world?s foremost biodiversity hotspots.
The researchers will train undergraduate and graduate students in DNA sequencing
and analysis and GIS, including students from groups underrepresented in
science.