* 1119242
* Mechanism of hypoxia down-regulation of reproductive neuroendocrine function in Atlantic croaker.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Peter Thomas, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2015
* USD 510,000.00

Recently there has been a dramatic increase in the number and size of low oxygen
(hypoxia) regions in coastal waters worldwide due to human activities, but the
long-term impacts of this global change on coastal fisheries and ecosystems are
unknown. Marked reductions in egg production and hormone levels are found in
Atlantic croaker collected from hypoxic coastal regions which are associated
with inhibition of the brain hormone controlling reproduction, gonadotropin
releasing hormone (GnRH). These studies suggest hypoxia may target three enzymes
in the brain critical for GnRH function, tryptophan hydroxylase, aromatase and
neuronal nitric oxide synthase. This project will test the hypothesis that all
three enzymes in croaker brains are altered by hypoxia exposure through a
specific mechanism resulting in down-regulation of GnRH and reproductive
functions. The results are expected to show, for the first time in any
vertebrate, the existence of a specific brain mechanism by which hypoxia
prevents reproduction as an adaptive mechanism to conserve energy. The results
will be valuable for making policy, management and regulatory decisions by
resource protection agencies. Undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
researchers, including underrepresented Hispanic minorities, will conduct
independent projects and receive training on all aspects of the research and its
analysis, the results of which will be communicated via different media to the
general public, high school students, teachers and scientific community.
Trainees will be taught how their basic research findings can be utilized to
benefit society by developing their skills in recognizing the potential broader
societal impacts of their research.