* 1119584
* Constructing and Critiquing Arguments in Middle School Science Classrooms: Supporting Teachers with Multimedia Educative Curriculum Materials
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Jacqueline Barber, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,147,015.00

This project between Lawrence Hall of Science and Boston College is developing
Earth and Space Science multimedia educative curriculum materials (MECM) and a
system to facilitate teachers' learning and beliefs of scientific argumentation.
The MECMs include videos, voice-over narratives, diagrammatic representations,
images of student writings, and text. The PIs are investigating the impact of
the MECMS on teachers' beliefs about scientific argumentation and their related
pedagogical content knowledge. The overarching research question, with four sub
questions, focuses on how can multimedia educative curriculum materials provide
support to middle school science teachers in implementing standards for
constructing and critiquing arguments. The four sub questions are: What factors
impact teachers' implementation of argumentation instruction in the classroom?
How can MECMs be designed to positively impact teachers' beliefs and their
pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) about argumentation? What is the
relationship between teachers' beliefs about the value of argumentation and
their implementation of argumentation in the classroom? What impact do MECMs
have on teachers' beliefs and PCK?

A mixed method approach is being used to assess teachers' beliefs and
pedagogical content knowledge. The PIs are developing and pilot testing
teachers' beliefs about scientific argumentation. They will use an iterative
design process for the MECMs that will involve 50 teachers. Twenty-five phone
interviews will be conducted to investigate factors that impact teachers'
implementations of scientific argumentation. Three iterative cycles of design
and testing include focus groups, a pilot of the MECMs in six classrooms, and a
national field test of 30 classrooms. One hundred teachers will field test the
assessment followed by collection of six case studies and data analyses. The
project's formative and summative evaluations include monitoring and providing
feedback for all activities, and assessments of program implementation and
impact. Teachers need support using field tested multimedia educative materials
(MECMs) in learning and delivering science content using a scientific
argumentation process. By delivering and engaging the teaching and learning
process through iterative design of Earth and Space Science multimedia educative
curriculum materials, this project would provide, if successful, teachers and
students with the necessary literacy and knowledge about scientific
argumentation. The MECMs and approach has the potential for broad implementation
in middle schools and beyond for delivering Earth and Space science material to
support and teach scientific argumentation.