* 1119612
* Collaborative Research: Algorithms for Threat Detection via Geometry of Virus Genome Space
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Rong He, Chicago State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 168,243.00

A genome space is a moduli space of genomes. In this space each point
corresponds to a genome. It is expected that two genomes are closely related if
the corresponding points in the genome space are close to each other. The
investigators and their collaborators obtain a new geometric representation-the
natural vector for DNA sequences, and show that the correspondence between DNA
sequences and the natural vectors is one-to-one. They perform phylogenetic and
clustering analysis for genome sequences in this space. Unlike most existing
methods, the proposed genome space here does not need sequence alignment or any
evolutionary model and thus avoids computational repetition. In a pilot study of
27,643 genome sequences, it takes only a couple of hours using the natural
vector method to compute all the pairwise differences, while it will take four
years using the classical multiple alignment methods. Considering the
exponentially increasing size of the known genome database, the natural vector
method is the only known feasible approach to cluster the whole genome space.
With the constructed natural vectors, the investigators use the classification
model based on a permanental process, a stochastic classification model, to
perform classification and clustering. Moreover, the probability of each virus
genome belonging to a cluster can also be obtained. For example, the
investigators did clustering analysis for 59 Influenza A H1N1 swine flu genomes
and 113 human rhinovirus (HRV) genomes based on their whole genome sequences,
and showed that the new outbreak of Influenza A H1N1 swine flu virus was most
closely related to Eurasian swine flu viruses and North American swine flu
viruses, and the 113 HRV genomes were well clustered into 5 classes HRV-A,
HRV-B, HRV-C, HEV-B, and HEV-C. It takes only 18 seconds for the proposed method
to get the clustering result while it takes more than 19 hours for the commonly
used multiple alignment method. Both methods yield the same clustering result.
The first goal of the proposed activity is to collect all available genome
sequences for each type of virus, compute their natural vectors, set up and
maintain a "natural vector bank" for viruses. Secondly, the investigators will
explore the necessary number of dimensions of the natural vector such that it
accurately classifies or clusters the genomes. The third goal is to do
clustering on the virus genomes based on their natural vectors. The final goal
is to classify or identify any given new virus based on its genome sequence, and
predict its functions or behavior pattern.



In this project the investigators construct a novel, high-speed, accurate
geometric representation, called the natural vector, for DNA sequences. Based on
this new powerful method, the biologists can have a global comparison of all
genomes simultaneously, which cannot be achieved by any other method. It is very
fast and convenient once the genome sequence is known, which is vital to the
homeland security. To predict the characteristics of a new virus coming from
terrorist groups, one can compute the natural vector of the new virus and
compare it with the natural vectors of other known viruses. In this way one can
predict the possible properties of this new virus by looking at the properties
of those viruses located nearby. Quickly and accurately identifying a new virus
and predicting its functions will be very helpful to authorities taking
precautions and manufacturing a vaccine before it reaches a pandemic state and
propagates throughout the general public.