* 1119308
* G8 Initiative: ExArch: Climate Analytics on Distributed Exascale Data Archives
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Venkatramani Balaji, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 312,967.00

This NSF award to Princeton University funds U.S. researchers participating in a
project competitively selected by the G8 Research Councils Initiative on
Multilateral Research through the Interdisciplinary Program on Application
Software towards Exascale Computing for Global Scale Issues. This is a pilot
collaboration among the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Canadian National
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence Nationale
de la Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian Foundation for
Basic Research (RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils (RC-UK),
supporting collaborative research projects selected on a competitive basis that
are comprised of researchers from at least three of the partner
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international project targets the rapidly
growing demands of climate science data management as models increase the
precision with which they depict spatial structure and the completeness with
which they describe a vast range of physical processes. The ExArch project is
principally a framework for the scientific interpretation of multi-model
ensembles at the peta-and exa-scale. It applies a strategy, a prototype
infrastructure and demonstration usage examples in the context of the imminent
CMIP5 archive, which will be the largest of its kind ever assembled in this
domain. It will attach the ExArch framework to the CORDEX experiment, pushing
beyond CMIP5 in resolution, albeit at regional scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
international project involving collaborating researchers in six countries will
explore the challenges of developing a software management infrastructure which
will scale to the multi-exabyte archives of climate data which are likely to be
crucial to major policy decisions by the end of the decade. In the short term,
strategies will be evaluated by applying them to existing data archives. The NSF
funding primarily supports early career scientists at Princeton designing a
system for querying and processing data from distributed web archives.