* 1119865
* Collaborative Research: Price determination in ectomycorrhizal symbioses
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jason Hoeksema, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 403,750.00

Many pairs of species are involved in mutually beneficial exchanges. One of the
most widespread and ecologically important types of these mutualisms in nature
are associations between fungi in the soil and the roots of plants, known as
mycorrhizae (fungus-roots): the fungus exports mineral nutrients such as
phosphorus and nitrogen to the plant and the plant exports sources of energy
based on carbon to the fungus. However, as in other types of exchanges, the
actual net benefits to each partner in these associations can depend upon the
current costs of exports and value of imports. The associations may even grade
into parasitism of one partner on the other and fall apart when, for example, a
rise in the concentration of nitrogen and phosphorus in the soil makes export
from the fungus superfluous to the plant. One difficulty in understanding and
predicting when resource exchanges between organisms will be truly beneficial is
the problem of comparing apples to oranges: how does one compare the cost of
exporting one element, such as carbon, to the benefit of importing a different
one, such as nitrogen or phosphorus? This project will try to solve this problem
by using economic models to calculate a "price of resource exchange" between
species. Laboratory experiments will measure resource exchange prices between
the Monterey pine and eight of its mycorrhizal fungi and show how those prices
vary over time, as abundances of the resources change, and between the species
of fungi. This will test whether scientists can use economics to understand and
predict the interactions between species as different as fungi and
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also help us understand how
economically important trees such as the pine respond to changes in soil
fertility, and help us more accurately model global cycles of elements such as
carbon and nitrogren. In addition, the project will train graduate and
undergraduate students from groups that are under-represented in science, and
work with teachers in two local high schools to teach younger students about the
vital role of fungi in the soil, through a field trip and a year-long experiment
right in the classroom.