* 1119217
* OPUS:  A SYNTHESIS OF FIVE DECADES OF BIOGEOCHEMICAL RESEARCH IN A NORTHERN HARDWOOD FOREST ECOSYSTEM
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Gene Likens, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 101,553.00

The results of long-term biogeochemical and ecological research on the Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest, New Hampshire will be assembled, synthesized and
published. The quantitative records of precipitation and streamwater amount and
chemistry are now the longest, continuous biogeochemical records of this type in
the world, representing a treasure-trove of information relevant to current
environmental problems, such as acid rain, N-deposition and rising levels of
atmospheric CO2. This synthesis will evaluate the linkages between forested
watersheds and associated aquatic ecosystems of the Northern Forest Ecoregion,
will detect and evaluate changes in ecosystem structure and function (such as
water quantity and quality), will test questions of ecosystem function (such as
nitrogen saturation), will evaluate response to disturbance, such as climate
change, commercial forestry practices, acid rain, and major hydrologic
fluctuation (drought or deluge), and will help establish baselines for
evaluating change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For researchers and decision makers
grappling with solutions to major environmental issues, such carefully
documented and synthesized, long-term data are essential to a quantitative
perspective on biogeochemical change and to advance the theoretical
underpinnings of ecology. Without such long-term and landscape-scale data, there
are only limited abilities to detect the magnitude and direction of ecosystem
change in New England.