* 1119709
* LTREB Renewal:  Biogeochemical Mechanisms of Response in the Third Decade of Whole-Ecosystem Experimental Manipulations at the Bear Brook Watershed in Maine (BBWM)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Stephen Norton, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 448,875.00

Research at the Bear Brook Watershed in Maine has been conducted for more than
25 years on the effects of atmospheric sulfur and nitrogen deposition on forest,
soils, and stream runoff, in a changing climate. Each watershed includes a
headwater stream. One watershed is treated bimonthly by helicopter (simulating
atmospheric sulfur and nitrogen deposition) and the other is an untreated
reference. This project will support the third decade of research, which
explores new ecological response mechanisms that can only be investigated by
long-term, multi-decadal research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project include the training of undergraduate and graduate students. This
research also provides direct evidence of whole-ecosystem responses to chemical
treatments that simulate air pollutants, providing results not possible from
controlled laboratory studies. This research has identified and verified key
factors governing forest response to sulfur and nitrogen deposition, and
revealed major gaps in our understanding that are critical to determining the
success of current and future influences of the Clean Air Act. Societal concerns
about the effects of acid deposition, reactive nitrogen, and climate change on
forest ecosystem services grow increasingly important. This research directly
addresses those information needs for today and the future.