* 1119506
* Evaluating Approaches to Multilocus Species Tree Inference: Assessing Methods and Genomic Regions Using New World Orioles (Icterus)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Kevin Omland, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* ashley dowling
* 07/31/2016
* USD 403,372.00

Inferring evolutionary trees for closely related species remains a major
obstacle to completing the Tree of Life. For example, evolutionary trees
(phylogenies) of closely related animal species have generally relied on a
single gene region - mitochondrial DNA. Recently, new statistical methods have
been developed to analyze data from multiple gene regions from throughout the
nuclear genome. However, these new "species tree" methods have not been
rigorously compared. The project will use a well-studied bird genus (New World
orioles, Icterus), as well as two poorly known genera from Australia
(butcherbirds, Cracticus; red robins, Petroica) to compare the performance of
species tree methods as applied to closely related species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train postdoctoral researchers, PhD
students, and undergraduates in avian systematics, DNA sequencing, and
bioinformatic analyses of genomic data. This research will inform "active
learning" exercises to educate students about how DNA data are used to infer
species relationships, which has important applications for everything from
disease organisms and invasive species to biodiversity conservation. This
project on species trees and the associated educational activities will promote
the understanding of phylogenies and lead to advances that will help resolve
relationships for closely related species across the entire Tree of Life.