* 1119055
* Designing an Integrated Framework for Genetics Education to Develop Innovative Curricula and Assessments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Kevin McElhaney, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,348,184.00

Michigan State University is developing a model for integrating best practices
in technology-supported instructional design and formative assessment for
genetics instruction in upper elementary, middle and high school. The project
partners with an urban school district in Texas and a suburban school district
in Michigan. The objectives are: (1) to articulate a detailed standards- and
research-base conceptual framework for describing students' conceptions of
genetics and how students develop a full understanding of genetics across grade
spans (upper elementary, middle and high school); (2) to develop innovative
instructional materials and embedded assessments that provide richer information
about students' conceptual understanding of genetics and help practitioners make
decisions about what to do next in instruction; and (3) to examine the
implementation of these instructional materials and assessments to investigate
students' understanding of genetics concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the
Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE) 4.0 platform (a technology-rich
learning environment), the project is developing a 5-week elementary, middle,
and secondary school curriculum models that scaffold and model scientific
practices, enable students to interface with real-world problems, provide
opportunities for students to make connections between visible phenomena and
underlying genetic processes, and promote student monitoring and reflection on
their learning. Each module will include animation- and stimulation-based
contexts in WISE to provide rich occasions to press for building and developing
reasoning and explanations. To promote teachers' use of student responses in
formative ways, the materials will offer clear guidance about how to make
evidence-based instructional decisions as well as provide options for contingent
instruction activities that can be used to address persistent or common non-
normative ways of reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research offers
generalizable approaches on the principled design of embedded assessments in
WISE 4.0 and on using these assessments formatively. A quasi-experimental study
employing a cross-sectional and longitudinal comparison design will investigate
the development of students' understanding of genetics-related ideas from upper
elementary to the high school years.