* 1119354
* RAPID  Gardar Collaborative Rescue Project
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Thomas McGovern, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 03/31/2014
* USD 199,017.00

This RAPID award will support an intensive international multi-disciplinary
effort to salvage critical organic remains from rapidly degrading cultural
deposits at the unique site of Gardar E47 at modern Igaliku in the former Norse
Eastern Settlement in Greenland. This site is unique in that it represents a
church and manor farm from the 11th century, was the administrative and
religious center for the first settlement of the Norse in Greenland, and
remained thus until the extinction of the Norse ca 1450. As such, the Gardar
site has the potential to provide unique insights into the changing structure
and organization of Norse Greenland and its society response to climate change
and culture contact at this time period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site at
Gardar is very rich in archaeofauna, which is the source of concern and the
reason for this RAPID proposal. When Gardar was assessed as part of an IPY
project on how climate change was affecting cultural resources in the Arctic, it
was highlighted as a highly endangered site. As recently as 1981 the site was
shown to have great preservation of organic materials; unfortunately, the
previously favorable conditions are rapidly changing due to changing climate
conditions in the Arctic. The decrease in frozen ground is creating an
unidentifiable ?bone mush? out of much of the previously well preserved organic
materials at the site. In addition to the changing environmental conditions, the
local farmers have been cutting deep drainage ditches into the meadows
surrounding the site in order to drain off the now standing water. These ditches
have further destabilized the site exposing it to further melting and
destruction of organic data. The site has been nominated by the Government of
Greenland as a UN World Heritage Site because of its unique contribution to the
cultural history of modern Greenland, making the threatened data and the
scientific analyses and insights that could be gained all the more important.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field team has three objectives for the 2012 season:
to 1) carry out an intensive season of rescue excavation and site documentation
of the most endangered deposits; 2) ensure effective post-excavation curation
and analysis of the rescued materials; and 3) leave the Nunatta Katersugaasivia
Allagaaterqarfial/The Greenland National Museum &amp; Archives (NKA) with an
accurate digital site map and geophysical prospection results they will need to
effectively manage this nominated World heritage site for the benefit o f the
Greenlandic community.