* 1119181
* Collaborative Research: Differential Geometry and Statistics of Deformation Tensors
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Sarah Titus, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 74,502.00

Structural geology data and models rely on a variety of geometric concepts, such
as directions in space, ellipsoids, and deformation tensors. In mathematics,
these objects are often represented as elements of Lie groups and their
associated symmetric spaces. This vast mathematical theory has been applied to
geology in only a few instances. This project represents collaboration between
two structural geologists and a mathematician; the goal is to develop three new
applications of Lie groups to problems within structural geology. The first uses
Lie group-based differential equations methods to compute non-steady
deformations. This method is being applied to an existing dataset from a shear
zone in New Caledonia. The second applies established statistics of ellipsoids
to finite strain ellipsoid data from South Mountain, Maryland, which is a
classic field location within the field of structural geology. The third
develops a statistical theory of deformation tensors, and uses them to compute
best-fit deformations and to quantify the uncertainty in data and
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enriches the fundamental tool set that
geologists use to describe data and make inferences from data. It opens the door
to further cross-fertilization among geology, mathematics, and other fields
using related techniques, such as medical imaging. The products of the project
will be disseminated in scholarly publications, short courses, and free software
distributed to the geology community. The project will facilitate collaboration
and research between faculty from a four-year college and a research-intensive
university. The study will contribute to undergraduate education at both
institutions, and will provide funding for undergraduate research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by funds from the NSF EAR
Tectonics Program and the Collaborations in Mathematical Geosciences Program.