* 1119670
* CLASS: Continuous Learning and Automated Scoring in Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,147,729.00

This five-year project investigates how to provide continuous assessment and
feedback to guide students' understanding during science inquiry-learning
experiences, as well as detailed guidance to teachers and administrators through
a technology-enhanced system. The assessment system integrates validated
automated scorings for students' written responses to open-ended assessment
items (i.e., short essays, science narratives, concept mapping, graphing
problems, and virtual experiments) into the "Web-based Inquiry Science
Environment" (WISE) program. WISE is an online science-inquiry curricula that
supports deep understanding through visualization of processes not directly
observable, virtual experiments, graphing results, collaboration, and response
to prompts for explanations. In partnership with Educational Testing Services
(ETS), project goals are: (1) to develop five automated inquiry assessment
activities that capture students' abilities to integrate their ideas and form
coherent scientific arguments; (2) to customize WISE by incorporating automated
scores; (3) to investigate how students' systematic feedback based on these
scores improve their learning outcomes; and (4) to design professional
development resources to help teachers use scores to improve classroom
instruction, and administrators to make better informed decisions about teacher
professional development and inquiry instruction. The project targets general
science (life, physical, and earth) in three northern California school
districts, five middle schools serving over 4,000 6th-8th grade students with
diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds, and 29 science teachers. It
contributes to increase opportunities for students to improve their science
achievement, and for teachers and administrators to make efficient, evidence-
based decisions about high-quality teaching and learning.

A key research question guides this effort: How automated scoring of inquiry
assessments can increase success for diverse students, improve teachers'
instructional practices, and inform administrators' decisions about professional
development, inquiry instruction, and assessment? To develop science inquiry
assessment activities, scoring written responses include semantic, syntax, and
structure of meaning analyses, as well as calibration of human-scored items with
a computer-scoring system through the c-rater--an ETS-developed cyber learning
technology. Validity studies are conducted to compare automated scores with
human-scored items, teacher, district, and state scores, including sensitivity
to the diverse student population. To customize the WISE curriculum, the project
modifies 12 existing units and develops nine new modules. To design adaptive
feedback to students, comparative studies explore options for adaptive guidance
and test alternatives based on automated scores employing linear models to
compare student performance across randomly assigned guidance conditions;
controlling for covariates, such as prior science scores, gender, and language;
and grouping comparison studies. To design teacher professional development,
synthesis reports on auto-scored data are created to enable them to use evidence
to guide curricular decisions, and comments' analysis to improve feedback
quality. Workshops, classroom observations, and interviews are conducted to
measure longitudinal teachers' change over time. To empower administrators'
decision making, special data reports, using-evidence activities, individual
interviews, and observation of administrators' meetings are conducted. An
advisory board charged with project evaluation addresses both formative and
summative aspects.

A research-informed model to improve science teaching and learning at the middle
school level through cyber-enabled assessment is the main outcome of this
effort. A total of 21 new, one- to three-week duration standards-based science
units, each with four or more automatically scored items, serve as prototypes to
improve students' performance, teachers' instructional approaches, and
administrators' school policies and practices.