* 1119695
* REVSYS: Systematics of Paleotropical grammitid ferns (Polypodiaceae): using phylogenies to resolve generic circumscriptions and explore the evolution of morphological characters
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Thomas Ranker, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 420,378.00

An award is made to the University of Hawai'i at Manoa to study the evolution
and diversity of grammitid ferns, with a focus on tropical Asia and islands of
the Pacific. Grammitid ferns comprise a significant component of the vascular
epiphyte flora in forested ecosystems in the Paleotropics, especially at higher
elevations; however, further research is hindered by the lack of clearly defined
generic boundaries. The proposed research will conduct new molecular and
morphological analyses of the Paleotropical grammitid ferns to elucidate their
evolutionary history. Resulting hypotheses of relationships will be used to
elucidate generic boundaries, defining genera by discrete morphological
characters. This work will also undertake appropriate taxonomic revisions.
Hypotheses of relationships will be used to explore the evolution of
morphological characters and to test for correlations between changes in growth
habit and changes in morphology across species, as well as to test
biogeographical hypotheses that relate to possible mechanisms of speciation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be broadly beneficial to
society because it will resolve classification problems that are an impediment
to other research efforts and conservation management. The proposed research
will advance the discovery and understanding of diversity of grammitid ferns
and, thus, add to our knowledge of the evolution of vascular plants. The project
will involve international collaboration among scientists, provide critical
postdoctoral training to a recent PhD graduate, as well as doctoral training to
a graduate student and research experience for undergraduate students.