* 1119048
* Collaborative Research: Novel Isotopic Tests of the Mechanisms of Non-equilibrium Crystal Growth
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* E. Bruce Watson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 09/30/2014
* USD 68,968.00

Natural crystals (minerals) have stories to tell about the conditions that
prevailed during their growth, and so play a key role in the study of past
climates, ancient and modern volcanism, the plate tectonic motions responsible
for ancient mountain belts, among other problems. However, mineral chemistry
must be interpreted through some understanding of how environmental properties
get imprinted on compositions of growing crystals. It is generally assumed that
equilibrium thermodynamics controls the mineral-chemical archive. But emerging
evidence indicates that non-equilibrium processes, such as diffusion or
irreversible reactions, dominate the chemistry of many key minerals. And, it is
possible that the poorly understood thermodynamic properties of surfaces rather
than the well-studied properties of bulk solids and fluids control compositions
of some minerals. The goal of the Caltech-RPI proposal is to understand these
phenomena at an atomic (molecular) scale. Its results will advance
interpretations of mineral chemistry as constraints on the environments of
mineral growth, and thereby advance the study of Earth?s chemical systems and
past environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will focus its attention on
the zonation of isotopes (particularly naturally occurring isotopes of O and Si)
and trace elements in the mineral quartz, grown from natural or synthetic water-
rich solutions. Oxygen and silicon atoms make up most of the three dimensional
structure of quartz (and most other minerals), and proportions of their ?light?
and ?heavy? isotopes provide some of the most widely used records of the
geologic past. The distribution of these isotopes in individual minerals are not
always uniform. This heterogeneity, particularly differences in composition
between adjacent simultaneously growing crystal faces, tells us that some
influence other than environmental factors may have affected the growth of the
crystal?some manifestation of non-equilibrium growth. The Caltech-RPI study will
use the most recent advances in analytical geochemistry to document the co-
variations of O and Si isotopes associated with intracrystalline
heterogeneities, and their relationship to heterogeneities in trace element
abundances. The resulting chemical data will yield a sort of fingerprint for
mechanisms responsible for non-equilibrium growth. The study will then construct
first-principles chemical-physics models of mineral growth, constructed to
replicate and explain these chemical fingerprints.