* 1119485
* Teacher Residency Academy Alliance
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Rosalind Hale, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,026,948.00

Teacher residency academies (TRAs) are gaining attention as a powerful tool for
teacher preparation and professional development; however, there is a lack of
empirical study demonstrating their merit. The goal of the Teacher Residency
Academy Alliance (TRA2) - a partnership among Jackson State University, the
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, Xavier University of
Louisiana, and seven diverse urban and rural school districts in Mississippi and
Louisiana - is to investigate the implementation of a TRA model to recruit,
license, induct, employ, and retain 28 middle school and secondary science
teachers for high-need schools that serve more than 119,000 diverse students.
The Alliance will accomplish its goal by completing the following specific
objectives: create a high quality, rigorous, and clinically-based teacher
preparation program for aspiring middle and secondary science teachers; recruit,
prepare, employ, and support an increased number of diverse (e.g., African
American), effective middle and secondary science educators in high-need urban
and rural schools; and contribute to the knowledge base regarding the
implementation of a clinically-based science teacher preparation for middle and
secondary classrooms in diverse schools. The project will enable one cohort of
28 teachers to successfully complete the TRA2 program and obtaining state
licensure/certification in science teaching, a master's degree, and initiation
to National Board certification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's focus on
middle school and secondary science helps make TRA2 unique in its approach to
increase the number of high quality, culturally responsive, and licensed middle
and secondary science teachers prepared to teach in the nation's high-need urban
and rural schools. Project outcomes of this two year project are expected to
inform the design of additional TRAs that will serve as a novel alternative to
the traditional teacher preparation and post-baccalaureate certification
programs common throughout the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study design
will be formative. The data obtained through surveys of teachers, district
leaders, and principals, telephone interviews of mentors, and from extant data,
will provide important information regarding the implementation of TRA2.