* 1119704
* Understanding estuarine carbon cycling within the context of climatic and anthropogenic change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2016
* USD 449,532.00

Estuaries are among the most productive ecosystems on Earth, but are affected
negatively by a wide array of interacting human and climatic stressors,
including nutrient over-enrichment, climate warming, and changes in the amount
of freshwater input. The investigators seek to understand the cumulative effect
of these stressors through additions to and synthesis of a long-term water-
quality database for the Neuse River Estuary (NRE) in North Carolina, a
representative coastal-plain estuary with a growing human population in its
watershed. The NRE is experiencing increases in nutrient loading, frequency of
tropical cyclones, and climatic extremes. Nutrient and carbon-cycle
measurements, including CO2 exchange and microalgal (phytoplankton) production,
will be collected and studied for trends and patterns of variability that link
to specific stressors. It is hypothesized that regional climate patterns
modulate the impacts of management efforts, thus masking potential recovery in
the NRE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shared project data and results will help
researchers, managers, and decision makers to better predict and adaptively
manage water quality of estuarine ecosystems under the influence of human and
climatic changes. The project will provide diverse educational and employment
opportunities for post-doctoral researchers and students at the graduate,
undergraduate (including those enrolled in a companion NSF Research Experience
for Undergraduates program), and high-school levels. Web-based summaries and
classroom exercises will enhance K-12 science curricula and inform the public on
local estuarine water-quality issues.