* 1119715
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Will climate change alter rates of old field succession across the U.S. Eastern Deciduous Forest? A cross-latitude experimental network
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2011,11/30/2016
* Justin Wright, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2016
* USD 351,193.00

Abandoned agricultural land in the Eastern United States returns to forest in a
well-established pattern in which "old fields" of herbs and grasses gradually
give way to trees. This field-to-forest transition is a key event in ecosystem
development because it drives wildlife abundance, influences how ecosystems
store carbon and cycle nutrients, and often changes the balance between
landscapes dominated by alien or native plant species. One puzzling aspect of
this process is that old fields can persist for decades in the Northeast, but
tend to transition to forests in less than 10 years in the Southeast, despite
having many of the "field invading" tree species in common. Is this due to the
warmer climate of the Southeast, where trees can grow more quickly in
competition with herbs and grasses? If so, will "old fields" become forests more
quickly as the climate warms? Alternatively, the regions may be different in
other ways (e.g. soil quality). In this project the PIs have designed an
experiment to definitively answer this question, using a network of six field
experiments from New York to Florida. At each site, researchers will control the
composition of the old field plants and invading trees (using species common to
both the North- and Southeast), as well as varying the soil conditions to
approximate northern and southern soils. Researchers will monitor the rate at
which trees invade each experimental community, and use the results to formulate
a model that can make predictions about how climate, soil fertility, and
characteristics of particular species influence the rate of forest development
in the Eastern United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will be key for
understanding how agricultural landscapes of the Eastern United States will
continue to change over the next century, and will inform stakeholders on land
management issues with respect to carbon sequestration, biological diversity,
and other ecosystem services. Two graduate students and several undergraduates
will be trained, through the support of two junior faculty. The project also
includes use of several core ecological research facilities in the Eastern
United States.