* 1119027
* EAGER:  Science and Native-Knowledge in the Polar Heroic
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Robert Marc Friedman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

This unique history-of-science research project will investigate the Amundsen
and Nansen polar explorations. Although the project coincides with the 100th
anniversary of Amundsen?s South Pole expedition and the 150th anniversary of
Nansen?s birth, the significance transcends the particularity of 2011. As part
of the project, PI Robert Marc Friedman will develop a play focussing on the
relationship between these two titans of polar exploration. An initial
professional production of the proposed play is being planned, based on non-NSF
funding. The dramatization will be based on contemporary scholarly research, as
well as the research by the PI. Through this research and the development of the
stage play the PI hopes to illuminate two primary themes: 1) the role of science
in giving meaning and moral ballast to polar exploration, and 2) the role of
native Arctic peoples? know-how as a critical resource for polar researchers in
the age of heroic exploration.

The PI has several prior dramatizations about science, based on historical
research, that have been professionally produced. Dr. Friedman wrote a play in
2002 about the process by which physicist Lise Meitner was denied a Nobel Prize,
which was awarded to her male collaborator. Based on his experience with the
Meitner stage drama, which has enjoyed numerous international performances and
continues to be produced today also for conferences related to women in physics
and the world nuclear-physics meeting, Dr. Friedman proposes that the Amundsen-
Nansen play has similar potential to reach a broad audience, stimulate
reflection, and create broader interest in polar science.

Although Amundsen and Nansen have previously appeared on screen and stage, this
theatrical drama will bring the two men face to face for the first time. As
Friedman states, "A stage play should not be a history lecture. While seeking to
be faithful to the scholarly record, the play will nevertheless create its own
theatrical reality and seek to grasp and hold the audience as a compelling
drama. Why bring these two men together onto a stage? Why allow audiences to be
drawn into an epic struggle of accusation, anger, envy, and admiration between
two giants of polar exploration? How might we deconstruct myth and legend,
expose the ignoble along with the noble, and yet find opportunity to celebrate?"
These are questions that hold great interest not only to historians of science
but anyone interested in the processes of science and how individual personality
plays a role in the construction of scientific discovery itself.

In addition to the play and research the PI will create materials to accompany
performances into high school and university classrooms in order to expose
students to broader questions about the process of science, as well as create
interest in polar science.

The insights gained from the research entailed for the stageplay will be used as
a starting point to analyze exchanges of knowledge about polar environment
between members of what is often taken to be incommensurable cultures of
knowing. Exchanges of knowledge between native Arctic peoples and professional
scientists is increasingly receiving attention among Arctic social and natural
scientists. Building upon a growing literature on this topic, the PI will
develop research programs for studying such exchanges historically. Were those
explorers who were willing to learn Arctic natives? techniques of travel, making
clothing, building shelter, and preparing food also willing to consider these
peoples? observations and insight about nature? What did explorers, including
scientists, and Arctic peoples learn from each other about the nature of ice,
aurora, weather and climate, behavior and migratory patterns of animals, or
plant ecology?