* 1119795
* Building a molecular foundation for tropical mycorrhizal biology:  Sporocarp surveys of ectomycorrhizal fungal diversity of Southeast Asian dipterocarp forests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Kabir Peay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 08/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

The Dipterocarpaceae is the most diverse and abundant tree family in the lowland
tropical rain forests of Southeast Asia. There are more than 500 species and all
depend on root-associated fungi called ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungi to obtain
soil nutrients. Ectomycorrhizal fungi have evolved intimate associations with
particular groups of trees in forest communities across the world, but they are
rare in most lowland tropical regions. However, the extent of ECM fungal
diversity is unknown, thereby making tests of important evolutionary and
ecological hypotheses difficult. While soil fungi predominantly exist in
microscopic form, many fungi make macroscopic fruiting bodies during the sexual
stage of their life cycle, enabling taxonomic identifications that can be
coupled with molecular data. This project will make use of an existing
collection of identified and curated fungi in Malaysia to begin building and DNA
database for fungal diversity in dipterocarp forest. This effort will allow
environmental samples of soils and roots to be linked to specific species of
fungi. Also, fungal fruiting bodies from the dipterocarp forest will continue to
be collected, identified, and sequenced at a greater intensity with efforts to
identify host tree species of specific fungi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts for this project include the teaching and training of local Malaysian
assistants and students. We will also provide an intensive training workshop for
foreign and Malaysian researchers in the collection and identification of fungal
sporocarps in the field. Digital images of sporocarps will be publicly available
online. Since dipterocarps are also highly prized for timber and have
experienced some the highest deforestation rates in the world, this research
will be useful for implementing strategies for forest conservation and
regeneration.