* 1119373
* Using Thallium Isotopes to Assess Relative Contributions of Pelagic Sediments and Altered Oceanic Crust to Arc Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Sune Nielsen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2015
* USD 296,716.00

Intellectual merit: For decades, subduction zones have been studied intensely to
understand the physical and chemical mechanisms responsible for the surface
volcanism expressed as arcs around the globe. However, there are still large
uncertainties about how subducted slab material is discharged into the mantle
wedge. For example, despite almost ubiquitous sediment subduction [Plank and
Langmuir, 1998], many arc segments appear to have attenuated to negligible
sediment signatures [Tera et al., 1986; Morris et al., 1990; Leeman et al.,
2005]. Other are inferred to have carried strong chemical signatures from
altered ocean crust, even though sediment subduction is clearly taking place
[Regelous et al., 1997; Singer et al., 2007]. Are such discrepancies related to
the thermal structure of subducting slabs, whereby hotter slabs lose sediment at
shallower depths? Or related to sediment accretion in the forearc? Or do we
simply not currently have the appropriate means of tracing the different slab
fluxes in all arcs? It is proposed to evaluate the utility of novel thallium
(Tl) stable isotope systematics in quantifying subduction contributions of
pelagic sediments and altered oceanic crust from the Tonga-Kermadec, Aleutian
and Central American arcs. The Tl isotope system is unique because the mantle is
isotopically homogenous and depleted in Tl, whereas pelagic sediments and
altered oceanic crust are enriched in Tl by several orders of magnitude and
exhibit highly fractionated Tl isotope compositions. Thallium isotopes appear to
be ideally suited to determine slab fluxes to arc lavas. In addition, the three
targeted arcs represent different thermal regimes due to the large age range of
the subducting oceanic crust. Tl isotopes will be used in conjunction with more
conventional trace element and isotope ratios to quantify the role of sediments
versus altered oceanic crust and test whether there is a relationship between
the age of the subducting oceanic crust and the components incorporated into the
arc volcanics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The results obtained in
this study are expected to be of broad interest to all scientists working on
subduction zones. Geodynamicists may, for example, be able to incorporate
quantitative fluxes into their models on subduction zone melting processes,
which could help resolve if melting is driven by fluid fluxing or anhydrous
decompression. Quantification of fluid and/or melt fluxes from the slab in
individual arcs may also be used to model the thermal state of the slab/mantle
interface, where material is discharged to the mantle wedge. This project will
provide funds for a WHOI/MIT Joint Program graduate student and a newly
appointed WHOI scientist (PI Nielsen). An undergraduate student will also be
involved through the WHOI Summer Student Fellowship Program (funded by the NSF
REU program), which provides research funds for undergraduate students from
across the country. Even though both the chemical separation and mass
spectrometric techniques used to measure Tl isotopes are highly advanced, short
projects carried out over a 10?12 week period are possible. The PI has previous
experience from four undergraduate students in Oxford, UK, who with close
supervision learnt the technique and produced publishable results.