* 1119164
* Stochastic Aspects of Physical and Radar Meteorology
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2016
* Alexander Kostinski, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2016
* USD 400,252.00

The research seeks fundamental understanding in cloud physics, precipitation
physics, radar meteorology, and radiative transfer through clouds. To that end,
the researcher, in collaboration with graduate students, plans to conduct
theoretical investigations, perform numerical experiments, analyze data from a
variety of sensors, and suggest novel experiments. The specific objectives are
following.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Physics of rain: do all raindrops fall at
terminal speed? Theoretical investigation and analysis of data from video
disdrometers and Doppler radars will be conducted, with emphasis on fluctuations
of raindrop fall velocities and deviations from a terminal speed. This study
will have implications for retrieval by profilers, Doppler radars and
disdrometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Radar meteorology: the research will
search for coherent backscatter data based on new theoretical analyses. Data
analysis from short pulse radars, and exploratory signal processing will be
conducted. This study will have implications of recently discovered fluctuations
in raindrop surface tension in radar polarimetry. Non-Rayleigh signal statistics
of radar echoes and in-phase/quadrature signatures of heterogeneous targets will
also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Cloud physics: Is cloud ice
"sloppy"? Study of freezing of supercooled water droplets and the resulting
"scarred" ice and theoretical investigation of defect number density in ice
versus the degree of supercooling will be carried out. Investigation of
diffusional growth of cloud droplets with emphasis on the quasi-steady
approximation and associated relaxation times in mixed-phase clouds will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Radiative transfer through clouds:
surfactant-caused change in optical properties &lt;br/&gt;and the possibility of
hyperspectral signatures in cloud albedo will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:&lt;br/&gt;The questions
above have not been fully addressed previously. Furthermore, fundamental studies
of fluctuations in clouds and precipitation are likely to yield insights into
the structure of precipitation media, fundamental processes in clouds, radar
signal analysis and interpretation, and light attenuation in heterogeneous
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This research is also
likely to have broad impacts on cloud physics and development of precipitation.
It will improve characterization of rainfall spatial structure for better
rainfall estimation with weather radar, and radiative properties of clouds. In
addition, insofar as supercooled water is a metastable liquid, the associated
irreversible phase transition is of wide interest in material science. Hence,
study of the resulting defect riddled ice is likely to contribute to solid state
physics as well as to physical meteorology.