* 1119758
* Collaborative Research:   Seed defense syndromes of tropical forest trees: emergent properties of seed dormancy, defense and microbial interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Anne Arnold, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 147,081.00

Over the past 35 years, a robust theory of plant defenses has been developed to
explain why plant species vary in the toxicity and physical toughness of their
vegetative tissues. Application of this theory has broadened our understanding
of plant-herbivore interactions, yielding new insights into plant ecology and
evolution. This project will now extend the theory to cover defenses of seeds
against fungi in the soil. Seeds have only a limited capacity to adjust resource
acquisition and allocation to track a changing environment or to combat
individual threats. Fungi that attack and can kill seeds should therefore create
strong selection on suites of characteristics, or seed defense syndromes. This
project will quantify the chemical and physical defenses of seeds of 18 tree
species that exhibit a broad range of seed traits and germination behavior in
lowland tropical forest in Panama. Experiments will determine the time course of
seed survival, the efficacy of defenses at different times following dispersal
onto the soil, and the ways in which particular defenses correlate with others
to form syndromes of seed defensive traits. The study will offer a new
perspective on the ecological and evolutionary importance of seed dormancy and a
first step towards formalizing seed defense syndromes for an array of
ecologically important plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
unique, cross-disciplinary training in tropical ecology, molecular biology, and
fungal biology at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels and will
support research and publication by students from the United States and Latin
America. Research protocols and data sets will be posted on a bilingual, project
website, and results will be disseminated through the public outreach programs
of the Mycological Herbarium of the University of Arizona.