* 1119253
* PBS NewsHour: STEM Learning For Adults, Teens And At-Risk Populations
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Patti Parson, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,547,865.00

The PBS NewsHour STEM Learning project is a broadcast and online science
journalism and informal science education initiative to report breaking science
news and cutting-edge STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
research and researchers to a national audience. The multi-platform project
goals are to: (1) increase and improve the knowledge of the audience with
respect to science and technology; (2) stimulate the active engagement of the
audience with science and technology through interactive tools; and (3)position
the PBS NewsHour as a regular destination for in-depth and innovative science
reporting; (4) deploy new and creative digital tools to extend the impact of
NewsHour science reporting, especially for youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PBS
NewsHour is produced by MacNeil/Lehrer Productions and distributed by PBS to PBS
television and radio stations across the country, five nights per week. This
project is informed by an expert advisory board and other consultants. Project
evaluation will be conducted by City Square Associates. The formative evaluation
in year one will employ focus groups of adults from the general audience and
teens as well as a quantitative survey online to determine a benchmark of
current science knowledge, attitudes and behaviors. The evaluation in year two
will test digital components of the project in a usability lab setting to gather
information to help improve the quality and effectiveness of these deliverables.
The summative evaluation will administer a tracking study with the same
population surveyed in the first year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables
include: a minimum of 26 science documentary reports broadcast per year plus
additional in-studio interviews and coverage of breaking science news; a
revamped website, notably "Science and Tech To Go"; a weekly STEM interview or
report online featuring Hari Sreenivasan or other reporters; additional weekly
digital STEM reporting; and an expanded and redesigned outreach program for
teens and educators including an innovative, cloud-based student editing and
content-sharing initiative in collaboration with several science centers. Six
new PBS NewsHour Student Reporting Labs, established in high-need urban schools,
will shoot, edit, and post their videos on the web. The PBS NewsHour science
reports will be broadcast and featured on the NewsHour iPhone app, as well as
disseminated on the NewsHour's YouTube Channel, Disqus and UStream, Hulu.com,
with new science material updated daily on the web. The NewsHour is seen by more
than 7 million viewers each week, with additional audiences being reached by
radio, the Online NewsHour website, podcasts, and other social media. New
community-based programs expand the audience farther. The final summative report
will outline the impact of the project and identify the strategies and tactic
found to be most effective in making use of digital media to support project
goals.