* 1119359
* Collaborative Research and Development Project. School Structure and Science Success: Organization and Leadership Influences On Student Achievement
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Malcolm Butler, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 04/30/2013
* USD 299,249.00

The School Organization and Science Achievement (SOSA) Project will document
factors explaining variations in science achievement across schools enrolling
ethnically and linguistically diverse students. The research question is: what
leadership and organizational features at the school level are associated with
mitigating science achievement gaps? Previous school effectiveness studies
demonstrate school leadership and social capital influencing student
achievement; the SOSA project is unique with its focus on science achievement.
Researchers at the University of Connecticut and the University of South Florida
St. Petersburg, in collaboration with school districts in their respective
states, will identify school leadership practices that can be connected with
reductions in achievement gaps related to student ethnicity, English fluency,
and social status. At the conclusion of the five-year project, the findings will
take the form of recommendations about leadership practices and school
organization that can be implemented in other school settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a mixed methods design by combining
statistical modeling and qualitative data. Multiple regression analyses
highlight those schools populated by fifth graders that have greater or lesser
achievement gaps in science. Using social capital theory (i.e., school norms,
communication channels, and trustworthiness) comparisons of positive and
negative outlier schools will be made via interviews of building principals,
classroom teachers and community representatives. The expectation is that
schools providing more equitable science experiences to all students will
exhibit stronger social capital compared to buildings with disparities in
science test scores across demographic categories. These insights will be
supplemented by multilevel structural equation modeling to determine the
strength of association between various school climate measures (e.g., teacher-
to-principal trust, correspondence between teacher and principal perceptions of
leadership, and school/community ties) and science achievement as measured by
statewide fifth grade science tests. In addition, growth analyses will be used
to detect shifts over time and provide insights about the links between policy
changes or leadership adjustments, inasmuch as science achievement gaps are
affected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By working with 150 schools in two states, this
collaborative research project is designed to generate findings applicable in
other school systems. Particularly in settings where science achievement gaps
are large, and especially when such gaps vary between schools even when the
student populations are similar, the findings from this study will have
practical leadership implications. Expertise in this project includes science
education, educational leadership, and statistical modeling. This complementary
combination increases the depth of the project's efforts along with expanding
its potential impacts. Key questions addressed by this project include: to what
extent is leadership in science similar to or different from leadership in other
subject areas? how do variations in leadership design (e.g., top-down versus
distributed leadership) contribute to reductions in science achievement gaps? to
what degree can effective leadership mitigate other factors that exacerbate the
challenges of providing high quality science learning experiences for every
child? Findings will be disseminated via the SOSA Project website, along with
leadership development strategies. Deliverables include templates to replicate
the study, case studies for professional development, and strategies for
supporting the development of science teacher-leaders.