* 1119518
* Mathematical Argumentation in Middle School: Bridging from Professional Development to Classroom Practice
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Harriette Stevens, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2014
* USD 499,933.00

Mathematical Argumentation in the Middle School is an exploratory project that
is working in collaboration with teachers to increase their knowledge of
mathematics for teaching in middle school. In addition to geometry and algebra,
the professional development is focusing on the role of mathematical
argumentation in the middle school and strategies for increasing argumentation.
The research component of the project is providing insights into how teachers
use their mathematical knowledge to increase argumentation in the classroom and
to help students build skills in mathematical argumentation. In addition, the
project is studying student outcomes such as reasoning, communication skills,
and mathematical knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project researchers are
using both qualitative and quantitative methodologies to ensure that they have
high quality data and analysis that will provide insights into the following
research questions: 1) How do teachers use what they learn from the professional
development (PD) experiences when they teach in the classroom? 2) To what extent
does teachers? use of the project materials and what they learn in the PD result
in mathematical argumentation in their classroom discourse? 3) Do students gain
conceptual understanding of the mathematics as a result of their participation
in argumentation in the classroom? Based on previous research, there is adequate
evidence to believe that argumentation in the classroom does increase for
participants in the workshop, but the researchers are seeking a better
understanding of how teachers use their knowledge and the project materials to
enact such an important change in mathematics lessons and in student learning.
The professional development uses the dynamic software Geometers' Sketchpad, a
carefully-designed, geometry curricular unit, and student materials to help
teachers see how to set up a classroom environment that supports mathematical
conjectures, arguments, and discussion. The research is done in the classroom
and assesses the various components of the professional development in promoting
argumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is providing insights into how
teachers use their mathematical knowledge to implement changes in the classroom.
The project is creating effective professional development strategies, a middle
school curriculum unit on geometry that emphasizes argumentation, and associated
materials. The research is explaining how teachers use their knowledge and the
materials and providing information on how students' conceptual knowledge
develops through argumentation.