* 1119693
* Integrating Environmental Modulation, Osmosensitivity and Signaling in a Model Osmoreceptor
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Darren Lerner, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 490,991.00

The regulation of salt and water balance, or osmoregulation, is fundamental to
the proper function of the molecules that carry on the business of life in
living organisms. This project addresses the gap in knowledge of how osmotic
balance is monitored and how an organism responds to any deviation from the
optimal state. Detection of a change in this critical balance by osmoreceptor
cells is the first step in activating the mechanisms which ensure osmotic
balance is restored and maintained. Nevertheless, our understanding of how
osmoreceptor cells work has been hindered by their complex structure and
arrangement among other cells in the brain, kidney and other organs. This makes
it extremely difficult to develop useful experimental approaches. The prolactin
cell of the tilapia solves this problem. Prolactin is an osmoregulatory hormone
in tilapia, a remarkable fish that can live in fresh water and in salinities
exceeding that of seawater. Unlike mammals, prolactin cells in tilapia are
arranged into a nearly homogeneous mass in the pituitary gland making it easy to
study how the cell is regulated. Prolactin cells have been shown to function as
osmoreceptors that respond directly to osmotic changes by altering prolactin
secretion which restores osmotic balance. An increase in cell size is the
trigger that activates cell mechanisms that increase prolactin secretion. This
project will investigate how cell size controls the activity/expression of the
gene that encodes prolactin. It is anticipated that this work will increase the
fundamental understanding of how osmoreceptor cells work in an economically
important food fish grown in fresh water and seawater.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will allow the recruitment, education, and
training of high school, undergraduate and graduate students, including those of
under-represented minorities from within our multi-ethnic, culturally diverse,
University and area schools. Progress will be conveyed via institutional
educational programs and will be posted on a publically accessible website:
http://www.hawaii.edu/himb/faculty/grau.html.