* 1119731
* Collaborative Research: The Genetics of Convergence at Multiple Levels: Evolution of Colorful Dewlaps in Anolis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Hopi Hoekstra, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2016
* USD 641,570.00

Convergent evolution of similar form by distantly related species is a common
feature of organismal evolution and among the most tangible signatures of
natural selection. Anolis lizards in the Caribbean provide a textbook example,
with species similar in morphology, ecology and behavior arising independently
in similar habitats on each of the Greater Antillean islands. This project
exploits the diversity and repeated evolution of coloration in Anolis lizards to
study the genetic basis of convergent evolution. Using RNA-sequencing and
detailed phenotypic characterization, this study will identify genes associated
with colorful pigmentation and determine if convergence results from changes in
the same genes and developmental pathways. Illuminating the genetics of
convergent evolution will enrich our understanding of the evolutionary process,
and insight into the genetics of colorful pigmentation will have far-reaching
impact on the study of vertebrate biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the
diversity in Anolis dewlap color is so striking, this project presents a
visually appealing example of evolution with broader impact on the educational
and general community. The principal investigators will design a public exhibit
at the Harvard Museum of Natural History to highlight the genetic basis of
convergent evolution and coloration, illuminate the research process, and teach
basic lessons about adaptive radiation and evolution. The exhibit will be made
available to other museums. Also, undergraduates in this project will complete
species pages for the Encyclopedia of Life for each species in this study. These
web pages are easily accessible and will contain data summaries, photographs and
videos. They will serve as useful resource for students, educators and the
media.