* 1119697
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Multidimensional Democracy: The Supply and Demand of Political Representation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Thomas Carsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

The central intellectual merit of this study is in providing a better
understanding of the cornerstone of American democracy: political
representation. Scholars have devoted several decades of research to
representation, but past work typically studied the concept froma narrow
perspective. The literature indentifies four dimensions, or components, of
representation: (1) policy, or the influence of constituent opinion on voting
behavior, (2) service, which involves individual assistance to constituents, (3)
allocation, or the securing of funding for districts projects, and (4) symbolic,
which denotes a connection from identity traits. Although this work collectively
provides a comprehensive view of representation, most individual studies only
focus on one component, and thus omit important elements of the process.
Furthermore, most past research focuses on the behavior of elites. Less is known
about citizens' preferences for the components of representation. This research
utilizes three sources of original data to develop a supply-and-demand theory of
representation that unifies those four dimensions and accounts for both elites'
priorities (supply) and citizen demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the
investigator examines the supply of representation through survey experiments
administered to state legislators and with a new archive of state legislators'
websites. Both data sources are used to assess how representatives prioritize
the components of representation when interacting with constituents. Second, the
study also examines citizen demand for representation through survey experiments
administered to a sample of American adults. Preliminary results show that
demand is driven by how citizens expect government to play a role in their
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have several broader impacts.
Upon completion, the three datasets will be made publicly available (the surveys
in anonymous form). This project also has social value because it will inform
discussions of the quality of representation in America.