* 1119379
* RUI: Crystallization of Hydrous Silicic Melts in Nature and Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mona-Liza Sirbescu, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2015
* USD 181,371.00

Intellectual Merit: New evidence suggests that thin sheets of crystal-free
granitic melts intruded in the upper crust can cool to subliquidus temperatures
within weeks. Because hydrous silicic melts are sluggish to nucleate, such
strong undercooling may govern their crystallization and geochemical evolution
paths. It is proposed that dissolved water and other fluxing components (e.g.,
Li, B) lower melt viscosity and the glass-transition temperature, thus allowing
the silicate liquids to persist at unusually low temperatures. Geothermometric,
textural and compositional data have revealed important aspects of the
crystallization history of such melts, but more experimental constraints are
needed to decipher the textural and geochemical consequences of undercooling.
The goal of this three-year proposal is to identify links between texture,
composition, and crystallization history of silicic intrusive rocks by using
field-based and experimental observations. Reconnaissance experimental evidence
has demonstrated the existence of hydrous Li- and B-bearing haplogranitic melts
at temperatures as low as 400°C at a pressure of 300 MPa. Glass transition
temperatures (ranging between 250-300°C) measured for these compositions support
the experimental observations. Nucleation and crystallization of these
undercooled liquids was metastably delayed for at least 30 days. When
crystallization finally took place, distinctive textures resulted depending on
degree of undercooling and amount of dissolved water, that are specific to
pegmatites (spherulitic, graphic, skeletal, unidirectional, etc.), aplites (fine
grained, equigranular), and rhyolites (porphyritic, euhedral). High crystal
growth rates can lead to chemical and isotopic boundary layers ahead of the
solidification front. Nucleation and growth rates are consistent with cooling
timelines of small intrusions or sheets within larger incrementally built
plutons. A field-based component of the study will constrain emplacement
temperatures, temperature gradients, cooling rates, undercooling, and fluid
saturation during inward crystallization of magma sheets. Proposed research
includes fluid and melt inclusion studies, conductive-cooling simulations, and
mineral and isotopic analyses on samples from two study areas. Focus will be on
chilled margins and layered, unidirectional, and spherulitic textures
interpreted as consequences of rapid crystallization. Attempts will be made to
identify and quantify the existence of chemical and isotopic boundary layers. An
experimental component will address crystallization of synthetic melt
compositions seeking to quantify the kinetics of crystallization of fluxed
granitic melt at 300 MPa and various degrees of undercooling and cooling rates.
We will expand our study on nucleation and crystal growth rates in the
B-Li-H2O-haplogranite system with emphasis on the role of water on controlling
the crystallization kinetics and, ultimately, the magmatic texture. For a
complete characterization of the synthetic melts, the viscosities and glass
transition temperatures will be measured at the Univ. of Missouri, in
collaboration with Dr. Whittington. Chemical diffusion ahead of the
solidification front during rapid, disequilibrium crystallization will also be
investigated in experimental charges. Diffusion-driven boundary layers and their
potential impact on mineral and textural zoning, melt inclusion compositions,
and geochemical fractionation will be evaluated. The impact within the broader
petrologic community will be significant, because the interpretation of texture
based on integrated field-experiment observations, identification of low
temperature melts in nature, and diffusion-related isotopic fractionation
produced by rapid crystallization will improve our understanding of undercooled
melts, regardless of their composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: To
disseminate our results within the University and larger community, an
educational exhibit on the origin and significance of magmatic texture will be
developed as part of the Museum of Cultural and Natural History at Central
Michigan University (CMU) and public presentations will be given with hands on
crystallization activities. This RUI project will benefit the CMU undergraduate
program in that it will allow the PI to train and mentor several undergraduates
involved at all stages of research. Resources and a very strong commitment to
undergraduate research exist at CMU. Undergraduate CMU students will have the
opportunity to travel and work at prestigious research laboratories at GFZ-
Potsdam, Germany, Univ. of Michigan, and Univ. of Missouri.