* 1119550
* Tracking the Siberian-Laurentian Detrital Transition in the Farewell Terrane, Southwestern Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Brian Hampton, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2013
* USD 116,397.00

The origin and tectonic history of many of the crustal fragments (i.e. terranes)
that make up the deepest parts of the Cordillera in the Alaska Range (southern
Alaska) are largely unknown. The focus of this project is on the Farewell
terrane of southwestern Alaska, which has long been considered to be a displaced
crustal block that originated in western Canada. However, recent studies
indicate that the Farewell terrane may have instead originated in circum-Arctic
regions (e.g. eastern Siberia). The primary goal of this study is to test the
following hypotheses related to the origin and tectonic history of the Farewell
terrane: (1) All components of the Farewell were part of the Siberian-Arctic
margin during the Paleozoic and have since undergone late-stage transport to
their current position in the North American Cordillera; (2) The oldest parts of
the Farewell reflect Siberian-Arctic origins while the younger components of the
terrane record the early-stage accretion and collision with the Cordilleran-
Laurentian margin. As part of this project, this research group will conduct one
of the first detailed field studies on sedimentary basin deposits that make up
the middle and upper Paleozoic parts of the Farewell terrane. In addition to
carrying out geologic mapping and documenting the thickness and extent of these
strata, U-Pb geochronologic analyses on detrital zircon grains from these units
will be conducted. In the case of the Farewell terrane, the detrital record of
late-stage transport would most likely be reflected through zircons that are age
equivalent with circum-Arctic magmatic source areas. Alternatively, an early-
stage transport model may be reflected by a detrital transition through time to
more Laurentian-dominated source areas. At the broadest scientific scale, this
project will contribute a better understanding on the tectonic history and
provenance of crustal blocks that make up the basement to the northernmost
extent of the North American Cordillera in southwest Alaska. Results from this
study will also contribute to an ever-expanding U-Pb detrital zircon database
that is emerging from Alaska as well as the western parts of the continental U.
S., Canada, and eastern Siberia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transport and
accretion of crustal fragments to tectonic plate boundaries has occurred
throughout Earth?s history and is widely recognized as a fundamental process by
which mountain belts evolve and continents grow. In the case of Alaska, greater
that 95 per cent of the state consists of accreted terranes, each of which
carries with it an inherited geologic history as well as possible economic
potential. For example, the Arctic Alaska terrane of northern Alaska is directly
adjacent to petroleum-producing regions of the North Slope and is also the
world?s largest geologic source and producer of zinc. At roughly the size of
Switzerland, the Farewell terrane is one of the largest crustal fragments in the
Alaska Range and is located just south of Arctic Alaska in one of the more
remote and geologically frontier regions of the North American Cordillera. In
addition to the scientific objective of this study, this project will also
contribute to the field and lab training of students from Michigan State
University and expose them to the challenges and rewards of conducting research
in delicate and remote backcountry settings as well as in cutting-edge research
lab facilities. As part of an educational outreach component to this project,
the research team will be working with a group of Michigan Earth Science
teachers to develop accretionary tectonic analogs from Alaska as a means for
understanding and recognizing similar (and much older) events that are preserved
in the exposed rock record of northern Michigan.