* 1119589
* Persistence of Teacher Change in Rural Schools: Assessing the Short- and Long-term Impact of Professional Development on K-2 Science Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Judith Sandholtz, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2016
* USD 532,004.00

This research study is examining the persistence of improved teacher skills
achieved during the K-2 Science &amp; Technology Assistance for Rural Teachers
and Small Districts project (K-2 STARTS) funded by the State of California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;K-2 STARTS provided four years of professional development
to teachers in 16 rural school districts in California with high populations of
traditionally underserved students. 39 teachers each received 110 hours of
professional development. Project data indicate that the project met its goals
by increasing teacher content knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge,
abilities to integrate science and literacy and to use research-based
instructional strategies. K-2 STARTS also improved the capacity of teachers to
use science resources and to network with teachers from their own and other
rural districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is doing a longitudinal
research study by extending data collection for 35 teachers for two years after
the end of K-2 STARTS. It is using the measures from the original evaluation,
which include teacher surveys and interviews, classroom observations, surveys
for school administrators, teacher-developed unit artifacts, and student science
notebooks, and adding two more measures, administrative interviews and
school/district documents. In the final year, the project is doing data analysis
and dissemination. The project is exploring the persistence of the knowledge and
skills of the teachers over time, as well as their continued use of science
instructional practices. It will also study the persistence of school/district
support for science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;External evaluation is being
conducted by Dr. Loretta Kelley of Kelley, Peterson, and Associates, Inc. It
focuses on project progress through formative and summative components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Longitudinal studies of the effects of teacher
professional development are rare. The increased knowledge concerning the
persistence of the new knowledge and skills obtained through K-2 STARTS
professional development, and why and to what extent they decay over time, is a
significant goal.