* 1119908
* Can Institutions Cure Clientelism?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Daniel Gingerich, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 145,622.00

The ballot is the fundamental instrument of democracy in the modern world.
Perhaps more than any other device utilized in contemporary elections, it has
come to embody the process by which voter preferences structure the makeup of
the ruling elite. Yet most citizens of democratic polities take for granted the
series of institutional innovations in the dissemination and composition of the
ballot that made it possible for this instrument to serve today as a symbol of
the free and authentic convictions of voters. Among such innovations, it was a
specific packet of reforms in ballot preparation and distribution, the so-called
Australian ballot reforms, which were responsible for one of the most crucial
turning points in the history of democracy - the transition from de jure to de
facto secrecy in vote choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a
rigorous examination of how the use of the Australian ballot (AB)- a uniform
ballot paper permitting the selection of any registered candidate and which is
printed and distributed by electoral authorities (as opposed to candidates or
parties)- affected the fundamental structure of party politics in Brazil after
its introduction in the early 1960s. Engaging the claims of a literature on
institutions and clientelism in developing democracies, the impact of the AB on
four key outcomes will be evaluated: 1) the electoral strength of incumbent
state party machines; 2) the degree of electoral control enjoyed by local vote
brokers; 3) the electoral strength of right parties; and 4) the scope of
participation in the electoral process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to get
leverage on the impact of the AB, this project will examine municipal-level vote
returns for federal deputy and senate contests in Brazil during the 1958-1966
period. The analysis will exploit the fact that the peculiar manner in which the
AB was rolled out by the country's civilian and military rulers created a
natural experiment of history of exceptionally rare purity. During this period,
legislative elections - which put seats for both the Chamber of Deputies and
Senate simultaneously up for grabs - were held at three different times: 1958,
1962, and 1966. In 1958, the AB was in effect throughout all of Brazil for
senatorial contests, whereas candidate printed ballots were utilized throughout
all of Brazil for the deputy contests. In 1962, the AB remained in effect for
all of Brazil for the senatorial contests but was also extended to deputy
contests in the state of SÃ£o Paulo, the city of Rio de Janeiro, and state
capitals. In 1966, basically the same situation obtained, save for the fact that
the AB for deputy contests was extended further to all municipalities with more
than one hundred thousand inhabitants. Taking maximal advantage of the
geographically and institutionally targeted and temporally staggered nature of
ballot reform in Brazil, this project will employ several variants of the
difference-in-difference technique to estimate the causal impact of the AB on
the outcomes of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirically evaluating the impact
of the AB on the structure of political representation has been one of the great
challenges of institutionally oriented social science. It is a task which has
courted the efforts of political scientists, economists, and historians, and one
which has spawned numerous investigations into the historical experiences of
polities around the world. Given the peculiarities of the AB's adoption in
Brazil, it is reasonable to posit that the current project has the potential to
produce the cleanest evaluation of the impact of this institution in the entire
social science corpus on the subject. As a consequence, the findings of this
project are likely to contribute to ongoing policy debates about the
attractiveness of adopting the AB within polities that have not yet done so.
More broadly, the research design employed by this project may in the future
serve as a model of how to simultaneously exploit spatial, temporal, and
institutional variation in the adoption of formal rules in order to estimate the
impact of aspects of democratic institutional design. The project will also have
a lasting impact in terms of training graduate students and educating
undergraduates. The substantial administrative and coding duties required of
each group of students will provide a hands on tutorial on the organization and
execution of large scale quantitative research projects in the social sciences.