* 1119472
* Water in Nominally Anhydrous Minerals of the Lower Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Sheila Seaman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2015
* USD 174,989.00

Intellectual Merit. In contrast to long-held opinion that the lower crust and
mantle are nearly anhydrous domains, it is increasingly recognized that
nominally anhydrous minerals (NAMs; i.e., those for which water is not a
stoichiometric part of the mineral formula) potentially constitute a significant
inventory of water in the Earth?s interior. Water plays a critical role in many
fundamental interior Earth processes. For example, despite low estimated
abundance, water in the mantle it is thought to influence convection and
recycling of chemical components, planetary rheology and deformation, and
seismic velocity characteristics. The Earth?s crust is dominated by feldspar and
quartz that may host significant amounts (up to hundreds of ppm) of water, thus
comprising a major planetary water reservoir. In an attempt to quantify the
content and distribution of water in the lower crust, this project focuses on a
study of the Athabasca Granulite Terrane, northern Saskatchewan, that exposes
some ~20,000 km2 of representative lower crustal lithologies. Concentrations of
water will be measured and mapped using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
spectroscopy. Cathodoluminescence imaging also will be used to identify
preserved primary zoning in quartz that might correlate with localization of
primary fluid inclusions. The abundance and distribution of water in these rocks
will be quantified and this knowledge used to assess the following aspects of
the influence of water on crustal processes: [1] to what extent does water in
NAMs act as a flux to promote partial melting in the lower crust?, [2] to what
extent are metamorphic reactions that seemingly involve only ?anhydrous?
minerals actually dependent on progressive dehydration of NAM reactants?, and
[3] to what does water liberated from NAMs influence crustal deformation?
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. In addition to the typical societal
benefits of training and financially supporting graduate and undergraduate
students, this project offers the opportunity of continuing a rich exchange of
ideas in a field setting with members of the Geologic Survey of Canada and the
Saskatchewan Geologic Survey, and to conduct evening geologic forums for the
residents of the remote town of Stony Rapids, Canada. The study area will be the
site of a field forum for geophysicists and geologists in the future. Research
results will also be shared in various outreach activities. For example, a
series of articles is to be published in Canadian newspapers, focusing on the
geology of the Athabasca Granulite Terrane; these are based on interviews with
PI Williams.