* 1119784
* QEIB: Theory for communities in nonstationary environments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Peter Chesson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 595,063.00

Although the natural world is almost always in flux, ecological theory has been
largely developed using mathematical models that assume that ecosystems come to
a stable equilibrium. In recent decades, such models have been supplemented and
partially replaced by models in which the physical environment varies in time
and space. However, those model environments have invariably had the property of
stationarity, which means that they can be characterized by a fixed set of
statistics, such as averages, about which fluctuations occur, and measures of
the magnitude and nature of the fluctuations. Although much has been learned
from these models, it is now clear that the assumption of stationarity does not
hold in nature, because environments are not stable over time. The challenge of
anthropogenic climate change means that more realistic nonstationary assumptions
about the physical environment are essential for the future, but they are also
needed for more accurate understanding of past and present ecology. This
research will develop models of interacting species subject to nonstationary
environments to predict the impact of nonstationarity on the maintenance of
biological diversity. The project will develop mathematical tools for making
ecological predictions about diversity maintenance that allow stationary
predictions to be replaced or modified for more realistic, nonstationary
conditions. This will help show which aspects of species and of the environment
have large effects on the maintenance of diversity in the nonstationary case as
compared with the previous stationary assumptions. The project will also study
how migration of different species at different rates in response to a changing
environment affects the outcomes of the interactions between species and the
maintenance of biological diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
research will have application to the conservation and management of natural
environments, and help society face the challenges of global environmental
change, for which nonstationary theory is essential. In addition, there will be
a major education and training component for students and postdoctoral fellows
in new tools for ecological models in nonstationary environments. High school
teachers also will be given training in ecological models for changing
environments to foster the development of materials for classroom instruction.