* 1119724
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Morphogen Gradients
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Cyrill Muratov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 249,999.00

The project describes a series of theoretical and experimental studies of
morphogen gradients, defined as the concentration fields of chemical substances
that control spatial patterns of cell differentiation in developing tissues.
Molecular studies of embryogenesis have identified morphogen gradients in
systems as diverse as body axes specification in insects and patterning of
mammalian neocortex. Current studies of morphogen gradients move in an
increasingly quantitative direction and demand the development of a rigorous
theoretical framework that can be used to interpret experimental results and
guide systems-level analyses of pattern formation mechanisms. This project
develops such a framework, emphasizing the dynamics of morphogen gradient
formation. This research combines rigorous mathematical and computational
analysis of a general class of reaction-diffusion models of morphogen gradient
formation and application of these models to a specific pattern formation event
in Drosophila embryo.

Broader impacts of proposed work include the development of a general
mathematical framework for a highly conserved biological process. One of the
main outcomes of proposed activity is a set of analytical results that can be
used for the back-of-the-envelope analysis of pattern formation dynamics in a
wide range of developmental systems. The proposed theoretical and experimental
studies go hand-in-hand with the development of educational program that
provides interdisciplinary training in the emerging field of developmental
systems biology.