* 1119719
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Development of Early Household Inequality at Pirque Alto, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2012
* USD 0.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Marc Bermann, Mr Andrew Tenpas will explore the
extent to which productive activities, external ties, and ceremonial activities
formed the basis for social leadership, status differentiation, and community
integration in the Late Formative period (1150 BC-AD 600), and how these changed
in the Middle Horizon period ((AD 600-1100). He will focus on the small village
site of Pirque Alto which is located near Cochabamba, Bolivia. The research is
important from an archaeological perspective because it provides insight into
the processes which led to the development of complex large scale societies. It
also sheds light on the dynamics of small scale villages which exist today in
many parts of the world. The work will further understanding of how social
integration is maintained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Late Formative phase was a
time of societal transformation, with marked population growth, economic
intensification, increased social hierarchy, and the spread of regional-level
polities. It is not understood however how these changes were manifested in
processes at the household and community levels. While the Cochabamba Valley has
seen extensive regional survey, revealing a long sequence of occupation,
excavation has largely focused on Late Horizon sites, and almost no household
archaeology has been conducted for the Formative through Middle Horizon periods.
Lacking systematic investigation of sociopolitical and economic processes at
residential sites, major developments of the Formative can only be sketched in
the most general way. Study of household variability in status, consumption, and
economic activities will provide data needed to: (i) test a hypothesized
'economic boom' that underwrote social inequality and political leadership in
Cochabamba between the Late Formative and Middle Horizon periods, (ii) assess a
general model of domestic economy and change in prehistoric agricultural
societies, and (iii) test current hypotheses concerning the role played in
Cochabamba populations by interaction with the highland Tiwanaku empire.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has multiple broader impacts. It will serve to
strengthen collaborative ties between American universities and the Cochabamba
cultural institutions, with community outreach and feedback a strong focus. The
work will also further the training of Bolivian and North American students and
archaeologists in basic fieldwork techniques to more advanced material analysis
training, with constant emphasis placed upon anthropologically and problem-
oriented research. Finally, this project contributes two approaches that are
entirely lacking in Cochabamba archaeology to date: a greater focus on household
processes, and investigation at the community level.