* 1119476
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Social Structure, Ecological Organization and Individual Action at Three Swahili Settlements
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* John Stoetzel, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2012
* USD 18,466.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Adria LaViolette, Jack Stoetzel will conduct an
archaeological investigation to reconstruct the relationship between Swahili
people and coastal ecosystems between A.D. 600 and 1600. Swahili identity
emerged along the coast of tropical East Africa during the first- millennium
A.D. and is predicated on a cosmopolitan worldview that includes an openness to
engage with external material cultures and ideologies. Physical evidence of the
cosmopolitan worldview characteristic of Swahili identity includes the adoption
of rice agriculture, integration into the Indian Ocean commercial system, and
conversion to Islam. This project treats archaeological plant remains as
indicators of past ecological ecosystems. Two types of plant residues will be
considered in this research: (a) microscopic phytolith remains which are to be
used to reconstruct species composition of botanical communities through time;
and (b) visible charcoal remains which will be analyzed to identify cultural use
and preference of particular plant species recovered in a range of
archaeological contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of Swahili influence
on environmental change along tropical coastlines that will result from this
project will insert East Africa into the burgeoning discussion of coastal
resource management. The research will provide insight into the relationship
between a Muslim society and the ecosystems it occupied. The project will help
explain contemporary ecological conditions and create the opportunity to model
effects of current and future social activity throughout the region. This
research therefore has the potential to inform future environmental legislation
mandates throughout coastal East Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Swahili
archaeology has largely overlooked the potential that environmental archaeology
can have in reconstructing past lifestyles across the region. When evoking
environmental conditions, previous researchers situate Swahili within
contemporary conditions or quote historic documents. By acknowledging that human
actions influence environmental conditions, this research has the potential to
situate Swahili actions within ecological contexts they experienced as well as
track the effects such decisions had on plant communities through time. In order
to achieve this result, the project combines theories from both household
archaeology and environmental archaeology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
achieve the goals of this research, a comparative collection must be created
that represents microscopic phytolith and charcoal specimen available across the
Swahili coast. The time and financial investment which this research program
must undertake to create a comparative collection will be rewarded by the
development of an online database that will feature digital photographs,
descriptions, and names of unique shapes identified in both phytoliths and
charcoal wood- grain. African scholars and those otherwise interested in the
area will benefit from the database because the collection reduces start- up
costs and time investment necessary to research archaeological plant remains
throughout tropical East Africa.