* 1119843
* Collaborative Research: A new paradigm for understanding how leaf litter quality affects stream ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2015
* USD 77,007.00

Leaves are an important food source for organisms living in streams. When leaves
fall into streams fungi and bacteria begin to break them down, making them a
good food source for insects and fish. Although hundreds of studies show that
leaves from different plant species decompose at different rates, the
consequences of these differences are not well understood. This project tests if
differences among riparian plant species affect pathways of energy flow in
stream food webs, with consequences for microbial diversity and transfer of
nutrients to insects and fish. In particular, the investigators will test the
non-intuitive hypothesis that leaves that decompose more slowly provide a better
food source to organisms higher in the food web than quickly decomposing leaves.
This work will advance the field by providing a framework for predicting how
variation in plants living on stream banks affects major energy pathways in
stream food webs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is important for managing
and restoring streams. Managers spend millions of dollars each year re-
vegetating riparian zones but need better information on what to plant and how
different trees will affect the health and functioning of streams. This study
will provide the information needed to fill this knowledge gap.