* 1119248
* Collaborative Research: Time Scales and Dimensions of Rheological Heterogeneity and Fabric Evolution in the Lower Continental Crust during Extensional Orogenic Collapse
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Keith Klepeis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 290,575.00

This project is providing new information on how thickened lower crust in
mountain belts extends and thins during orogenic collapse. Field studies and
numerical models demonstrate that the strength, thickness, and mechanical
properties of the lower continental crust are key factors that influence the
behavior of the entire lithosphere during orogenesis, including the localization
of strain into shear zones. However, there still is uncertainty about how these
properties change during orogenic cycles and how they influence patterns of
deformation. Fiordland, New Zealand provides a natural laboratory for resolving
these questions because it exposes over 3000 square kilometers of ancient
Mesozoic lower crust. This project is determining the time scales, physical
dimensions, and effects of mafic-intermediate magmatism, crustal melting,
metamorphism, and deformation on the evolution of this lower crustal section.
The work integrates field mapping with three-dimensional analyses of
deformation, pressure-temperature-time-deformation paths for rocks, and uranium-
lead and samarium-neodymium isotope geochronology. These tools are helping to
resolve the thermal and mechanical structure of Fiordland's lower crust over 25
million years and at depths of 35-50 kilometers during a transition from
shortening and crustal thickening to extension and crustal thinning. They also
are revealing the changing nature of strain localization processes, including
the formation of a symmetric style of extensional faults that border domes of
high grade metamorphic rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of
this research is that variations in temperature, composition, strength, and
crustal thickness, resulting from magmatism and metamorphism, created a
patchwork of large (1000 square kilometers) relatively undeformed regions
separated by weak deforming regions. Strong regions resisting deformation
develop shortly after the emplacement of the youngest plutons. Initially,
extension was broadly distributed in diffuse shear zones that reflected the
large size of weak areas. Later, rapid cooling of the igneous rocks and removal
or crystallization of melt strengthened large sections, changing the location
and size of weak areas. During cooling, the dry cores of plutons became stronger
than the hydrous, quartz-rich host rocks, resulting in the migration of
deformation out of pluton interiors and into softer host rock.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported here is part of a collaborative
project between scientists at the University of Vermont and the University of
Alabama Tuscaloosa. In addition to the research objectives, the project is
supporting graduate and undergraduate student training in a STEM discipline at
both institutions. The students are involved in all aspects of the project, and
are gaining experience from using state-of-the-art analytical facilities from a
variety of sources, including those of their host institutions, the University
of North Carolina Chapel Hill, and the U.S. Geological Survey. The project is
enhancing collaborations among U.S. and New Zealand scientific institutions. A
strong partnership with New Zealand scientists provides access to unpublished
data and sample archives resulting from a recent program to map Fiordland at a
1:250,000 scale. Student participation in these collaborations is helping to
advance discovery and strengthen these partnerships. Students are benefiting
from cultural and scientific exchanges and are gaining important experience in
some of the best research facilities. Research results are being integrated into
classroom curricula, disseminated via presentations at professional science
meetings and the peer-reviewed geologic literature, and resulting data is being
archived in a variety of community databases.