* 1119444
* An Innovative Approach to Earth Science Teacher Preparation: Uniting Science, Informal Science Education, and Schools to Raise Student Achievement
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Edmond Mathez, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,800,381.00

The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), in collaboration with New York
University's Institute for Education and Social Policy, is developing an
innovative model of science teacher preparation. The project leverages the
scientific and educational resources of a world class informal education
institution, AMNH, with best practices from Urban Teacher Residency programs.
The primary project goal is to create an alternative pathway for teacher
candidates to earn a Board of Regents-awarded Masters of Arts in Teaching (MAT)
degree with a specialization in Earth Science teaching for grades 7-12.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed 15-month, 36-credit academic program will
initially serve 50 prospective Earth Science teachers. Teacher candidates will
participate in rigorous coursework in science content and pedagogy, summer
teaching and science practicum residencies at AMNH, and mentored school-based
residencies in high-need schools in the New York City region. Following
graduation, teachers will maintain their ties with AMNH and commit to a minimum
of four years of teaching in high-need, low-performing New York City
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong educational research and evaluation
components will help to determine the impact of this new teacher preparation
model on student achievement in New York City schools. More specifically, this
project will answer the question "How do students taught by first year AMNH MAT
Earth Science teachers perform academically in comparison with students taught
by first year Earth Science teachers not prepared in the AMNH program?", with
the hypothesis that teachers trained through the AMNH program will produce
higher achieving students as measured by their scores on New York State (NYS)
science assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of the NYS requirement that
the pilot program be implemented in high-need, low-performing schools, this
project has the potential to engage, motivate and improve the Earth Science
achievement and interest in STEM careers of thousands of students from
traditionally underrepresented populations including English language learners,
special education students, and racial minority groups. In addition, this
project will gather meaningful data on the role informal science education
organizations can play in preparing well-qualified Earth Science teachers.