* 1119887
* EVOLUTIONARY AND ECOLOGICAL FEEDBACKS:  DO LOCALLY ADAPTED SALAMANDERS SHAPE FOOD WEB DYNAMICS ACROSS NATURAL LANDSCAPES?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mark Urban, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,999.00

Most ecological research has focused on determining how environmental variation
shapes species' abundances and distributions. However, populations also can
adapt to local habitat heterogeneity. These adaptations, in turn, can alter
species interactions and consequently shape community dynamics. This proposal
tests how locally adapted foraging behaviors in salamanders affect food web
dynamics in temporary ponds. In southern New England, research has demonstrated
that populations of the spotted salamander larvae (Ambystoma maculatum) diverge
genetically in their foraging intensities and prey choice depending on the
composition of local predators across distances as little as 100 m. This
geographic variation in foraging intensity should not only affect A. maculatum's
survival with predators but also their interactions with other species in the
aquatic food web. Given this background, researchers will examine if and how
locally adapted traits influence local food web ecology. Specifically,
experiments will test how genetic differences in foraging behavior affect the
abundance and growth of organisms in temporary pond food webs by manipulating
predators and the genetic constitution of populations in field experiments.
Experiments will be conducted with salamanders distributed across local (1-km)
and latitudinal (240-km) gradients in predator density. Experiments performed
across a latitudinal cline in predator composition will address how the
potential northward expansion of predators with climate change might alter
northern food webs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work will
include training for K-12 educators; involvement of minority summer assistants;
training for undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral associates;
and enhanced public education in ecology and evolution. A summer internship
program will be developed for future K-12 teachers and to mentor summer minority
students in scientific research. Three undergraduate research positions will be
created and one additional graduate student will be trained. In conjunction with
the Connecticut State Museum of Natural History, museum exhibits and public
outreach programs will be developed that translate research results into
interactive learning units for the public