* 1119504
* Renewal: Chemistry of the Earth's Deep Interior
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2015
* USD 388,063.00

Intellectual Merit. Recent discoveries of the Cmcm post-perovskite (ppv) phase
of (Mg,Fe)SiO3 and the high-spin-low-spin (HS-LS) transition of iron in lower-
mantle pressure-temperature conditions have set the stage for a new paradigm in
deep Earth research. Previously supported research results reveal that
(Mg0.6Fe0.4)SiO3 crystallizes in another ppv structure (Pmma) and its iron is in
a mixed spin state and ordered in two distinct crystallographic sites. Thus
mantle mineralogy is more complex than previously thought, and several questions
must be addressed: What are the crystal structures of the major mineral phases
within the lower mantle? What are the effects of pressure-induced electronic and
magnetic transitions on the crystal chemistry of lower mantle phases? What are
the pressure-temperature-composition phase relations? How do major (Fe, Mg, Si)
and minor (Ca, Al) components partition among different solid and melt phases
and between different crystallographic sites? What are the geochemical and
geodynamic consequences of this new paradigm of mineral physics? Recent progress
in high-pressure technology now makes it possible to tackle these challenging
questions. The development of X-DAC and portable laser-heating system provide
the platform for versatile and robust high pressure-temperature environments.
The sub-?ÃŠm x-ray probe allows in situ single-crystal xray diffraction studies
with nominally polycrystal samples. A battery of newly developed synchrotron
xray spectroscopic probes, including NRXS, XES, XANES, XMCD, and XRS allows in-
depth study of the oxidation states, spin states, and site occupancy of Fe, as
well as chemical bonding of light elements (O, Si, Mg, Al). This accomplishment-
based project will address these and related questions that are fundamental for
understanding large-scale processes and phenomena including the nature of
geochemical reservoirs, the fate of deeply subducted slabs, the origin of
plumes, the nature of the core-mantle boundary, the differentiation of the early
Earth, and the continuing dynamic geochemical cycles today. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The research outlined in this proposal will impact a
broad range of disciplines within the Earth sciences, including seismology,
geodynamics, geodesy and tectonics, as well as petrology and geochemistry. This
work will also improve understanding of material properties as a whole under
extreme conditions, and as a consequence the research will illuminate areas
beyond the geosciences: in physics, chemistry, materials science, planetary
science, and biology. The research will enhance capabilities at synchrotron
radiation and other major national facilities with the development of new
experimental techniques for the broader community and training of new scientists
at these facilities. A wide cross?]section of participants will benefit from the
work, from high school and undergraduate students in internship programs, to
graduate students (predoctoral fellows), postdoctoral associates and visiting
investigators. As such, the project leverages existing infrastructure to prepare
young scientists for careers in academia, national laboratories, and industry.
The results and implications of the proposed work will be featured in popular
articles and lectures, as with previous awards. By advancing the scientific
frontiers of geoscience with newly developed techniques, the potential for
materials applications, the training of new scientists, and educating the
public, the proposed work will broadly impact both science and society.