* 1119655
* Re-Os Geochemistry to Test Recurrent Fluid Flow in the Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Judith Hannah, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2015
* USD 279,997.00

India is the next frontier for partnerships in global resource discovery and
management. Exploration for mineral resources in central India urgently needs
broad application of modern geologic understanding. Specifically, the age of the
rocks that host ore minerals, and the timing of introduction of economically
important minerals are very poorly constrained. Age relationships are the
foundation for interpretation of the geologic record. The team builds on
preliminary work that has shown, for example, that the introduction of gold ore
was nearly two billion years later than previously assumed. This realization
demands new models for ore formation in central India - models that suggest Au
formed during breakup of the last major supercontinent, Pangea. The
investigators will concentrate on a study area in central India, roughly mid-way
between Mumbai and Kolkata, which straddles a major geologic lineament that cuts
across the Indian subcontinent. This lineament, the Central Indian Tectonic Zone
(CITZ), has been active for more than two billion years, and continues to
generate earthquakes today. Because ore deposition is tied to movement of hot
fluids in the Earth's crust, dating the ore minerals also dates fluid movement.
This age control will help our understanding of the full geologic history of the
CITZ with implications for its on-going seismic activity. The project brings
together a unique multi-disciplinary team with complementary skills. Two US
geoscientists and a PhD student with advanced understanding of tectonics and
ore-forming processes will team with two Indian geoscientists and an Indian
student with solid knowledge of the regional geology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
unique tool underpinning this project is rhenium-osmium (Re-Os) geochemistry, as
developed for application to mineral exploration and tectonic reconstructions by
the AIRIE Program at Colorado State University. These two rare elements comprise
a radioactive pair, as an isotope of Re decays to a specific isotope of Os with
a half-life nearly ten times the age of the earth. Both elements are
concentrated in the ore-forming environment, and thus provide a mechanism for
dating precious metal-sulfide ore deposits. In addition, the isotopic
composition of Os serves as a tracer, revealing the primary source of the metals
in the earth?s crust or upper mantle. The Re-Os system offers a new window into
the tectonic causes and timing of fluid movement in the earth?s crust.
Historically, those working in ore geology have looked to tectonics for
understanding of ore-forming processes. In the proposed reverse approach, the
team will use the evidence from the ores to understand the tectonic processes.
The project thus opens a new approach to the broad field of tectonics, while
simultaneously providing the geochronologic framework for the next century of
sustainable mineral development ? a critical base for the burgeoning global
economy.