* 1119266
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating Ancestry of the Tibet Plateau: Did a Mesozoic Proto-plateau Exist?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Delores Robinson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 219,545.00

Despite much investigation, when and how the Tibet plateau attained its
elevation is a major unresolved problem in Earth science. This is partly due to
the fact that early history of plateau growth is unknown. In recent years, many
researchers have emphasized the effects of early Cenozoic India-Asia collision
on the timing of increased elevation of the Tibet plateau; however, mechanical
modeling of this increase in elevation requires improved constraints on the
initial boundary conditions that existed prior to the impingement of India with
Asia. This project employs a multi-disciplinary test of the hypothesis that a
proto-plateau resulted from crustal thickening due to Mesozoic continent-
continent collisional systems along the Qiangtang terrane borderlands prior to
the collision of India with Asia. Reconstructing the upper crustal configuration
of eastern Tibet prior to the Indian collision is performed using methods in
sedimentology, stratigraphy, structure, stable isotope paleoaltimetry,
geochemistry, geochronology, and basin modeling of the Mesozoic Qamdo basin in
southeastern Tibet. Investigations of paleoenvironmental data from study of
sedimentary deposits reveal patterns of aridification to compare with those
indicative of plateau development. Comparison of sedimentary provenance of Qamdo
basin deposits with lithologies of surrounding structural highlands and the
structural kinematic history of adjacent deformation belts is used to model
tectonic evolution and surface configuration of the region. Oxygen isotopic
composition of paleosol carbonates is employed to assess paleoelevation history
of the area and detect possible episodes of plateau rise. Documenting this early
history of Tibet plateau evolution is required to address several outstanding
issues of scientific and societal importance. First, research results provide
constraints on initial input parameters that will improve the calibration of
mechanical models of plateau development, as well as the threshold conditions
under which extrusion tectonism was later initiated in the region. Also, the
geological history of the Tibet plateau is thought to be tightly linked to major
changes in climate patterns and wholesale secular changes in ocean chemistry due
to chemical influx from the rivers that drain the Tibet plateau. Because
chemical erosion of rocks consumes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, erosion
of the widespread uplifted region of the Tibet plateau, enhanced by a monsoonal
climate, is a potential driver of global cooling episodes. Finally, the plate
tectonic processes that formed the Tibet region bear the most relevance to the
plate tectonic processes operating today that control the distribution of major
seismic, volcanic, and mass wasting (e.g., landslide) hazards around the globe,
as highlighted by the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake centered on the eastern Tibet
plateau margin. In addition to the scientific objectives of this project, it is
supporting the training of two Ph.D. students and three undergraduate students
in a STEM discipline. Scientific collaboration between students and faculty at
West Virginia University (U.S.), the University of Alabama (U.S.), and Nanjing
University (China), is an important component of this project.