* 1119430
* The ecology of disease and anthropogenic stressors in amphibians
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Rick Relyea, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 408,661.00

Understanding how human activities affect natural populations and communities is
an important issue in environmental biology. Human impacts such as the release
of abiotic stressors commonly co-occur with natural factors such as diseases,
yet abiotic stress and wildlife diseases are commonly considered in isolation of
each other. This project will investigate the effects of abiotic stress and
wildlife diseases in concert. Amphibians offer an ideal system for studying the
interaction of abiotic stress and diseases; they are experiencing global
population declines and the presence of abiotic stressors and diseases have been
implicated as causes. However, these two factors have largely been treated in
isolation. This project will test the hypothesis that low concentrations of
globally common abiotic stressors make amphibians more susceptible to two
disease organisms that are causing tremendous mortality around the world. The
objective of this project is to examine the separate and combined impacts of
diseases and abiotic stressors on several species of amphibians. This work is
transformative because it brings together three typically separate fields of
research (physiological ecology, disease ecology, and community ecology) and
unites them to tackle a major biological question. The proposed research has
clear implications for understanding the role of abiotic stress and diseases in
wildlife populations and for concerns about biodiversity in general. As a
result, findings from this research have enormous potential implications for
conservation and informing the regulation of abiotic stressors
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are multi-dimensional. The
project will train several graduate and undergraduate students at two
institutions, including under-represented groups. The benefits to society
include new insights into the spread of infectious disease, with a focus on
pathogens that are currently associated with worldwide amphibian declines.
Hence, the potential impacts for improved amphibian conservation are enormous.
The results will be disseminated in journals, conferences, seminars, web pages,
and the popular press. The results also will be developed into Teacher Workshops
and teaching modules for middle and high school teachers. Collectively, this
work promises to have a substantial scientific impact as well as numerous
broader impacts on society.