* 1119038
* Ediacaran Paleomagnetism and Geochronology of Eastern Baltica: A Key to Paleogeography and Climatic History of the Continent
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Joseph Meert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 301,950.00

All intervals of geologic time are filled with mysteries and enigmas but some
offer more intrigue than others. The span of geologic time that stretches from
the late Neoproterozoic through the Middle Cambrian (~800-501 million years ago)
heralded the evolution of complex animals; some of the most severe glacial
episodes in Earth history; rapid changes in continental configurations;
increased oxygen levels in the atmosphere and oceans and a host of other
enigmatic geological, geophysical and astronomical events. In particular, this
interval of time includes the Cambrian 'explosion' from 535-513 million years
ago. Precise causes for this unique biological period in Earth history are
unknown, but speculation about the rise of animals has run the gamut from purely
intrinsic biological causes to extrinsic triggers or some combination of both.
Tectonic events during this same time interval created the framework that
'guided' the Phanerozoic development of the present-day globe. It is intriguing
that numerous and superficially disconnected phenomena seem to be interrelated
at a profound level. There have been many attempts to provide paleogeographic
maps for this interval of time and one important tool for accomplishing this
goal is paleomagnetism. Paleomagnetic studies provide the only quantitative
method from which the ancient spatial distribution of major landmasses can be
established. Yet, it is precisely this time period where paleomagnetic data are
the most controversial. The problems are particularly acute for North America
and Baltica where the paleomagnetic data are argued to support high or low
latitude positions, rapid continental drift, rapid true polar wander, inertial
interchange true polar wander and unusual magnetic field configurations. This
work is examining the paleomagnetic signature recorded in sedimentary sequences
along the margins of Baltica (in the Ural Mountains) in an effort to unravel the
complexities of paleogeography during and preceding the Cambrian explosion.

The research is part of an international collaboration between scientists of the
University of Florida and Russian researchers. In addition to the scientific
goals of the project, the proposal is helping to train the next generation of
geologists (including groups typically under-represented in the field) by
providing support for graduate and undergraduate students. The project is also
communicating research results to the general public via outreach efforts
through the Geological Science Ambassador group at the University of Florida and
Florida Citizen's for Science.