* 1119763
* Evolutionary and Functional Analysis of Plant Adaptation to Salinity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Karen Schumaker, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2016
* USD 540,000.00

Abiotic stresses such as soil salinity cause major reductions in annual
agricultural yields worldwide. It has been estimated that, in the United States
alone, soil salinity reduces irrigated crop yields by 20-30% annually. With few
exceptions, crop plants are unable to adapt to the ionic and osmotic stresses
induced by elevated levels of salt in the soil. While genetic variation for
plant growth in salinity (salt tolerance) exists, little is known about the
genes and pathways underlying this variation. This project will use: 1)
evolutionary analyses of species within the Brassicaceae (the mustard family) to
understand mechanisms that drive plant adaptation to soil salinity, 2) molecular
genetic comparisons of Arabidopsis thaliana and Eutrema salsugineum
(Thellungiella halophila), related species within the Brassicaceae with extreme
differences in salt tolerance, to understand if changes in proteins or gene
regulatory sequences drive this adaptive evolution and, 3) analyses of natural
variation within Arabidopsis accessions to uncover the relationship between
genetic variants and plant adaptation to salinity. Results from these studies
will identify the genes, pathways, and modifications needed to enhance crop
growth and yield in saline environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
also be used to enhance the infrastructure of research, training, and outreach
through: 1) continued instruction of undergraduate and graduate students and
training of postdoctoral researchers at the University of Arizona, 2)
collaboration with the University of Arizona Graduate Fellows in K-12 Education,
the BIOTECH Project, and the KEYS Summer Internship Program, to produce
integrated teaching modules to introduce evolutionary, genetic, and genomic
approaches for investigating plant adaptation in K-12 classrooms and to provide
teachers and high school students with research experiences and, 3)
participation in the Southern Arizona Math, Science, and Technology Funfest
program (6,000 4th-8th graders) and the University of Arizona Plant Science
Family Nights.