* 1119327
* Cluster Randomized Trial of the Efficacy of Early Childhood Science Education for Low-Income Children
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Norman Lownds, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,592,999.00

The research goal of this project is to evaluate whether an early childhood
science education program, Head Start on Science, implemented in low-income
preschool settings (Head Start) produces measurable impacts for children,
teachers, and parents. The study is being conducted in eight Head Start programs
in Michigan, involving 72 classrooms, 144 teachers, 576 students, and their
parents. Partners include Michigan State University, Grand Valley State
University, and the 8 Head Start programs. Southwest Counseling Solutions is the
external evaluator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is determining the efficacy
of the Head Start on Science curriculum in two models, one in which 72 teachers
participate in professional development activities (the intervention), and
another in which 72 teachers receive the curriculum and teachers' guide but no
professional development (the control). The teacher study is a multi-site
cluster randomized trial (MSCRT) with the classroom being the unit of
randomization. Four time points over two years permit analysis through
multilevel latent growth curve models. For teachers, measurement instruments
include Attitudes Toward Science (ATS survey), the Head Start on Science
Observation Protocol, the Preschool Classroom Science Materials/Equipment
Checklist, the Preschool Science Classroom Activities Checklist, and the
Classroom Assessment Scoring System (CLASS). For students, measures include the
"mouse house problem," Knowledge of Biological Properties, the physics of
falling objects, the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Fourth Edition, the
Expressive Vocabulary Test-2, the Test of Early Mathematics Ability-3, Social
Skills Improvement System-Rating Scales, and the Emotion Regulation Checklist.
Measures for parents include the Attitudes Toward Science survey, and the
Community and Home Activities Related to Science and Technology for Preschool
Children (CHARTS/PS). There are Spanish versions of many of these instruments
which can be used as needed. The external evaluation is monitoring the project
progress toward its objectives and the processes of the research
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project meets a critical need for early
childhood science education. Research has shown that very young children can
achieve significant learning in science. The curriculum Head Start on Science
has been carefully designed for 3-5 year old children and is one of only a few
science programs for this audience with a national reach. This study intends to
provide a sound basis for early childhood science education by demonstrating the
efficacy of this important curriculum in the context of a professional
development model for teachers.