* 1119383
* CyberSTEM: Making Discovery Visible Through Digital Games
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kurt Squire, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Helen Martin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,727,483.00

CyberSTEM is developing and testing an integrated digital gaming network that
spans homes, schools, and informal learning settings, offering a suite of
digital games based on cutting-edge discoveries in the life sciences. The
project asks if participation in CyberSTEM leads to increased learning in six
areas: interest in science, conceptual knowledge, scientific reasoning,
reflection on knowing, participating in science, and identifying as a scientist.
The target audience includes youth in grades 6-9.

CyberSTEM is iteratively designed, developed, tested and rolled out to the
public across the three year project. Each individual game (and subsequently,
the entire learning system) is developed through an iterative, research-driven
process starting with laboratory studies of players designed to uncover how game
play shapes their thinking, classroom-based case studies of how participation in
CyberSTEM changes classroom practice, controlled studies of how participation in
CyberSTEM has an impact on classroom achievement, and then how articipation in
CyberSTEM beyond the classroom (in museums, homes, or other settings) influences
youth participation in science. In each phase, research designs, methods, and
analyses procedures appropriate to the questions will be employed, including
experimental studies involving think aloud protocols, case studies using
responsive case methodology, pre- and post- tests using repeated measure ANOVAs,
and exploratory data mining techniques using discourse and regression analysis.
As an integrated research project, CyberSTEM will build the capacity for rapid
development and deployment of science-based games through developing art and
code assets, as well as a network of schools, teachers, and students who can be
recruited for research. All code, art assets, and research instruments will be
published online and be open sourced.

CyberSTEM will result in an integrated gaming platform consisting of 5 model
games that can be the basis of integrated game-based curricula. Each game will
have an associated curriculum that teachers, museums, and other science
educators can use to educate the public about cutting-edge science. By year
three, the project will be tested in 20 schools. The project will use informal
gaming channels such as Kongregate, iTunes, and XBox Live to reach the general
public who will ultimately create the community that sustains CyberSTEM. This
model of education and outreach that cuts across homes, schools, and informal
science institutions has the potential to lead to a dramatic rethinking of
education. Partnering organizations include Wisconsin University, the Minority
Students Achievement Network and the Morgridge Institutes for Research.