* 1119034
* Development of a Cognition-Guided, Formative-Assessment-Intensive, Individualized Computer-Based Dynamic Geometry Learning System for Grades 3-8
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Michael Battista, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,779,961.00

Developers and researchers at Ohio State University and KCP Technologies are
creating, testing, refining, and studying a computer-based, individualized,
interactive learning system for intermediate/middle school students that can be
used by them independently (online or offline) or by teachers in classrooms.
This learning system is called Individualized Dynamic Geometry Instruction
(iDGi) and will contain four instructional modules in geometry and measurement
that reflect the recommendations of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS). iDGi
courseware fully integrates research-based Learning Progressions (LPs) for
guiding students' reasoning; formative-assessment linked to LPs; instructional
sequencing that interactively adapts to students' locations in LPs; built-in
student monitoring, feedback, and guidance; and research-based principles of
educational media into the modules. The software platform for iDGi development
is an extended version of the dynamic geometry computer environment, The
Geometer's Sketchpad.

The development process follows recommendations in Douglas Clements' Curriculum
Research Framework and includes sequences of development, trials with students,
data collection, and revision. The research and evaluation are based on random
assignment of approximately 350 students to treatment and control groups.
Achievement data are collected using developer-constructed instruments with
items that reflect the mathematics topics in the CCSS. Researchers explore the
variability at the student, teacher, and school levels using the appropriate
level of hierarchical linear models.

Commercial publishers have expressed strong interest in publishing online and
offline computer versions of iDGi, an iPad version of iDGi, an online management
system for iDGi, and support materials for users and teachers.