* 1119403
* Collaborative Research: Fluid Transport and Fluid-Rock Interactions Preserved in Two Serpentinite Melanges in the Guatemala Suture Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* George Harlow, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2017
* USD 252,609.00

Subduction channel fluids are responsible for modification of metamorphic
blocks, crystallization of vein rocks, serpentinization of the overlying mantle
wedge and ultimately the flux melting that spawns arc volcanism. We propose to
extend our studies of the serpentinite mélanges of the Guatemala Suture Zone
(GSZ) to elucidate this record of mass transport by fluid as recorded in the
rocks. The GSZ encompasses two serpentinite mélanges that preserve the elements
described above. One system on the south side of the Motagua fault records very
cold and wet conditions within the subduction channel, represented by lawsonite
eclogite blocks formed at ~2.6 GPa and 450-500ºC. The other system north of the
fault represents somewhat warmer but still wet conditions preserved in epidote-
eclogite blocks, with peak metamorphism at 500-600°C and ~ 2 GPa. Both mélanges
carry fragments of vein systems that formed within the overlying serpentinizing
mantle peridotites; these include jadeitite, omphacitite, albitite, and mica-
dominant rocks that contain a strong signature of fluids from altered oceanic
crust and subducted sediment. Detailed petrologic and geochemical
characterization of representative rocks is proposed for major, minor, and
trace-element geochemistry and Sr-Nd isotopic systematics for this research,
with a focus on B, Li, Be concentrations and isotopes. Textures, mineralogy, and
chemical composition will be utilized to sort between processes that occurred
during subduction as opposed to later exhumation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Subduction is a fundamental process on Earth that
recycles surface matter into the interior mantle and contributes to growth of
continental crust. However, details of fluid-mediated mass transport and
alteration in subduction zones are poorly understood and require further
resolution. Careful study of preserved subduction zones, where both fluid
precipitates and hydrated mantle wedge rocks are preserved, will contribute
important insights on this issue. It is proposed to build upon results of a
previously NSF-funded project by detailed chemical analysis of minerals in rocks
preserved in serpentinite mélanges in the GSZ with the following objectives: (1)
Characterize the mantle wedge protolith by study of the relict phases; (2)
Analyze serpentinite minerals for major, minor and trace elements with
particular attention to B, Li, and Be (and isotopic signatures) and textural
settings to assess fluid modification of protolith and distinction between
changes produced during subduction versus during exhumation; (3) Analyze
minerals from vein rocks (e.g., jadeitite, omphacitite, mica-rock, etc.) with
the same approach to determine the solute load of fluids traversing the
subduction channel and entering the mantle wedge, as well as the relative timing
based on textures and mineral assemblages. Using fluid-mineral partition
coefficients we will estimate fluid composition entering the mantle wedge. (4)
Utilize Sr-Nd isotopic data to assess sources of lithologic components (e.g.,
mantle vs. recycled continental or sedimentary sources). The proposed research
will enhance understanding of fluid transport from subduction channels to the
mantle wedge.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These include the
collaboration of researchers at universities and museums, involvement of
students and scientists in many countries, including those in Central America,
support of teacher training and geological training in Guatemala, links with
archaeological studies on Caribbean-area jade, connections among research
groups, and extensive outreach to both the media and the public via interviews,
articles and Museum web-sites aimed both at student education and dissemination
of our activities, results, and data.