* 1119051
* Conference Support for IRMMW-THz 2011: The 36th International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves, held in Houston, TX on October 2-7, 2011.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Daniel Mittleman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Samir El-Ghazaly
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal requests partial support for participation of students and young
researchers in the 36th Annual International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter,
and Terahertz Waves. The conference will be held in Houston TX on October 2-7,
2011. NSF support will provide opportunities for young researchers to showcase
their recent results and interact with experts in the various disciplines which
fall within the conference scope. The requested funds will specifically be used
to support travel and registration costs for US researchers, and will be
targeted towards under-represented groups. This conference has recently grown
rapidly and is now the leading forum for researchers in all areas of long-wave
electromagnetic science and technology. Topical areas span a wide range of
disciplines, including aspects of physics, chemistry, biology and numerous
engineering disciplines. The conference continues to benefit from the technical
co-sponsorship of the IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques Society, which
oversees the publication of the conference proceedings. The broader impact of
the proposal is fostering an environment of technical discussions among numerous
different communities of theorists and practicing scientists and engineers. In
addition the conference organizers are dedicated to encouraging participation by
young US scientists and researchers, especially from under-represented groups.
This will be accomplished through reduced conference registration fees for
students as well as by providing targeted travel support enabled by this NSF
proposal. By fostering the careers of younger researchers, this proposal will
benefit the future growth of the field of long-wave science and technology.