* 1119648
* Mechanisms and Dynamics of Magma-Water Interactions: Case Studies From Iceland
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Thorvaldur Thordarson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2015
* USD 250,023.00

Phreatomagmatic volcanic eruptions involve interactions between magma and
external water and are typically more explosive than otherwise similar magmatic
eruptions that do not involve external water. Such magma-water interactions pose
significant risks to society, agriculture, and the economy because they generate
large volumes of fine-grained ash that can blanket nearby population centers,
threaten livestock, and endanger air traffic, as demonstrated by the April 2010
and May 2011 eruptions in Iceland. Understanding the explosivity of magma-water
interactions, therefore, is key to mitigating risk to society from volcanoes in
wet environments. The proposed research will advance our understanding of how
water enhances magma fragmentation in an explosive eruption, using a suite of
case studies from Iceland in which varying amounts of water were involved. The
results of this work will be disseminated broadly, through scientific
publications and presentations, training of a new cadre of volcanologists, and
the production of a series of short educational films designed to stimulate
excitement in the processes of scientific inquiry and discovery in students of
grades 9-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding explosive magma-water
interactions is complicated by the fact that the magma contains gases, which, in
addition to external water, participate in driving the explosivity of the
eruption. It is proposed to untangle the competing influences of magmatic gases
and external water by comparing the explosive products of an end member eruption
type ('rootless volcanic cones'), in which no magmatic gases participate, with
ash from Icelandic eruptions in which magmatic gases were involved in the
fragmentation process, and with particles produced experimentally under
controlled laboratory conditions. Our comparisons will involve particle shape,
size, and density analysis to quantify how water affects explosivity. Computer
modeling of the explosion process, incorporating particle-scale and deposit-
scale measurements, will allow refinement of our understanding of the physics of
magma-water interactions. With validation using our case studies, the model will
ultimately be useful for predicting patterns of ash dispersal from explosive
lava-water interactions. The proposed work will allow quantification of the role
of external water in a way that has not previously been possible, and as a
consequence, it has the potential to impact hazards assessment and mitigation
strategies for such eruptions.