* 1119224
* Testing Models of Magma Generation in Warm-slab Subduction Zones: A Case Study of Volatiles in the Cascade Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Paul Wallace, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2015
* USD 295,274.00

The goal of this project is to better understand how magma is produced inside
the Earth beneath the volcanoes in the Cascade mountains of Washington, Oregon,
and northern California. Volcanism in this region is caused by the process of
subduction, in which oceanic crust offshore of the Pacific northwest sinks back
into the Earth?s mantle along the continental margin. Subduction is also
responsible for the very large earthquakes that can occur in this region. As the
sinking plate heats up, it releases H2O and other ?volatile? elements (Cl, S, F,
C), which in turn cause the overlying mantle rocks to melt, producing magma that
feeds the Cascade volcanoes. While the process of subduction occurs in many
regions around the world (e.g., the Andes), a distinctive feature of the
Cascades system is that the subducted oceanic crust is geologically young when
it starts to subduct. This causes the crust to be hotter and should result in
release of H2O and other volatiles when the subducted crust is still quite
shallow, before it lies beneath the volcanoes. The main challenge, then, is to
understand what role H2O and other volatiles play in creating magma beneath the
Cascade volcanoes, and if volatiles are important, how they move from the
subducted oceanic crust back into the mantle to produce magma.

This project will test some fundamental ideas about volatile recycling and magma
generation in ?warm-slab? subduction zones such as the Cascades arc. The project
will involve new measurements of H2O, other volatiles, fluid mobile elements,
and stable and radiogenic isotope tracers in primitive Cascade magmas. Many of
the measurements will be done on melt inclusions, which are small blobs of
silicate melt trapped inside of growing phenocrysts at depth. Such inclusions
are not affected by low pressure degassing as magma moves towards the Earth?s
surface, and thus provide a record of the pre-eruptive dissolved volatile
contents in magma. The data obtained in this project will provide new
information on mantle and slab temperatures, magma production processes, and the
sources of volatiles beneath the Cascades arc. This project involves
collaborations with other scientists in the U.S., Canada, and Japan for some of
the specialized chemical analyses that will be done. Another collaborative
effort will involve geodynamic modeling of mantle wedge flow patterns beneath
the Cascades so the new geochemical data can be integrated with geophysical
results.