* 1119512
* Morehouse College DR K-12  Pre-Service STEM Teacher Initiative
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2018
* Charles Meadows, Morehouse College
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 3,573,714.00

Morehouse College proposes a research and development project to recruit high
school African American males to begin preparation for secondary school science,
technology, engineering and mathematics(STEM) teaching as a career. The major
goal of the program is to recruit and prepare students for careers in secondary
mathematics and science teaching thus increasing the number of African Americans
students in STEM. The research will explore possible reasons why the program is
or is not successful for recruiting and retaining students in STEM Teacher
Education programs including: (a) How do students who remain in STEM education
differ from those who leave and how do these individual factors (e.g. student
preparation, self efficacies, course work outcomes, attitudes toward STEM/STEM
education, connectivity to STEM/STEM education communities, learning styles,
etc) enhance or inhibit interest in STEM teaching among African American males?
(b) What organizational and programmatic factors (e.g. high school summer
program, Saturday Academy, pre-freshman program, summer research experience,
courses, enhanced mentoring, cyber-infrastructure, college admissions guidance,
leadership training, instructional laboratory, program management, faculty/staff
engagement and availability, Atlanta Public Schools and Morehouse College
articulation and partnership) affect (enhance or inhibit) interest in STEM
teaching among African American males?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two cohorts of 40
students will spend six weeks in an intensive summer program with a follow-up
Saturday Academy during their senior year before formally beginning their
academic careers at Morehouse College. The program will integrate STEM education
with teacher preparation and mentoring in order to develop secondary teachers
who have mastery in both a STEM discipline as well as educational theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pre-service program for future teachers will recruit
80 promising eleventh grade African American male students from the Atlanta
Public School District to participate in a four-year program that will track
them into the Teacher Preparation program at Morehouse College. The research
will focus on the utility and efficacy of early recruitment of African American
male students to STEM teaching careers as a mechanism to increase the number of
African American males in STEM teaching careers.