* 1119176
* Collaborative Research: Integrating gene and individual level selection to understand the evolution of self-fertilization in flowering plants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Christopher Herlihy, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2017
* USD 336,494.00

Throughout the biosphere, most organisms display some sort of adaptation to
reduce inbreeding. In flowering plants alone, there are a staggering number of
adaptations that prevent inbreeding, yet these systems break down frequently.
Mutations causing self-pollination should enjoy two major selective advantages.
Mutations causing self-pollination will spread in nature either because they
enjoy a gene-level transmission advantage or because they boost seed production
when pollination is uncertain. No study has simultaneously tested these
mechanisms and evaluated their interaction, so it is not well understood why
outcross-pollination mechanisms repeatedly break down. In this project, a
mutation causing self-pollination will be crossed into a typically outcross-
pollinated genome and replicated field experiments will examine whether this
mutation spreads because of genetic or ecological reasons. This project will
identify the mechanisms that cause evolutionary shifts to inbreeding, which
imperil plant biodiversity. The project will train undergraduate and graduate
students to use genetic markers to infer parentage and patterns of gene flow,
which are critical tools in applied agricultural settings. Students will present
their results at public outreach events coordinated by the Center for Cedar
Glades Studies (CCGS) in Tennessee. The involvement of students in the process
of direct outreach will communicate the principles of evolution and conservation
biology to the public. The PIs will also work with science educators at the CCGS
to develop a pollination ecology field exercise aimed at K-12 students to be
included in the "Cedar Glades Activity Guide" published by the CCGS and used by
many local science teachers.