* 1119826
* Center for Innovative Structures and Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 13,600,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The Center of Excellence in Materials Research and
Innovation* (CEMRI) at the Yale University Center for Research on Innovative
Structures and Phenomena (CRISP) discovers and develops novel engineered
materials with emphasis on the unique opportunities that arise from designing
man-made transition metal oxides at the atomic scale and from structuring
amorphous metals down to nanometer dimensions. Two Interdisciplinary Research
Groups (IRGs) lead the research effort. The Atomic Scale Design, Control, and
Characterization of Oxide Structures IRG investigates the novel chemical,
electronic, and magnetic properties that emerge at interfaces between oxides.
The research addresses three grand challenges: the design of new oxides with
unique physical properties; the creation of new devices based on the novel
properties of oxide interfaces; and the understanding and manipulation of the
interactions between electrons that give rise to novel properties. The Multi-
Scale Surface Engineering with Metallic Glasses IRG focuses on the grand
challenge of controlling surface properties of metals by structuring their
surface topography over length scales of nanometers to centimeters. This IRG has
the unique ability to pattern and shape metallic glasses using methods developed
for plastics while retaining the superior properties of metals. Based on this
capability, it aims to gain a fundamental understanding of the behavior of
metallic glasses as they approach atomic length scales and then to devise
hierarchical surface patterns (as often found in nature) to create unique
properties. CRISP research impacts a wide range of technologies spanning
computation, communication, energy, and medical applications. &lt;br/&gt; CRISP
research is tightly integrated with an Education and Outreach (EO) program that
leverages local EO successes in economically distressed, urban public schools
that have a large population of students from underrepresented groups. There are
two signature initiatives that evolve based on quantitative assessments. The
first focuses on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
recruitment and retention through professional development of teachers in order
to impact the largest number of students. The second employs team-based research
where the entire spectrum of STEM members (teachers, students, postdocs, and
faculty) work together on multi-disciplinary IRG research projects. &lt;br/&gt;
Collaborations with industry, national laboratories, and state and local
governments play an important role in augmenting CRISP research and EO efforts
and providing a pathway for broadening CRISP's impact. Key national laboratory
collaborations enable joint development of new characterization methods at
national user facilities. Industrial partners provide unique facilities, summer
internships, and faculty development grants (e.g., IBM) as well as materials and
processing equipment (e.g., PX Group). A partnership with the New Haven Public
School system provides teacher assessment data used to develop and assess the
impact of CRISP's teacher development initiatives. &lt;br/&gt; CRISP houses
unique thin film growth and atomic-scale characterization and imaging tools that
are not only essential to its success, but also provide a novel contribution to
the national network of materials research facilities. The Center welcomes
outside users to work with CRISP scientists on new research projects that take
advantage of these unique capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*An NSF Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)