* 1119111
* Highly Siderophile Elements as Tracers of Mantle-crust Interactions in Subduction Zone Metamorphic Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Sarah Penniston-Dorland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,027.00

Intellectual merit. Arc magmas are generated by complex processes involving
release of aqueous fluids/melts from the subducting slab, which rise and
interact with overlying mantle. These processes are still not well understood.
Metamorphic rocks from subduction related mélange zones provide a critical
window into these processes. Mélange zones, found in many subduction zone
metamorphic complexes around the world, are thought to represent the interface
between the subducting slab and the overlying mantle wedge. Their position above
the dehydrating, subducting slab is the ideal location to record a variety of
processes of aqueous infiltration, melting, and tectonic mixing of crust and
mantle. Moreover, these processes act to hybridize crustal and mantle material
creating a volatile-rich, mixed rock type with chemical and isotopic
compositions reflecting the multiple sources of material in the mélange.
Dehydration and melting of this hybridized rock type could potentially result in
the production of fluids/melts that bear the signatures of multiple source
materials. The tracers currently applied to subduction systems mainly provide
information about the input of sedimentary and mafic components of the
subducting slab to arc magma. Much less information is available regarding the
contributions of ultramafic mantle peridotite to subduction zone processes. It
is proposed here to determine the mechanisms of mass transfer at contacts
between ultramafic and crustal lithologies and determine the relative proportion
of ultramafic material within the hybridized rock types found in mélange zones.
Highly siderophile element (HSE) concentrations and Os isotopic compositions
will be used as the primary tracers of the ultramafic component in the fluids or
rocks. Previous research has suggested that O isotopes and large ion lithophile
elements (LILE) are modified in the Catalina Schist by infiltration of a fluid
derived from sedimentary rocks. Therefore O isotopic compositions and the LILE
will be used as tracers of the sedimentary component involved in material
transport. We will additionally use the high field strength elements to
determine whether mechanical mixing is a likely mechanism for mass transfer.
Preliminary results from blocks and reaction rinds in the Franciscan Complex,
Samana Metamorphic Complex and the Catalina Schist show that HSE are elevated in
reaction rinds compared to mafic blocks, suggesting some relative mobility of
HSE. The mélanges of the Catalina Schist and on Syros have well-exposed mafic
rocks and reaction zones in ultramafic matrix, and will provide the ideal
natural localities to investigate processes of mass transfer of HSE, LILE, and
O.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the overall project include the
training and education of students in the areas of petrology and geochemistry,
as well as in scientific writing and communication of research results. Graduate
and undergraduate students are critical to the implementation of the proposed
research. Both PIs have involved women and underrepresented minorities in their
research groups and expect to continue to do so in the future, particularly
through the NSF-funded Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation program
at UMd. The Department of Geology at the University of Maryland requires all its
undergraduate students to complete a senior thesis, and one or two seniors will
likely be involved in this research. In addition, this grant will enable the
lead PI (who started her career as a faculty member at the University of
Maryland in 2007) to assist her in building a strong research group.