* 1119342
* Investigating the Impact of Math Teachers' Circles on Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching and Classroom Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* J. Brian Conrey, American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2015
* USD 449,981.00

The Math Teachers' Circles project (MTC) is connecting mathematicians and
mathematics teachers in middle schools by offering summer workshops and
continued communication throughout the year. The workshops focus on mathematical
problem solving and include activities that offer multiple entry points. The
goal of the workshops is to increase teachers' knowledge of mathematics for
teaching and to help teachers use their knowledge to improve student learning of
mathematics. In addition to conducting workshops, researchers are investigating
what mathematics teachers learn by participating in the workshops and how
teachers use what they have learned in their mathematics teaching. The American
Institute of Mathematics (AIM) is facilitating Math Circles in 26 states with
research sites in Albuquerque, Denver and San Francisco Bay area. Their research
questions include: (1) How is the MTC model being implemented at local sites?
(2) What are the effects of participation in a MTC on Teachers' Mathematical
Knowledge for Teaching? (3) What is the impact of MTC involvement on teachers'
approaches toward mathematics and classroom practice? Twelve case studies, based
on classroom observations, are offering insights into how teachers use their
mathematical knowledge in planning, implementing, assessing, and reflecting on
their instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Math Teachers' Circle leaders and
participants are connected by a digital network organized by AIM. Workshops are
offered for mathematicians who would like to be leaders and organizers of local
Math Teachers' Circles, and help is provided to local Circles. The purpose of
the local workshops is to develop teachers' content knowledge, problem-solving
skills, and mathematical habits of mind. The Math Circles supplement other
professional development efforts that focus on pedagogy. The MTC model includes
five criteria: content focus, active learning, coherence, approximately 50 hours
of professional development, and collective participation. Participants are
expected to continue to work within the networked community to develop their
mathematical knowledge. The research effort is measuring teachers' mathematical
knowledge and conducting case studies to investigate the impact of the MTC on
mathematics teaching. They are videotaping lessons and using the Mathematical
Quality of Instruction observation protocol. The project evaluator is from
Colorado State University.