* 1119200
* U.S. ATLAS Operations Program: Empowering University Physicists to make Discoveries at the Energy Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2012,05/31/2017
* P. Michael Tuts, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Coles
* 05/31/2017
* USD 43,583,717.00

The ATLAS collaboration, consisting of 174 institutions from 38 countries,
completed construction of the large multi-purpose ATLAS detector at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN and began data collection with colliding beams in
2010. The 44 institutions of U.S. ATLAS, with the support of NSF, made major and
unique contributions to the construction and initial operation of the detector,
and to the software and computing program development. This is enabling U.S.
physicists to contribute significantly to physics analysis and associated
publications. The U.S. ATLAS Operations Program aims to provide the necessary
technical support for (1) the maintenance and operation of the U.S.-built
detector subsystems;(2) the maintenance and ongoing development of software and
computing, and (3), an R&amp;D program for detector upgrades to accommodate
accelerator performance improvements . Another component of the program is to
provide a strong education and outreach effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of the U.S. ATLAS Operations
Program is to empower U.S. physicists to address some of the most profound
questions in particle physics today: what is the physical origin of mass? Do
supersymmetric particles exist and are they associated with dark matter? Does
space-time have extra spatial dimensions? Answers to these questions would
provide a major advance toward completing a unified view of the particles in
nature, the forces with which particles interact, and their role in the past and
future of our universe. This is a time when particle physics researchers have
compelling indications that the LHC, with collision energies far beyond those
available at existing facilities, will lead to especially important discoveries
with implications over a broad field of fundamental science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposal will enhance the computing
infrastructure for research, education and beyond. The LHC computing
requirements are driving a paradigm shift towards global computing with
potentially significant economic impacts, and our students will be at the
forefront in using these new technologies. NSF-ATLAS groups continue to expand
their education and outreach programs, with a particular focus on high school
teachers and students and on outreach to under-represented populations. We plan
on expanding our outreach efforts during ATLAS data taking, including the
network of worldwide grid facilities. The LHC is the major accelerator-based
program in which the next generation of physicists is being trained. Support for
R&amp;D activities will lay the groundwork for new technologies that might be
adopted by other fields as well as train our graduate and undergraduate
students. For U.S. physicists to be at the forefront of the physics discoveries,
it is vital that the U.S. continue to be a leading participant in the scientific
operational phase of the experiment.