* 1119884
* Exploring an apparent paradox in metal stress - what are the AtATR-related long term consequences of Al toxicity?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Paul Larsen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 290,572.00

Aluminum (Al) toxicity is a global agricultural problem that severely limits
root growth and crop productivity in regions with acidic soils, which represent
upwards of 50% of the world's arable land. Significant progress has been made
toward understanding how plants cope with Al in their environment, yet our
knowledge of how Al toxicity leads to root growth inhibition is lacking. Using a
genetic approach with the plant model system Arabidopsis, it has been determined
that Al-dependent root growth inhibition is largely an active process that
occurs in response to detection of DNA damage. Mutational loss of factors
required for detection of this damage actually leads to increased root growth,
which suggests that Al functions as a mild agent of DNA damage in vivo. Further
work is aimed at determining the nature of the Al-dependent DNA damage, which is
speculated to lead to heritable changes since Al is capable of causing DNA
crosslinks in vivo. Techniques to be used include monitoring DNA integrity over
several generations following exposure to Al along with identification and
analysis of additional biochemical components that are required for detection
and response to Al toxicity. Through these analyses, it will be possible to gain
a better understanding of how Al causes root growth inhibition while at the same
time determine the in vivo effect of Al on DNA integrity, the latter of which
has been intensively debated with regard to impacts on both plants and animals.
Through this work, the PI will be able to continue an ongoing commitment to
promotion of creativity in the local school district along with providing
intensive mentoring opportunities in a laboratory environment to students from
underrepresented groups.