* 1119446
* EAGER:  Layered Semiconductor Membranes for Tunable Separation and Filtering of Ions and Biomolecules
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Maria Gracheva, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 04/30/2014
* USD 128,490.00

The objective of the proposed EAGER research is to show the feasibility of using
layered nanoporous semiconductor membranes for tunable ion and protein
separation and filtering. This objective will be achieved through the use of
complex computational models which have been previously utilized by the PI to
describe electrostatic behavior of nanoporous semiconductor membranes, including
layered membranes under bias, as tunable electronic devices for ion and
biomolecular manipulations. This work is built on the widely known electrical
tunability of semiconductor materials and the charge inversion phenomenon in the
nanoporous semiconductor membranes under electrical bias, which was recently
demonstrated by the PI. The novelty of the proposed membranes is in utilization
of opposite doping in the layering of the n- and p-doped semiconductor materials
to form a p-n junction membrane for versatile electric control over
electrostatic potential landscape in the nanopores transversing the membrane.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this program is
developing self-consistent model of a nanoporous membrane composed of
semiconductor materials and immersed in an electrolyte solution with electric
bias applied to the semiconductor layers and the electrolyte solution, resulting
in motion of ions in the solution through the nanopore. This model will be used
to understand and control the membrane behavior with applications in ion
separation and filtering. The advantage of using semiconductor materials for the
membrane resides in the electrical tunability of these materials as well as ease
of integration of such membrane in lab-on-a-chip and nanofluidic devices. Thus,
the theoretical understanding of the effect of the ionic charge inversion in a
nanopore in various semiconductor membranes and its influence on ionic transport
through the nanopores could find broad applications in nanotechnology and
bioengineering and will contribute to understanding analogous processes in
biological and bio-mimetic systems. The primary goal of this focused program is
to show the feasibility of using layered membranes made of doped semiconductor
materials for separation and filtering of ions. The model developed as a result
of this program will be further utilized for simulation of the electrically
tunable membrane and electrolyte solution with a coarse-grained Brownian
dynamics model of a biomolecule immersed in this solution. This project will
stimulate future research on the effect of the membrane electrostatic potential
over ionic and biomolecular movement through the pore with the main goal to
demonstrate tunable control of the membrane for application in protein and
biomolecule separation, concentration and filtering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this program is in directly addressing the need for developing
new technologies for separation and filtering of biomolecules. The emergence of
tunable protein and ion filters will have a beneficial impact on industry,
research and society by broadening the application of a unified device towards
multiple means and ease of integration with silicon-based technology in lab-on-
a-chip and micro- and nanofluidic devices. Thus, an important aim of the program
will be to establish a collaboration with an experimental group with expertise
in the fields of membrane technologies or separation techniques to secure
further testing and implemantation of the proposed ideas and methods in
practice. This project will support two graduate students at Clarkson University
(CU). International collaboration with the Moscow State University (MSU) will be
strengthened by offering two summer positions to its undergraduate students for
research projects within the framework of the program. A summer research
position will be offered to a disabled undergraduate student at CU, and another
summer position will be offered to a student outside of CU. The results of this
program will be published in top journals and will be presented at national and
international conferences. The PI will also maintain a research web-site to
insure a wider public access to the results. The developed models will enrich
the Computer Modeling in Physics course at CU which is offered by the PI every
semester.