* 1119122
* Investigating and Supporting the Development of Ambitious and Equitable Mathematics Instruction at Scale
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Paul Cobb, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2017
* USD 4,721,282.00

The Development of Ambitious and Equitable Mathematics Instruction project is
supporting and investigating the implementation of reformed mathematics
instruction at the middle school level in two large school districts. Project
researchers are asking: What does it take to support mathematics teachers'
development of ambitious and equitable instructional practices on a large scale?
The project has built on what was learned in a previous, successful project
studying the implementation of a middle school mathematics curriculum. The
primary goal of the new project is to develop an empirically grounded theory of
action for implementing reform at school and district levels. The researchers
are investigating reform within a coherent system that focuses on leadership and
school-based professional development. In addition, they are facilitating a
longitudinal study of the curriculum implementation by continuing the data
collection from the original study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In order to build a
theory of action, the project team is synthesizing data from a variety of
domains including instructional systems (e.g., curriculum, materials,
professional development, support for struggling students, and learning
communities), mathematics coaching, networks of teachers, school leadership, and
district leadership. Investigators are using a variety of analytic techniques to
successfully integrate both quantitative and qualitative data as they seek to
understand how school district strategies are playing out in schools and
classrooms and how those strategies can be revised in order to improve student
learning of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; An empirically grounded theory of
action for implementing reform will help the mathematics education community to
implement and to understand the process of reforming mathematics instruction at
the middle school level. Many advances in mathematics instruction have been
documented within a limited context, but researchers and practitioners need to
understand the full range of action necessary to achieve similar successes at a
district-wide level. The model developed from this project, in conjunction with
longitudinal data, has the potential to guide future reform efforts that seek to
provide ambitious and equitable mathematics instruction.