* 1119739
* LTREB: Long-term effects of a species invasion on an aquatic ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Jonathan Cole, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Non-native species have large ecological effects, cause enormous economic
damage, and are one of the most important and least well controlled of human
impacts on the world?s ecosystems. The long-term effects of species invasions,
which may differ considerably from short-term effects, are still poorly
understood. Soon after zebra mussels invaded the Hudson River over 17 years ago,
they had large impacts on nearly every aspect of the ecosystem. Recently, the
zebra mussel population and its effects have begun to change: survival rates of
zebra mussels have fallen by a factor of 100, and some, but not all, parts of
the ecosystem have recovered toward pre-invasion conditions. This award
continues the investigators' long-term study of zebra mussel invasion by
quantifying the zebra mussel population and its effects on water chemistry,
water clarity, and populations of phytoplankton, zooplankton, bacteria, and
native pearly mussels in the Hudson River. Results will lead to a better
understanding of the zebra mussel (one of the world's most important invaders),
and also provide one of very few detailed studies of the long-term effects of an
invader.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will be of significant
value to managers who oversee with the Hudson River and who confront wide-
ranging effects of non-native species. To reach beyond the scientific community,
the researchers will disseminate their findings by posting data on open
websites; continuing highly successful programs for middle- and high school
students; and continuing a very active program of outreach through public
lectures, seminars, training workshops, and newspaper articles.