* 1120448
* RUI: Mechanisms of acclimation in the Eastern red spotted newt
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Nancy Berner, University of the South
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Acclimatization is a process by which individual organisms vary their
characteristics in response to some aspect or aspects of their environment.
Acclimatization is reversible, which distinguishes it from adaptation, generally
defined as an evolutionary response to long-term environmental alteration.
Acclimatization is an important mechanism by which organisms respond to
fluctuations in their surroundings. Modifications in characteristics brought on
by natural seasonal temperature differences are of particular interest, and are
generally studied in animals acclimated to specific temperatures in the
laboratory that mimic temperatures found in their natural environment. Thus,
both acclimatization to natural seasonal temperatures and acclimation to various
temperatures in the laboratory have been well described across numerous taxa,
vertebrate and invertebrate as well as in plants. Despite the widespread nature
of seasonal thermal acclimatization and acclimation, mechanisms controlling and
coordinating these processes remain elusive.&lt;br/&gt;This research uses
laboratory acclimation experiments on an amphibian model to clarify cellular,
molecular and environmental mechanisms responsible for controlling and
coordinating thermal acclimation in a single species, the Eastern red spotted
newt. It will provide one of the most complete investigations of acclimation in
a single cold-blooded vertebrate species, and will lead to insights about
mechanisms of acclimatization in their natural environment. The PI, along with
undergraduate co-workers, will investigate the expression of genes that are
related to temperature regulation and acclimation processes. The investigators
will determine the role of particular cellular membrane components in the
acclimation process by artificially changing membrane composition through
dietary manipulations. The use of mass spectrometry will allow them to identify
specific membrane components critical to the activity of metabolic enzymes.
Laboratory acclimation experiments controlling day length and temperature will
determine the environmental cue most important to the acclimation process.
Knowing how environments impact individual characteristics will lead to a better
appreciation of how our currently changing global temperatures might impact
species distribution and survival. Such information will be critical in
determining best conservation practices in the face our changing global
environment.&lt;br/&gt;This project will have considerable impact beyond the
broad scientific impact of the research itself. As a biology professor at a
liberal arts institution, the PI consistently publishes with undergraduate co-
authors in leading scientific journals. Funding will provide summer stipends for
ten to twelve undergraduate students and travel funds for these students to
attend national meetings to present their research. In addition, the PI will
coordinate with the University's high school minority program "the Bridge
Program in Math and Science" to increase the involvement of minority students in
research. One or two of the summer research students each year will be entering
freshmen that participated during previous summers in the Bridge Program.
Engaging minority students in research and involving them in a research
community early in their college career will increase the likelihood that they
will enter and stay in STEM disciplines.