* 1120153
* Functional Analysis of the High-Light-Inducible Proteins (HLIP) in Synechocystis PCC 6803
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Qingfang He, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2015
* USD 457,460.00

Intellectual Merit Light is required for photosynthesis, which is the ultimate
source of energy in food for almost all living things on earth. However, when
the light energy absorbed by photosynthetic cells exceeds the photosynthetic
capacities, reactive oxygen species are generated in the cells, causing
oxidative damage to proteins, lipids, and photosynthetic pigments. These
detrimental effects are amplified by other environmental stresses (e.g. low
temperature, drought). Under suboptimal growth conditions plants or algae cannot
efficiently use the reducing power generated by photosynthesis. This lowers the
light intensity at which excess light absorption leads to photo-damage. Hence,
photosynthetic organisms unavoidably face light stress as well during all other
stress conditions. However, in spite of the importance of light stress in
relation to crop productivity, the molecular mechanisms of light-stress
responses have not yet been elucidated in plants or photosynthetic microbes. The
goal of this project is to determine the molecular mechanisms by which
photosynthetic organisms protect themselves from high intensity light. The
research focuses on analysis of the functions of a family of four high light-
inducible proteins (HLIP) in the model organism Synechocystis PCC 6803. HLIPs
resemble the light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins of higher plants
in their primary sequences. They have been proven to be essential for
cyanobacteria to survive exposure to high light. It may also play a critical
role in higher plants as well. To investigate the functions of HLIPs and
associated-proteins in cell survival during exposure to high light, the
regulator PfsR (photosynthesis, Fe homeostasis and stress-response regulator)
will be further characterized in order to understand its roles in protection
against high intensity light. The second-site mutation in at least one of the
five suppressors that restore viability in high light to the quadruple hli
deletion mutant will be pinpointed. These studies will reveal the mechanisms of
cell survival and the functions of HLIPs in high light. In addition, the effects
of HLIP and photosystem I trimer interaction and the role of the pigment-binding
motifs in HLIPs will be defined by site-directed mutagenesis. Furthermore, a
novel high light-inducible, carotenoid-binding protein complex in the thylakoid
membrane will be characterized. Overall, the research will improve understanding
of the mechanisms for survival of photosynthetic organisms under high light
conditions and will eventually enhance the ability to develop rational
strategies for engineering plants or algae for better stress tolerance.

Broader Impact The research subject is of general interest to plant biologists.
The research allows students and postdoctoral fellows to integrate approaches of
genetics, biochemistry and biophysics in their educational and research
programs, fostering highly competitive and novel research initiatives important
to agriculture and biofuel production. It will prepare the trainees for
independent research careers. In addition, it will improve the strength of
photosynthesis research in Arkansas. The project will allow the PI to continue
involving underrepresented minority students in research, contributing to their
retention in higher education. About 35% UALR undergraduates (more than 4000
students) are from underrepresented groups, but few have opportunities for
research training due to the shortage of laboratory space and active faculty
research programs. Furthermore, this project will stimulate additional funding
for the training of undergraduate students through State- or UALR-sponsored
programs that involve minority students.