* 1120967
* Rib kinematics and intercostal muscle function in amniotes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Elizabeth Brainerd, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 07/31/2016
* USD 471,116.00

Breathing seems like one of the simplest things we do, but actually the
structures and motions of the rib cage are enormously complex. Ribs and
associated muscles (the intercostal muscles) contribute to breathing in humans
and other animals, but the exact respiratory actions of the ribs and intercostal
muscles have been controversial for centuries. Why is it so difficult to infer
the actions of these muscles from their structure and attachments to the ribs?
The answer lies in: (1) the 3D complexity of rib shape; (2) the 3D complexity of
rib motion during breathing; (3) the 3D complexity of intercostal muscles; and
(4) variation in all of the above from top to bottom and front to back of the
rib cage. Decades of work on dogs and humans have finally yielded a solid
understanding of exhalation and inhalation in these mammals, but the work has
been slow and laborious. Now a new 3D X-ray technology, X-ray Reconstruction of
Moving Morphology (XROMM), has just become available and will vastly speed up
the collection of data on bone shape and bone motion in living animals. In this
project, XROMM will be used to determine 3D rib shape, 3D rib motion, and
intercostal muscle function in seven species: three lizards, two birds, an
alligator, and a crocodile. These animals were selected because they show a
diverse spectrum of rib shapes, rib joint morphologies, body forms, and
locomotor behaviors (swimming, running and flying). The advent of XROMM will
make it possible to add these seven new species to the current knowledge of just
two species, all within just three years. In the future, the results of this
work can be used to reconstruct the respiratory system of extinct animals, with
particular relevance to the controversial respiratory mechanisms of
dinosaurs.&lt;br/&gt;The project includes interdisciplinary training for a
Postdoctoral Fellow and a doctoral student, contributions to K-12 education, to
increasing participation of underrepresented groups, and to enhancing scientific
infrastructure. The postdoc and graduate student will gain interdisciplinary
training through interactions with our collaborators in Engineering, Computer
Science, and the Center for Computation and Visualization. The postdoc and
graduate student will take the lead on specific projects, mentor undergraduate
researchers, and work with K-12 teachers from the Providence Public Schools.
More than 80% of students in the Providence Public School system are from
underrepresented groups and more than 80% qualify for free or reduced cost
lunch. In cooperation with K-12 teachers, the scientists will develop and
deliver lessons and projects to teach the students about animal motion,
biomechanics, and scientific methods such as XROMM. Toward enhancing scientific
infrastructure, the XROMM technology will be improved and new software developed
to simplify the data analysis. All hardware and software innovations are made
public and are available to colleagues (through an NSF Research Coordination
Network and via www.xromm.org). The complete metadata generated by the study
will be published immediately through a public online database
(xromm.ccv.brown.edu/webportal/). Metadata publication allows colleagues to see
the contents of the data sets and suggest collaborations. After publication or
after 10 years, whichever is earlier, all data will be made public.