* 1120761
* Collaborative Research: Ecological Diversification and Molecular Evolution of Grasses (Poaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2017
* Melvin Duvall, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2017
* USD 179,401.00

Over 10,000 species of grasses are known to science. Grasses proliferated
rapidly, obscuring their historical relationships. This project integrates three
broad approaches in a study of grass diversification using contemporary methods
to reconstruct the genealogy of the grasses. Next generation DNA sequencing
methods will be used to determine complete chloroplast genomes and subregions of
the nuclear genome from at least 100 species. Bioinformatics analyses will
explore patterns and rates of DNA sequence evolution. Studies of development,
especially in leaves, will be used to test whether particular adaptations are
correlated with historical migrations into new habitats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grasses are of fundamental economic and ecological
importance. Rice, wheat, maize and other cereals supply half of human dietary
calories. Wild grasses predominate over 25% of Earth's terrestrial landscape. A
better understanding of their relationships is fundamental to predicting the
response of grasslands and cereal crops to environmental change. Analyses of
sequence data will clarify relationships and have broad application in
evolutionary studies. Ecological adaptations will be better understood when
viewed in a developmental context. An image-rich web site will be established,
with content in English and Spanish, with information on grass structure,
classification, and evolution. The new framework of grass relationships and
accompanying web resources will appeal to a broad range of users and promote
international collaborations.