* 1120281
* The role of phylogenetic diversity on community assembly and ecosystem functioning: experimental tests using laboratory microcosms
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Lin Jiang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 157,847.00

The past several decades have seen escalating human activities that have
substantially transformed our biosphere, resulting in widespread loss of
biodiversity in many of Earth's ecosystems. Does this erosion of biodiversity
affect the way that ecological communities assemble from individual species?
Will it have any impact on the functioning of natural and managed ecosystems,
including products and services (e.g., food, medicine, water quality, nutrient
retention) that they provide for humanity? Ecologists have used a multitude of
approaches, including mathematical models, field and laboratory experiments, and
observations, to answer these important questions. While the large body of
research conducted so far has revealed that biodiversity change can carry
significant ecological consequences, our knowledge is rather incomplete. In
particular, our current understanding of biodiversity effects is largely based
on species richness (that is, the number of species in a given area) or
diversity indices associated with species richness. It is largely unknown how
phylogenetic diversity, an important element of biodiversity that accounts for
species' evolutionary histories, affects community and ecosystem properties. In
this project, the research team aims to fill this void by conducting a series of
laboratory experiments using bacteria as model organisms. The project will start
by examining the relationship between species' evolutionary relationships and
the strength of competition between species, an issue first addressed by Darwin
150 years ago and yet still unresolved. With this basic information in hand,
several hypotheses will be tested on how evolutionary relationships among
species affect a number of community and ecosystem processes and functions. The
research will be conducted in small artificial ecosystems called microcosms.

Besides scientific contributions, this project will also contribute to
educational outreach by training graduate and undergraduate students,
particularly those from underrepresented minority groups. Minority students will
be recruited from the Summer Undergraduate Research Program in
Engineering/Science at Georgia Institute of Technology and from Agnes Scott
College (a small liberal arts women's college in metro Atlanta).