* 1120443
* Niche differentiation between Ammonia-oxidizing Archaea and Bacteria in Freshwater lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Rachael Morgan-Kiss, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The nitrogen cycle is one of the most important nutrient cycles on the planet.
Nitrification, the biological conversion of ammonium to nitrate, occurs in
almost all environments, including soils, sediments, fresh and marine waters and
wastewater, and can cause serious environmental problems such as promotion of
algal blooms and subsequent creation of dead zones in aquatic systems. This
research project concerns the first and rate limiting step of nitrification, the
oxidation of ammonia to nitrite. Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria have been studied
for over 100 years, and until recently scientists assumed that they were the
sole microbes responsible for ammonia oxidation in the environment. However, a
new player in the oxidation of ammonia to nitrite was discovered very recently,
the ammonia-oxidizing Archaea. Both groups use the same resources due to the
similarity in their basic energy generating metabolism, and are found in a wide
variety of environments together. This project will address the question of
which group of ammonia-oxidizing microbes is responsible for ammonia oxidation
in different habitats. The project focuses on open water and bottom sediment
habitats in Lake Acton, a freshwater lake in Ohio, and will test the hypothesis
that these two groups of ammonium oxidizing microbes display niche
differentiation. The experimental efforts will focus on cultivation dependent
approaches to investigate the response of ammonia-oxidizing microbes to
environmental factors under controlled conditions in the laboratory. In
addition, a novel culture transplant experiment will be used to link the
response of the Archaea and bacteria to natural conditions in the lake.

This project will contribute more broadly to strengthen interdisciplinary
research in microbial ecology through the collaboration of two early career
scientists. Graduate and undergraduate students will be engaged in active
research on the project and participate in a genome annotation project. In
addition, a one-week class will be developed and offered at Miami University to
educate K-12 teachers about water quality with a focus on wastewater treatment
and water purification.