* 1120121
* Collaborative Research:  Genetic diversity, resistance genes, and negative density dependence in tropical tree seedling dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Liza Comita, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 57,500.00

Tropical forests are known for their high biological diversity, and this is
partly due to the large numbers of rare species they contain. One reason for
rarity in tropical trees seems to be high rates of death from diseases that
spread between individuals of the same species. When a seedling of a rare
species is surrounded by neighbors of the same species, its risk of dying from
pathogens is much higher than that of a seedling of a common species surrounded
by neighbors of that species. This project will test the new hypothesis that
rarity goes along with low resistance to disease because having just a small
number of individuals of a species leads to also having a low diversity of the
genes that are responsible for disease resistance. The hypothesis will be tested
through collaboration between scientists at the Smithsonian Institution and
Pennsylvania State University. Plant tissue will be collected from related pairs
of rare and common species of tropical trees at the Smithsonian's Tropical
Research Institute in Panama. The tissue will be shipped to Pennsylvania, where
a new technique in molecular genetics known as next generation transcriptome
sequencing will be used to quantify the overall and resistance gene diversity of
each species. Back in Panama, experiments in the forest will test whether
enhancing cross-pollination between trees can increase the genetic diversity of
their offspring and give them greater resistance to disease and chances of
survival.

This study will provide useful insights into how the abundance of a species can
shape its ability to resist disease. Knowing this will help us understand why
some species are rare while others are common, and help forest managers make
more informed decisions. This project will be the first to obtain a large
collection of resistance gene sequences from trees, information that can used in
future studies of genetic diversity in agricultural and horticultural plants.
The project will also provide training for students and early career biologists
in both the United States and Panama.