* 1120971
* Structure and Function of Eukaryotic Ribosomes
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Susan Gerbi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2013
* USD 349,513.00

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this research is to identify conserved
nucleotide elements (CNEs) in ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and elucidate their functions
in the ribosome. The CNE regions must be crucial for ribosome biogenesis,
structure and/or function as they have been maintained throughout evolutionary
time. Presumably, mutations in these regions would have been lethal to the
organism and hence not perpetuated. This research project builds upon previous
NSF-funded research in which a Complete Organismal rRNA Database (CORD) was
developed and bioinformatic methods were designed to identify CNEs in the large
ribosomal subunit rRNA. These methods were applied to eukaryotic 25-28S rRNAs
and 42 CNEs were thus identified. Of these 42 CNEs, five are universally
conserved in all Domains of life (eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea), and nine
other CNEs are specific to eukaryotes with their sequences being degenerate in
bacteria. This analysis will be expanded to identify CNEs in bacterial 23S rRNA
and to discern which bacterial CNEs are universally conserved in all domains of
life and which are specific to bacteria. Mutations will be made in each of the
nine eukaryotic-specific CNEs to analyze their function in rRNA processing,
ribosome export, ribosome function in protein synthesis and coordination with
the cell cycle. Furthermore, an MS2-based pulldown strategy will be developed
for isolation of ribosomes containing mutations in the rRNA. Development of this
system will provide the foundation for future proteomic and structural studies
on ribosome biogenesis. The results of the research described here will be of
great value to the scientific community. rRNA is used as a yardstick for
phylogenetic comparisons, so the derivation of CORD will be useful to
evolutionary biologists. Moreover, the results will be very valuable to
molecular biologists in their study of ribosomes. The next frontiers of ribosome
research are (i) a study of eukaryotic ribosomes, (ii) a full description and
understanding of ribosome biogenesis and (iii) elucidation of conformational
changes that occur in ribosomes during elongation in protein synthesis. The data
from the research described here will highlight the regions in rRNA of great
functional importance for these processes, thus helping to focus studies on
structure and function by the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research described here will be integrated with education, serving
to train undergraduates through a postdoctoral associate who will help with this
research. Graduate education and postdoctoral training are topics of great
interest to the Principal Investigator who has played leadership roles at the
national level in this area. The research described here will help to broaden
participation in science by women and minorities, with students from these
groups working on the research. Furthering the opportunities in science for
women and minorities is a topic in which the Principal Investigator has been
actively involved at Brown University and at the national level. New methods and
tools will be developed by the research described here, thus enhancing the
infrastructure for scientific research. The results will be disseminated to the
scientific community through publications and talks. The Principal Investigator
has a track record of bringing the benefits of biological research to the
attention of the lay public and to Congress.