* 1120875
* ATD: Geometric and Statistical Data Analysis on Special Manifolds for Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Michael Kirby, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2012
* USD 126,978.00

This proposal concerns the development of new geometric algorithms for detecting
and classifying threats from airborne biological agents and chemical agents. The
investigators propose a mathematical framework centered on encoding massive data
sets associated with streaming hyperspectral imagery as points on special
manifolds, e.g., as representations on Grassmann, Stiefel as well as flag
manifolds. In this setting, algorithms will be developed for computing
descriptive statistics. A well-known example of such an algorithm was introduced
by Karcher to compute the mean of a set of points on a Grassmann manifold. The
investigators are primarily concerned with developing new algorithms with
improved computational properties on Grassmannians, as well algorithms that can
be applied to, e.g., Stiefel and flag manifolds. These algorithms will be
designed to be applied to very large data sets in real time and will be
evaluated using temporally-evolving hyperspectral data sets made available by
the Defense Threat Reduction Agency. These include (but are not limited to) data
acquired using a Fabry-Perot Interferometer and Frequency Agile
Lidar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed interdisciplinary research program
addresses a major challenge related to National Security, i.e., identifying and
assessing chemical and biological risks in the environment from observational
data in real time. New mathematical tools for exploring massive quantities of
chemical and biological hyperspectral data are proposed to assist with threat
detection and characterization. A primary goal of the research program is to
apply these tools to exceed performance capabilities of current techniques used
for classification of biological and chemical threats. It is anticipated that
the results of this research program will be useful to other applications
related to National Security such as detection of anomalies in data beyond
hyperspectral imagery.