* 1120268
* RUI:   Function and Structural Characterization of Secondary Product Glucosyltransferase Clones from Citrus paradisi
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Cecilia McIntosh, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 386,774.00

Flavonoids are a major group of compounds that are produced by plants. In
addition to their significant roles in the plant life cycle, flavonoids have
important food properties, including contributions to flavor and anti-oxidant
activity. The focus of this research is to advance our understanding of the
manner in which specific flavonoids are produced in the grapefruit.
Specifically, the structure and function of the enzymes (the
glucosyltransferases) that add sugar groups to the flavonoids will be studied,
and the roles that these enzymes play in the production of different classes of
flavonoid will be defined.

Broader Impact: This project will provide training and educational opportunities
at a predominantly undergraduate institution located in an economically
disadvantaged region within Southern Appalachia. The modular nature of this
research is well suited to the engagement of undergraduate and M.S. students in
comprehensive research experiences that include designing and executing
experiments, analyzing results, making presentations at scientific meetings, and
preparing articles for publication. The PI will mentor undergraduate students
about career opportunities, and will engage in outreach to middle school, high
school and elementary school students and teachers through a variety of
activities that include workshops, mentoring classes and individual student
research activities.