* 1120380
* The evolution and biogeography of mimetic Elymnias butterflies in Southeast Asia (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae: Satyrinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* David Lohman, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2015
* USD 290,000.00

Natural selection can play an important role in speciation, but few studies
examine how mimicry may accelerate diversification, particularly in taxa
distributed across a geographically complex region. The genus Elymnias is a
little-studied group of mimetic butterflies that vary dramatically in color,
pattern, and size because different species frequently mimic dramatically
different models. The evolutionary history of the 43 species in this genus will
be inferred using DNA sequences from multiple genetic markers to address several
key questions, including: 1) Have similar mimetic wing patterns evolved
convergently? 2) What role has Southeast Asia's complex geography played in
speciation? 3) Is divergence within a single landmass associated with shifts in
mimetic color pattern? 4) Has sexually dimorphic mimicry evolved multiple
times?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of its species richness and extreme wing
pattern diversity, Elymnias promises to be an unparalleled taxon for studying
rapid evolutionary change. The phylogenetic tree generated in this study will be
used to frame future comparative studies, including genomics-driven approaches
to identifying the genetic basis of wing pattern differences. The specimens,
tissues, and data obtained in this study will be deposited in publicly
accessible museums and databases. This project will support graduate and
undergraduate students, including students from groups underrepresented in
science.