* 1120938
* The Functional Role of Experience in the Development of Visual Cortical Circuits
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jozsef Fiser, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2016
* USD 900,000.00

The goal of the present research project is to uncover how the astonishingly
complex structure of human and animal brains emerges during development and how
it becomes well-suited to perform highly sophisticated behaviors. The PIs will
use the latest multi-electrode, imaging and opto-genetic methods of
electrophysiology to measure the functional development of neural circuits in
the visual cortex from eye opening until the full maturity of the visual system.
If successful, this project will reveal how incoming visual stimuli are combined
with previous visual memories stored in the brain to interpret the visual
environment. This work will illuminate how experience influences the development
of the circuitry in the visual cortex. The potential scientific impact of this
research is extremely high because it can, through using the visual system as a
model example, clarify of how the brain adapts to the environment to perform its
function. This work will have a broader impact on the advancement of science, as
students and postdoctoral fellows will be trained to integrate the study of
behaving animals with advanced neural recording and stimulation technologies.
Further, the computer code for performing recordings and analysis will be
published on the authors? websites, and the authors will provide instructional
tutorials so that others can build upon the methods developed here. The
resulting data will be published on the authors? websites so other scientists
can examine and extend the results. Finally, insights gained about how the
environment influences the development of neural circuitry are likely to have
implications that could reach as far as designing more effective educational
tools and creating more supportive work environments.