* 1120832
* Studying the Structure and Function of Flagella in the Emergent Properties of Bacterial Communities
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Douglas Weibel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2015
* USD 467,711.00

Intellectual Merit Bacteria are not solitary organisms. In their native
habitats, bacteria form large, dense, and often diverse communities in contact
with surfaces. Many bacteria use flagella to swim through fluids and to attach
to surfaces, which is an important step in establishing communities. However,
very little is understood about the role of flagella during the growth and
development of communities. Several observations suggest that flagella play an
important role in coordinating the movement of cells, which is crucial for the
behavior and physiology of multi-cellular structures. This project studies the
role of flagella in community development in three model bacteria and will
develop a framework for understanding how the coordination of behavior of many
individual cells produces multi-cellular behavior.

Broader Impacts This project will have a scientific impact across a range of age
groups, including one graduate student and postdoctoral fellow who will have
opportunities for: 1) mentoring undergraduate research assistants; 2) working
closely with a collaborator in engineering; 3) participating in scientific
conferences; 4) collaborating on the design and development of science outreach
projects with local K-8 teachers; and 5) participating in science outreach
events for K-8 students and their families. This project includes hosting local
teachers as summer interns in the lab for the development of age-specific
microbe-related activities that will be integrated into classrooms and after-
school programs in the Madison Metropolitan School District. These activities
will also be used for one-day family events at local libraries and the
Childrens' Museum in Madison. This research will thus enrich the science
education of postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students, K-8
teachers, and K-8 students and their families.