* 1120387
* To what degree does phylogenetic relatedness between species predict ecological similarity?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2018
* Sharon Strauss, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 577,700.00

A primary goal of ecology is to understand the processes maintaining species
diversity and coexistence in natural communities (also called community
assembly). Models of this process suggest that stable coexistence requires
competitors to differ in their niches, and that species that are too
ecologically similar cannot coexist. Intersecting with this discussion of
ecological similarity and coexistence is the degree to which the evolutionary or
phylogenetic relatedness between species reflects their ecological similarity,
and can thus be used to understand coexistence and community assembly. Several
hypotheses to explain community assembly predict a link between ecological
similarity and phylogenetic relatedness. Darwin argued that closely related
species compete intensely because they have similar morphologies and niches, and
thus should not coexist. The proposed study will combine an explicitly
experimental field approach across a large diversity of plant species, coupled
with extensive observational data, to explore community assembly and the
mechanisms underlying species coexistence in a phylogenetic context. Nineteen
species of native plants will be placed into the habitats of close and distant
relatives and plant performance will be assessed across these habitats both in
the presence and absence of herbivores (experimentally manipulated). In
addition, species will be planted into sterilized, field-collected soils in the
greenhouse and will be inoculated with live or sterilized soil biota communities
from these soils. This experiment will indicate the degree to which soil biota
collected under relatives influences patterns of competition and coexistence
among relatives. Observational data will be collected in the field to document
soil biota, soil mineral properties and patterns of coexistence in the field of
close and distant relatives, along with functional traits of these species in
the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the study will contribute to
strategies aimed at restoring and maintaining natural communities of high
biodiversity, communities that often provide greater ecosystem services than
species-poor communities. The data will be made available to other researchers.
In addition, these activities will support a public lecture series on current
topics in ecology and evolution, as well as train undergraduates, post-doctoral
associates and students between undergraduate and graduate schools. A new female
Assistant Professor will be supported by the grant and mentored by the PI.