* 1120796
* Interaction between electrical activity and bone morphogenetic proteins: Consequences to spinal cord differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Laura Borodinsky, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2017
* USD 920,000.00

Connections among neurons and with target cells enable the plethora of nervous
system tasks. The establishment of these connections relies on the
specialization of neurons during development, which in the spinal cord is
regulated by a family of proteins known as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs).
The current view is that these proteins trigger a genetically hardwired program
that establishes the fate of cells along the dorsoventral axis of the developing
spinal cord. However, differentiation of embryonic neurons is also sensitive to
electrical activity, which manifests spontaneously in these developing cells.
This study will test the hypothesis that a gradient of BMPs across the
dorsoventral axis of the nervous system contributes to establish a gradient of
calcium-dependent electrical activity in immature spinal neurons that, in turn,
regulates neuronal differentiation. A multi-approach study using molecular,
pharmacological, biochemical and physiological techniques will be implemented.
This investigation may lead to new ways of thinking on how the nervous system
develops and will challenge the idea that nervous system development is
exclusively genetically driven. Results from this project may identify novel
mechanisms of action of BMPs of relevance to many research fields, including
developmental biology, neuroscience, stem cells and tissue repair. Overall, this
study will contribute to the understanding of how to induce restorative plastic
events in a pathological context of loss or impaired nervous system
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will serve as role model for female and
latino students and colleagues. This award will support both graduate and
undergraduate students, and the PI will institute a multistep research
experience for the Sacramento High School District in the context of outreach
activities coordinated by the Center for Biophotonics. The PI will also continue
to support international Neuroscience research in developing countries such as
Argentina, through participation in argentine scientific meetings and training
courses.