* 1120209
* Integrating Evolution and Development of Novelty and Diversity through the Study of Horned Beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Armin Moczek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2016
* USD 634,381.00

Biologists have learned a great deal about the developmental and genetic changes
that are necessary to facilitate gradual evolutionary modifications. For
instance, much is known about the genetic and developmental basis that enable
legs or wings to become longer, or eyes to become more efficient in a given
environment. However, little remains known about how major complex traits, such
as legs, wings or eyes, originate in the first place. What does it take to
evolve the first limb, or wing, or eye, from a limbless and blind ancestor?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the origin and diversification
of novel traits using the unique, diverse and morphologically spectacular horns
of beetles as focal traits. Beetle horns are produced in body regions in which
other insects do not produce outgrowths, are highly variable in shape and size,
and endow their bearers with an ecologically important function: a weapon to be
used in combat between rival males over females. Beetle horns thus offer an
outstanding opportunity to investigate the genetic and developmental means by
which novel traits come into being and are elaborated upon as a group of
organisms diversifies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research uses
molecular genetic and developmental approaches to investigate the regulation of
growth, shape, and positioning of traditional appendages (such as legs or wings)
and recently evolved, novel appendages (such as horns). In doing so, this
research aims to identify the degree to which innovation and diversification in
nature are enabled by novel genes and developmental pathways, or the re-use and
modification of existing genes and pathways, or combinations of these two
alternatives. As such it addresses a fundamental, unresolved question in
evolutionary and developmental biology: how novelty can arise in nature from
within the confines of ancestral variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lastly, this
research interfaces tightly with several educational and outreach efforts. (1)
Using a collaboration with a local children's museum for science, health and
technology this research will help provide training and educational resources in
insect biology to approximately 180 local and regional K-12 teachers over the
course of 3 years. (2) This research will help train at least 8 young scientists
(6 undergraduate students, 1 graduate student, 1 postdoc) in intensive
interdisciplinary research. (3) Lastly, it will facilitate educational outreach
by helping recruit 6 high school teachers and 6 minority high school students
for summer research immersion and introduce them to research in development,
evolution, and ecology.