* 1120888
* ATD: Detection of Clusters in Distributed Systems of Information under Dependence
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* David Meyer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 99,873.00

The first part of the proposal deals with detecting correlations. A special case
is the problem of testing whether the covariance matrix of a multivariate
population is the identity matrix. The investigators will reconsider this
classical problem assuming that, under the alternative, only a small fraction of
the variables are correlated. The second part of the proposal is focused on
determining which correlation structures are possible for Bernoulli random
variables. The investigators propose to investigate such algebraic constraints
on correlations between Bernoulli random variables under constraints on the
correlation structure implied by homogeneity (stationarity) and isotropy, in the
case of long range dependence. The third part is on applying resampling
techniques to change point analysis of time series and random fields. This is
particularly important in detection situations where the underlying distribution
of the data is unknown. A recently introduced novel way to bootstrap time
series, namely the linear process bootstrap, holds some promise and seems
extendable to random fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The task of anomaly detection
is quintessential in surveillance settings where the first step is to detect the
presence of an anomaly. Applications range from detecting vehicles that
transport hazardous radioactive or bioactive materials, target tracking, man-
made object recognition from satellite images, and more. Beyond surveillance,
similar detection problems arise in many other areas, such as the detection of
fires for satellites, flu outbreaks in an urban area, or the detection of tumors
in medical imaging. The investigators will focus on detecting unusual
dependencies in the data, on modeling such dependencies and on engineering new
ways of calibrating detectors based on carefully designed simulations.