* 1120296
* Cornell Center for Materials Research - CEMRI
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Frank Wise, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 18,562,500.00

The Center of Excellence in Materials Research and Innovation* (CEMRI) at the
Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR) will explore fundamental challenges
in interdisciplinary materials research that will enable technological progress
of a scope and complexity that requires the sustained contribution of
researchers from multiple disciplines. In doing so, the Center will develop the
experimental and theoretical tools and techniques necessary for further
advances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in the Center will be pursued through
three Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs) as well as a number of smaller
Seed research projects. The theme of IRG-1 is to understand and control complex
electronic materials that have spectacular electronic and magnetic properties,
including high temperature superconductivity, huge electric field effects, and
many forms of nanoscale electron self-organization. Starting from materials that
are reasonably well described by existing theory, the group will systematically
perturb the targeted materials through experimentally-accessible parameters such
as electron overlap and carrier density, using observed changes in materials
properties to drive new advances in understanding. The goal of IRG-2 is to
understand and apply new mechanisms to manipulate electron spins in both
ferromagnetic and non-ferromagnetic materials. This research will potentially
enable nonvolatile magnetic memory technologies that are much smaller, more
energy efficient, more reliable, faster, and less expensive than competing
strategies, possibly leading to the replacement of silicon-based memories in
many applications. IRG-3 will explore atomic membranes an exciting new class of
two-dimensional, free-standing materials only one atom thick yet mechanically
robust, chemically stable, and virtually impermeable. Applications for these
membranes loom in almost every technological sector from electronics to chemical
passivation to high-resolution imaging, but major materials challenges must
first be addressed. The timely exploration of novel ideas, higher-risk and
potentially transformative projects will be enabled by a Seed research program
that will pursue limited-term, exploratory research projects. This program will
nucleate new interdisciplinary, materials-focused research projects, integrate
new faculty into the Center, and refresh the Center's portfolio of research.
National and international collaborations will augment and enable the Center's
research by providing access to one-of-a-kind facilities, specialized
instrumentation, new techniques, and world-leading
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will educate a diverse
cadre of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars in areas
of national need and importance. To further improve the national supply of
science and engineering students, Center researchers will partner with K-12
teachers to improve student interest and achievement in science, technology, and
mathematics. These activities will be complemented by a summer research program
that will provide undergraduate students with an introduction to materials
research. The Center will enhance the local and national materials research
infrastructure by offering both routine and state-of-the-art Shared Facilities,
offering fabrication, analysis, and characterization and consultation to all
users (on a fee-per-use basis). Knowledge transfer to industry and other sectors
will be stimulated by extensive collaborations with international, industrial,
academic, and national lab researchers, as well as by a multifaceted industrial
partnerships program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* An NSF Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center (MRSEC)