* 1120329
* SNM:  Designing and Integrating LCA Methods for Nanomanufacturing Scale-up
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Ahmed Busnaina, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,259,658.00

This Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) research project uses the life cycle
assessment (LCA) methodology to address the ethical, legal, and societal impacts
(ELSI) in decision-making as nanomanufacturing scales to commercial production.
Resource and emission inventories from three carbon nanotube (CNT) nano-enabled
applications will be determined as they apply to manufacture, use, and end-of-
life (EOL) management, including recycling and disposal. Cost models will be
developed and inventories collected through collaboration with researchers and
industry partners. To assess human exposures to CNT materials, exposure
monitoring will be performed during manufacturing (machining, grinding) and at
end-of-life (recycling, incineration). The viability of recycling strategies for
highly-loaded polymer based CNT nanocomposites will be determined. Life cycle
release, fate and transport, and ecotoxicity model outputs will be combined into
an impact assessment characterization factor to be used in standard LCA software
models. The assumptions embedded in LCA valuation will be examined and adjusted
to better incorporate values of sustainability in decision-making.
Recommendations for adapting stewardship strategies for nano-enabled products
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide greater
overall insights into the utility of LCA as a decision tool for various
stakeholders in the nano-enabled product value chain. State and federal
policymakers will also benefit from better understanding of how LCA contributes
to effective environmental governance. The project will examine how LCA
approaches could be strengthened and better integrated into decision-making,
with particular focus on the overall impacts of nanomaterials on emerging
product stewardship programs. This research advocates the responsible
development of nanotechnology as central to promoting scalable nanomanufacturing
and product commercialization by offering a systematic consideration of short
and long-term societal impacts to avoid unintended and unduly harmful
consequences. Ultimately, this project will help to foster the sustainable
development of nanotechnology.