* 1120865
* Collaborative Research: Demographic heterogeneity in landscapes and communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Bruce Kendall, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2015
* USD 260,763.00

Individuals within a population are not identical. Instead, they differ from one
another physically and in their behavior, due to differences in their genetic
make-up and in the environments in which they grow up, including how they are
treated by their parents. This causes individuals in a population to have
different chances of birth and death, a phenomenon known as demographic
heterogeneity. Although widespread, this phenomenon has rarely been considered
in studies of populations of animals or plants. Previous theoretical work by the
researchers heading this project has suggested that demographic heterogeneity
can increase the rate of growth of a population and the maximum number of
individuals that the environment can support, reducing the risk that the
population will go extinct. The new work for the project will expand this theory
to include interactions between species and use it to predict the future of a
wild population of conservation concern, the Florida scrub jay. First, the
theoretical model will be extended to account for the fact that biological
populations are not isolated, but interact with other species through
competition and through eating and being eaten. Research will help understand
whether heterogeneity makes it easier or harder for species to coexist, and how
individual variation in competitive or predatory ability affects the dynamics
and long-term persistence of a community of different species. Second, spatial
models will be used to examine how demographic heterogeneity affects population
dynamics when individuals mainly interact with their immediate neighbors, as in
plants. To start to apply the models to real populations, the project will use
data collected on a population of scrub jays in central Florida, which other
researchers have studied since 1969. Florida scrub jays have an unusual social
structure that promotes demographic heterogeneity: young adults often help their
parents raise younger siblings, improving both the breeding success of their
parents and their own subsequent breeding. Using recent statistical advances,
the project will measure the amount of demographic heterogeneity in the
population and project the impact of that heterogeneity on the population's
future growth and survival. The project will train a post-doctoral researcher
and a graduate student, improve scientific understanding of the link between
individuals and populations, and help develop tools for the conservation of
biodiversity.