* 1120949
* AvrPiz-t-mediated suppression of PAMP- and effector-triggered immunity in rice by targeting host ubiqiutin proteasome system
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Guo-Liang Wang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2016
* USD 634,417.00

Fungal pathogens of plants cause tremendous yield losses in crop production
worldwide. The molecular mechanisms underlying pathogen interference with host
defenses have been gradually elucidated for plant bacterial and oomycete
pathogens. However, these mechanisms are still poorly understood for fungal
pathogens. Rice blast, caused by the fungus Magnaporthe oryzae, is the most
devastating disease of rice. It serves as an advanced model pathosystem for
researchers who study plant-fungal interactions in cereal crops. M. oryzae
introduces an effector protein called AvrPiz-t into its host, where it causes
widespread changes in immune function. This effector is noteworthy for attacking
two components of plant immunity, the reaction to conserved molecular patterns
of the pathogen (PAMP-triggered immunity or PTI) and strain-specific immune
responses to pathogens (effector-triggered immunity or ETI). Preliminary results
indicate that AvrPiz-t represents a novel fungal effector that interacts with
the host?s ubiquitination system for both its virulence and immunity inducing
activities. In particular, it interacts with three rice enzymes called ubiquitin
E3 ligases to suppress their ligase activity and thereby reduce the
effectiveness of the host's immune response. The immunosuppressive activity of
the pathogen is countered by these same E3 ligases, which ubiquitinate AvrPiz-t
to mark it for degradation. This project seeks to understand at the molecular
level how AvrPiz-t interacts with host proteins to suppress the host's innate
immunity. The specific goals are: (1) Determine the interference, degradation,
ubiquitination and PTI suppression mechanisms of AvrPiz-t; (2) Identify the
function of an E3 ligase in the regulation of PTI and ETI; and (3) Use genetic
and biochemical approaches to gain insight into the relationship between this E3
ligase and the resistance protein that mediates the immune response induced by
AvrPiz-t. The project will potentially provide new insights into fungal disease
control in rice and other cereal crops. As the staple food for nearly 50% of the
world's population, development of new rice blast control strategies from this
project will affect food security and social stability in many developing
countries. Moreover, this project will provide extensive training opportunities
for a postdoctoral fellow and a PhD student who might continue to work on this
important disease in the future.