* 1120256
* ATD Collaborative Research: Statistical Modeling of Short-Read Counts in RNA-Seq
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2014
* Wenxuan Zhong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 01/31/2014
* USD 281,030.00

Rapid and accurate detection of biothreat is important not only for containing
its potential damages, but also for determining potential medical remedies.
Extensive researches show that certain genes in infected cells have different
mRNA expression levels for different pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;Thus, an accurate
identification of the genes that react to pathogens and an accurate
quantification of their expression variations are key steps in early biothreat
detections. The emerging RNA-Seq technologies provide tens of millions of short
sequence reads of the expressed genes, which, after mapping to the genome, can
be converted to accurately represent gene expression levels. However, the
conversion from sequence reads to gene expression levels is still problematic.
In this project, The investigator and her colleagues will tackle this problem by
modeling RNA-Seq data through a broad class of flexible nonlinear models, called
sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) models; propose novel variable selection
methods for SDR models; and develop theoretical underpinning of the
effectiveness of the proposed methods. As a consequence, this effort will result
in a powerful software suite for estimating gene expression levels from RNA-seq
data and identifying marker genes reacting to specific pathogens in a unified
framework.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project not only addresses
some emerging issues in biothreat detections using high-throughput sequencing
technologies, but also results in novel statistical methods and&lt;br/&gt;theory
broadly applicable to general statistical learning and prediction problems. More
specifically, the proposed methods (i) produce innovative new methodologies for
analyzing ultra-high dimensional data, (ii) inspire new lines of quantitative
investigations in genomics, and (iii) offer a unique educational experience for
both undergraduate and graduate students to participate in cutting-edge
statistical and interdisciplinary research.