* 1120712
* Conference: CSH Laboratory Course on Molecular Techniques in Plant Science at Cold Spring Harbor, NY, July 1-22,2011 CSHL Frontiers and Techniques in Plant Science Course
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 57,000.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory is offering a summer course on Frontiers and
Techniques in Plant Science. This is a 3 week combined laboratory and lecture
course for students ranging from advanced graduate student to faculty.
Scientists come from universities, medical schools, research institutes and
industry. Laboratory work includes projects using a wide variety of species,
including model and agriculturally important plants such as maize, rice,
Arabidopsis, tobacco and tomato, reflecting current research priorities in many
US and international laboratories. The course allows students to take advantage
of a wealth of technological resources applied to biological processes that are
unique to plants. They will gain experience with recent advances in several
systems, including genetic, genomic and comparative studies. The course is
designed to fulfill a continuing demand within the academic community and
industry for training in molecular and genetic approaches to plant science. The
intention is (1) to teach state of the art techniques to scientists already
involved in plant research so that they can apply these technologies to their
own future research and (2) to introduce scientists familiar with microbial,
animal or plant systems to cutting-edge research carried out by top plant
biologists. The course consists of a rigorous lecture series, a hands-on
laboratory and informal workshops on a variety of research tools. Speakers will
provide both an overview of their specialty and an in-depth discussion of their
work. These speakers will be experts in a variety of plant systems, and will
bring a range of technical expertise to the course. The laboratory sessions
provide an intensive training in modern techniques in plant biology and
reinforce the lessons learned in lectures.