* 1120020
* Conference: Support for 23rd International Colloquium on the Dynamics of Explosions and Reactive Systems, Irvine, California, July 24-29, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,08/31/2011
* Derek Dunn-Rankin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

1120020&lt;br/&gt;Dunn-Rankin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for support
of US students and junior researchers to attend the International Colloquium on
the Dynamics of Explosions and Reactive Systems (ICDERS). The meeting is held
biannually in the years when the Combustion Symposium is not held. The host
organization is formally the Institute for the Dynamics of Explosions and
Reactive Systems (IDERS, a non-profit organization registered in the state of
Washington, USA, but the conference is essentially organized by the hosting
institution. The 23rd ICDERS meeting will be held at the University of
California, Irvine, July 24-29, 2011. It has been 10 years since the meeting was
last held in the United States. Recent prior Symposia include: Minsk, Belarus,
2009; Poitiers, France, 2007; Montreal, Canada, 2005; Hakone, Japan,
2003.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;ICDERS is the longest
running specialist meeting of the Combustion Institute, and is the most
important international meeting on combustion and explosions that focuses on the
dynamic elements of reactive systems. It focuses on combustion and explosion
dynamics, the following lists the topics from the session titles at the most
recent past meeting in Minsk: 1) Deflagration-Detonation Transition; 2)
Detonation - Structure; 3) Modeling of Reactive Systems; 4) Jet Ignition; 5)
Combustion Induced Vortex Breakdown; 6) Flames in IC Engines; 7) Multiphase
Reactive System; 8) Diagnostics; 9) Fires; 10) Pulsed Detonation Engines and
Rotating Detonation Engines; 11) Fast Flames; 12) Ignition; 13) Soot; 14)
Flames; 15) Hydrocarbon Ignition and Combustion; 16) Detonation Initiation; 17)
Numerical Simulation; 18) Detonation Structure and Chemical Reaction; 19)
Detonation Multiphase; 20) Electric and Magnetic Effects; 21) Flame
Instabilities; 22) Flames in Channels; 23) Chemical Kinetics; 24) Explosions;
25) Micro and Mesoscale Combustion; 26) Multiphase Combustion; 27) Various other
Topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The current plan
includes (1) a special grad-student/post-doc poster session and reception that
allows younger scientists to interact directly with each other. (2) Discounted
registration for selected U.S. researchers who have recently graduated (since
they cannot get the student rate and might not have the resources for a full
registration to present material that is not associated with their current
position). (3) Graduate student registration waivers for student presenters to
encourage their attendance and participation.