* 1120699
* ATD: DEEP SEQUENCING OF MICROBIAL POPULATIONS: DISENTANGLING  DIVERSITY, DYNAMICS, AND ERRORS
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Daniel Fisher, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 744,131.00

Deep sequencing of microbial populations is a potentially powerful probe of
their diversity and their dynamical evolutionary history. Unfortunately, the
ability to analyze deep sequencing data and to infer information in the presence
of errors has far from kept up with DNA sequencing capabilities. The
difficulties are particularly pronounced for investigating the fine-scale
diversity in a population of closely related microbes. The investigator and his
colleagues will develop new algorithms for extraction of reliable information on
the genomic diversity of microbial populations and analyze the short-term
dynamical evolutionary processes that can generate such diversity. The
algorithms will be based on modeling the processes that produce errors and
biases in deep sequencing data, primarily the PCR amplification of the DNA and
the sequencing itself. But in order to make useful inferences about fine-scale
diversity, far better understanding is needed of the evolutionary dynamics of
large microbial populations. &lt;br/&gt;Thus a spectrum of evolutionary
scenarios will be modeled and analyzed focussing on the diversity and clues it
may give to the evolutionary history. The algorithms developed for disentangling
the diversity from errors will then be focussed and adapted to use the
expectations from the evolutionary modeling as prior information and thereby
distinguish between different scenarios. This will include developing optimized
strategies for depth, breadth, and timing of DNA
sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolution of animals is usually very slow, but
bacteria and viruses evolve extremely fast and this evolution leads to major
threats to humans. For example, the evolution of usually innocuous bacteria
within children with cystic fibrosis is what eventually leads to their premature
death, and, on a global scale, evolution of influenza is what causes new
epidemics. Better understanding and observations of evolution of pathogens is
sorely needed. In the laboratory, bacteria and viruses also evolve --- and this
evolution can be directed. Although artificial evolution can lead to many
benefits, such as bacteria that eat pollutants, it can also be used for
nefarious purposes. A crucial capability, such as for investigation of the
anthrax attacks ten years ago, is to determine the evolutionary history from
samples: when, where, and how they evolved. Fortunately, DNA sequencing has
become so inexpensive that one can not only sequence many individual bacteria or
viruses, but also sequence whole populations. This enables direct observations
of the evolution of a population. the spectrum of differences among the
individuals that provides the variation on which natural selection acts, and
clues to the evolutionary history. But DNA sequencing produces many errors which
make extraction of the useful information exceedingly difficult. This project
will develop new algorithms for disentangling the actual DNA sequences from the
errors. In parallel, sophisticated mathematical modeling will be used to explore
various possible evolutionary histories and the resulting sequence variations.
These will be put together to develop strategies for optimal use of DNA
sequencing for inferring key aspects of the evolution of bacterial and viral
populations, and understanding and predicting their consequences.