* 1120327
* Stochastic dynamics of neuronal populations with intrinsic and extrinsic noise
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Paul Bressloff, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2016
* USD 350,994.00

In biochemical and gene networks, there is an important distinction between
intrinsic and extrinsic noise; extrinsic noise refers to external sources of
randomness associated with environmental factors, whereas intrinsic noise refers
to random fluctuations arising from the discrete and probabilistic nature of
chemical reactions at the molecular level, which are particularly significant
when the number of reacting molecules is small. The main goal of this research
project is to develop a mathematical theory of intrinsic and extrinsic noise in
neuronal population dynamics, adapting analytical methods from the study of
chemical master equations such as Langevin approximations, stochastic hybrid
systems, and large deviation theory. It is assumed that intrinsic noise at the
network level arises from fluctuations about an asynchronous state due to finite
size effects, whereas extrinsic noise arises from fluctuating external inputs.
The theory is applied to a variety of neurobiological phenomena where noise is
thought to play a crucial role, including the stimulus-induced synchronization
of neural oscillators during sensory processing, and the generation of
oscillations and waves during binocular rivalry. The latter forms the basis for
non-invasive studies of human vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noise has recently
emerged as a key component of many biological systems including the brain.
Randomness arises at multiple levels of brain function, ranging from molecular
processes such as gene expression and the opening of ion channel proteins to
complex networks of brain cells (neurons) that generate behavior. Indeed, the
presence of noise has direct behavioral consequences, from setting perceptual
and decision thresholds to influencing movement precision. Noise also
contributes to the generation of spontaneous activity patterns during resting
brain states, which are thought to play an important role in cognition. From one
perspective, neuroscientists are interested in how, in spite of significant
levels of noise, the brain appears to function reliably, consistent with the
idea that it has evolved under the constraints that are imposed by noise. From
another perspective, neuroscientists are interested in situations where the
presence of noise can either be harmful to or, in certain cases, actually
enhance brain function. The main goal of this project is to use mathematical and
computational modeling to develop our understanding of how noise that is present
at the molecular and cellular levels affects dynamics and information processing
at the network level, both in healthy and diseased brains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous behaviors ranging from locomotion to cognitive
tasks rely on oscillatory activity generated by networks of neurons in the
brain. Despite the predominance and indispensability of brain oscillations, few
theoretical tools are available for understanding how such oscillations are
generated or controlled. A novel approach is used that combines biological
experiments and mathematical analysis to break apart the complex interactions
present in network components into simple building blocks. This allows core
elements that are important in the generation of oscillations to be extracted
and will clarify the role of other existing components in sculpting behavior
using mathematical models. The models are tested through experiments that
connect real time computer-simulated neurons to small oscillatory network in the
crab central nervous systems. This project provides a framework for developing
neural-based control systems with potential applications in robotics and bio-
inspired computing.