* 1120769
* Conference:  2011 CSHL Conference on Mechanisms of Eukaryotic Transcription to be held August 30 - September 3, 2011 at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on Eukaryotic
Transcription will be held August 30- September 3, 2011 at Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory. This meeting is a central forum for the presentation of new results
in eukaryotic transcription. Participants will represent laboratories throughout
the world, and most attendees will present either short talks or posters. The
breadth of the conference makes it an important focus for the exchange of
information in this era of scientific specialization. Topics for the meeting
will include: 1) Global Regulation of Transcription, 2) Transcription Initiation
Mechanisms of Pol I, II &amp; III, 3) Coactivator Complexes and Activation
Mechanisms, 4) Transcription Elongation and Termination Mechanisms, 5) Chromatin
and Transcription, 6) Regulation of Transcription Factor Activity, 7) Signaling
and Regulatory Mechanisms, and 8) Transcriptional Regulation in
Development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The meeting will provide an
outstanding opportunity for participation by graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows and for those from underrepresented groups. For many, this is the first
large meeting at which they have an opportunity to speak, and the highly
interactive nature of the meeting allows young scientists to meet and talk to
the senior scientists they know from the literature. Thus, it plays a vital role
in building scientific networks.