* 1120062
* LiT:   Phenotype-based models for ecological and evolutionary responses to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Joel Kingsolver, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 487,180.00

How do the morphological and physiological traits of organisms determine their
responses to climate change? Which traits are more likely to evolve? To address
these questions this project will integrate lab and field experiments with
mathematical models for two species of Colias butterflies in the Colorado Rocky
Mountains. How temperature affects larval feeding, development, and heat
tolerance will be measured and these results will be compared to historical lab
data (30-50 years) to detect evolutionary changes. This project will also
compare adult morphological traits and heat tolerance to historical data and
museum specimens (&gt;100 years). To examine how traits influence performance,
reciprocal transplant of larvae and adults across sites at different elevations
will be conducted. These data will be used to develop models that predict how
traits determine survival and reproduction in changing climate conditions. To
predict the impact of future environmental change on Colias model simulations
with and without trait evolution will be applied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will train undergraduate and graduate students to conduct
interdisciplinary environmental change research. The project will continue
initiatives for undergraduates to report current evolutionary research via
articles and podcasts and to train high school teachers in global change
ecology. We will apply our models to Colias in Rocky Mountain National Park and
publically disseminate our predictions of possible climate change impacts.