* 1120577
* SNM:  Scalable Nanomanufacturing Machine Based on Parallel Optical Antenna Array
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Timothy Fisher, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,300,000.00

This Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) grant provides funding for the development
of a high throughput, scalable nanomanufacturing machine for parallel
nanolithography and parallel manufacturing of nanomaterials and devices.
Research in the past two decades has demonstrated superior properties and
performances of nanomaterials and devices. However, technologies for producing
nanomaterial-based devices suffer from low throughput. To bring the advances in
nano-science and technology to society, nanomanufacturing methods scalable to
economically and industrially relevant production levels are needed. This
machine will greatly expand the capability of commercial machines in terms of
high throughput, high resolution, and high precision manufacturing, and will be
the first commercial scale manufacturing machine capable of both parallel
nanolithography and parallel nanomaterials synthesis. The development of the
machine will be based on advances in using nanoscale optical antennas for
nanomanufacturing. The nanoscale antenna produces high intensity, localized
light spot; and an array of antennas is used for parallel nanomanufacturing. To
synthesize nanomaterials, the localized energy from antenna will create
localized chemical reaction environment for producing nanomaterials at precise
locations, ready for device fabrication using standard semiconductor
manufacturing tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project will
result in a unique and first of its kind machine for nanolithography and for
manufacturing of nanomaterials that can be readily used for developing many
types of nano/multi-scale devices. The development of such a commercial high
throughput nanomanufacturing machine will enable manufacturing of nanoscale
devices at economically and industrially relevant production levels, which will
impact every sector in industry. The project will address fundamental and
engineering challenges critical for the development of the machine, including
nano-optics, on-line metrology, manufacturing engineering, and system
integration. The project will also advance the relevant science and engineering.
The ability to concentrate light into a nanometer spot with high efficiency has
significant impact not only on nanomanufacturing but also on other areas in
science and technology, from biological/chemical sensing to next-generation data
storage. The project will also provide graduate and undergraduate students,
including students from under-represented groups with trainings in
interdisciplinary areas and industrial experience through internships in
industry. Undergraduate students will be recruited to the project through Purdue
undergraduate research fellowship programs. Research results will be introduced
as new modules or special topics in a number of courses and undergraduate senior
design projects, and will be outreached to high school students through Purdue
outreach programs. Therefore, this project will have broader impacts on human
resource development.