* 1120937
* Elucidating molecular mechanisms of the iron deficiency response in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Terri Long, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2016
* USD 581,555.00

Elucidating molecular mechanisms of the iron deficiency response in
plants&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The ability to respond to fluctuations in
nutritional availability is critical for all living cells. Multicellular
organisms can respond to such challenges by altering a number of physiological,
developmental and molecular processes that are often controlled at the level of
transcription. While conventional molecular biology and physiological approaches
have revealed the importance of genes involved in nutrient uptake and transport,
few transcriptional regulators have been identified that coordinate organismal
responses to nutrient availability. This research focuses on the following
questions: What transcription factors regulate the response to iron deprivation
in plants? How do these transcription factors interact with each other and other
proteins to regulate gene expression? Is there a protein complex that acts as an
iron sensing mechanism in plant roots that reacts and leads to the classic
response to low iron? Since plant iron transporters translocate other metals
nonspecifically, studying this mechanism will further inform us about
homeostasis of other metals. Moreover, the protein-protein interactions that we
will examine shares features with an iron sensing and response mechanism
recently described in mammalian cells and would, therefore, shed new light on
conserved iron sensing and response mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Iron deficiency, which causes anemia, is the most prevalent nutritional
disorder in the world. Approximately 30% of the world's population is iron
deficient, which results in increased maternal mortality and infant loss,
impaired growth and cognitive development and decreased immune response. In
addition, iron deficiency is a global problem for the growth of major crops
grown in calcareous soils. This project proposes to increase our understanding
of how plants respond to iron deprivation with the long term goal of producing
plants with enhanced nutritional capacity and tolerance of nutrient-poor soils,
thus increasing our ability to address increasing global nutritional needs. In
addition to agricultural and nutritional contributions, this project will create
resources for the scientific community at large, including a new model for how
iron content is sensed within cells. Moreover, the project will provide unique
research opportunities for students, in particular, underrepresented minority
groups attending smaller historically black colleges and universities. Thus, the
project will help to increase the dept and breath of molecular and plant biology
researchers.