* 1120000
* Dissemination of Microprocessor Courses through Classroom and Interactive Cyber-Enabled Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Steve Hsiung, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 03/31/2016
* USD 596,302.00

The proposed project is to refine and disseminate a cyber-enabled learning
system on microcontroller technologies that the PIs developed in a Type 1 CCLI
project and make it adaptable by other institutions. Assessment of the Type 1
project indicates that the microcontroller curriculum and training system were
both effective and efficient in delivering the learning experience required for
microelectronics education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Type 2 project is
substantially increasing the functionalities of the PIC training system, further
testing its capabilities in distance learning, making it more adaptable to other
institutions, and expanding its use by other instructors in three regions of the
US. The project team will design additional trainer hardware/software, develop
distance learning management tools, and add 6 course modules that fit into
electrical and computer engineering and engineering technology curricula. One
hundred and twenty faculty members from 2-year and 4-year institutions and high
schools across the country will be trained to use the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed PIC training system has potential for
large scale adoption not only because of its effectiveness and efficiency, but
also the possibility of commercialization. The low relative cost for this system
makes it attractive to a broad spectrum of electronics teachers from high school
to community college to university level. The effort of this project will
contribute to the education of the next generation of microcontroller designers
and technicians and help to maintain US leadership in the area of
microcontroller technologies.