* 1120502
* Topoclimate and plant distributions on the Cape Peninsula (South Africa): implications for resilience to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2014
* David Ackerly, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2014
* USD 90,000.00

Anthropogenic climate change poses a threat to biodiversity across the globe.
One of the most important responses for a species that is sensitive to climate
is migration and a shift in species distributions across a landscape. In
mountainous landscapes, fine-scale variation in topography (south vs. north-
facing slopes, cold air drainages, etc.) can generate a wide range of climate
conditions over a fairly small spatial scale. This variability may allow plants
and animals to respond to global climate change through local shifts in
distribution, providing spatial resilience in the face of temporally changing
conditions. This project will examine the influence of topography on
microclimate and plant distributions in Table Mountain National Park, part of
the mega-diverse Cape Floristic Region of South Africa. Distributions of shrubs
in the Proteaceae will be examined in relation to fine-scale topographic
variation at a 30m pixel scale. A detailed study of diurnal and seasonal
temperature variation will be conducted to quantify elevational lapse rates, the
occurrence of marine inversion layers, and the small-scale effects of slope,
aspect and cold air drainage. The results will be used to develop a spatial
model of topoclimate and to refine statistical models of plant distributions in
relation to climate. Finally, future climate scenarios will be downscaled to a
fine spatial scale, and combined with species distribution models to test the
hypothesis that topoclimatic heterogeneity will enhance population persistence
in the face of climate change.

In connection with the proposed research, the PI will teach a two-week short
course for South African graduate students on statistical methods in spatial
analysis and phylogenetics. Participation by students from underrepresented
economic and ethnic groups will be encouraged. The workshop will contribute to
development of statistical expertise and the professional careers of
participating students, and build a foundation for continuing international
collaboration.