* 1120924
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Priming optimism: The automaticity of health risk perceptions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Jane Brown, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2012
* USD 14,425.00

Communication initiatives frequently are used to inform people about various
risks in an attempt to improve their decision making and behavior. People,
however, do not readily accept personal risk information, often underestimating
their susceptibility to and the severity of the risks. This project is designed
to learn more about perceptions of health risks with the ultimate goal of
designing more effective messages for health promotion and disease
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves three experiments to
learn whether people automatically underestimate their health risks, that is,
without awareness, intention, or effort. The first experiment explores whether
participants subconsciously primed with self-identity words (e.g., ?I,? ?me?)
respond faster than participants primed with third-person (e.g., ?he,?
?herself?) or neutral (e.g., ?it,? ?itself?) words. The second experiment
explores whether participants primed with self-identity words will exhibit
faster response times when they are mentally taxed (i.e., memorizing an eight-
digit number) compared to when they are not (i.e., memorizing a two-digit
number). The third experiment will explore whether highly reactant participants
(i.e., those who react negatively to restrictions on personal choice) when
primed with self-identity words will exhibit faster response times in response
to health conditions that are perceived to be highly controllable (i.e.,
conditions that are preventable if personal action is taken). In all three
experiments, the research team will also examine several individual difference
variables (e.g., self efficacy, dispositional optimism) and see if
characteristics of the health risk (e.g., prevalence) influence risk
perceptions.