* 1120425
* Genomic Architecture of Adaptation in Yeast Experimental Evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Maitreya Dunham, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 04/30/2016
* USD 847,239.00

Intellectual Merit: How organisms adapt to new environments is an important
evolutionary question. Genome sequencing projects are currently discovering the
genetic differences found in populations and between species. However, it is
more difficult to determine which of these genetic changes cause adaptation and
how. This project uses evolution of yeast populations in controlled laboratory
conditions to watch evolution in action. By using new cheaper, faster sequencing
methods, the genomes of evolved yeast strains can be decoded and compared to the
ancestral founder cell. Discovered mutations can be engineered into new strains
to test their effects alone and in combinations. These engineered strains will
also be used to ask how mutations control which genes are active under the
growth conditions. Finally, the project will repeat the evolution experiment
multiple additional times to find how reproducible the results are. Results will
allow discovery of what kinds of mutations are responsible for adaptation to new
environments, how they lead to adaptive change, and how frequently the same
genes acquire mutations if evolution is performed repeatedly. Due to the
complexity of natural environments, simplified laboratory systems, like the one
employed here, offer distinct advantages for testing these important questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will have a number of broader
impacts in undergraduate and public science education, inclusion of
underrepresented groups, and scientific understanding. Dr. Dunham has a strong
record of educating undergraduates, including women, underrepresented
minorities, and students from primarily undergraduate institutions. This
research will allow more students to participate in substantive, independent
research. Further understanding of evolutionary processes is a benefit to
science and society. In particular, experimental demonstrations of evolution are
a compelling example of evolutionary change in action. Understanding adaptation
will also be useful to learning how to improve domesticated crops, animals, and
microorganisms through selection.