* 1120076
* Nitrogen Oxide Chemistry:  Connecting Ambient Concentrations to Mechanisms of Emission, Oxidaton and Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Ronald Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 221,692.00

This project supports an integrated interpretation of flux and gradient
measurements from the Biosphere Effects on Aerosols and Photochemistry
Experiment (BEARPEX) during 2007 and 2009. The overall goal is to improve
mechanistic understanding of nitrogen exchange between the atmosphere and
forests. Nitrogen oxides control the catalytic production of tropospheric O3
directly via NOx (NO + NO2) cycling and indirectly via termination reactions of
the HOx (OH + HO2) cycle and associated production of higher oxides of nitrogen.
The atmosphere-biosphere exchange of NOy (sum of oxidized N species) also
affects NOy budgets on regional and global scales, ecosystem productivity, and
carbon cycling. A reliable predictive capability for the physicochemical
evolution of the troposphere and related feedbacks involving ecosystems requires
that major pathways in the cycling of nitrogen oxides be understood and reliably
implemented in models.

Building on past results, this project will investigate factors regulating the
forests NO2 compensation point, the atmospheric mixing ratio below which NO2 is
emitted from the forest and above which NO2 is deposited to the forest. The
BEARPEX 2007 and 2009 experiments were designed, in part, to provide
quantitative constraints on the nature of these NO2 exchange processes. Vertical
gradients in NO and NO2 mixing ratios through the forest canopy were measured in
parallel with their corresponding fluxes into and out of the canopy. Fluxes of
NO from forest soils were also quantified. These results provide independent
evidence for a compensation point but actual values inferred from each vary. In
addition, NO and NO2 fluxes measured using similar techniques during a 2004
experiment at the same location yielded a factor of 3 greater compensation
point, which suggests that the nature of atmosphere-forest exchange may vary as
a function of long-term temporal changes in ambient NOx mixing ratios. In
addition to NOx, exchange fluxes of higher oxides of nitrogen during BEARPEX
2009 diverged substantially from those measured in 2004. This project will
synthesize these various data and associated process-level constraints. Results
will be interpreted based on theoretical approaches including modified Browning
analysis and detailed model calculations. The overall goal is to develop a
coherent mechanistic understanding of factors regulating nitrogen exchange
between the atmosphere and forests based on the available observational
constraints.

The project will contribute to the training graduate students, including two
women, and undergraduate students. It will also foster K-12 science education
through collaboration with the Chabot Space and Science Center, a local museum
with a strong presence in the Oakland school district. Finally, results will
advance understanding of the scientific basis for policy decisions regarding air
quality and climate. Findings will be communicated in the scientific literature,
to a more general audience through various outreach media, and directly to
regulators in California at both the Bay Area Air Quality Management District
and the California Air Resources Board.