* 1120867
* Collaborative Research: Phylogeography in Madagascar - Using ants to test hypotheses of biotic diversification in a model continent
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Brian Fisher, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2014
* USD 176,000.00

The tropical regions of the world house a disproportionately high amount of the
world's biodiversity. Though the reasons for this are not well understood, a
number of hypotheses have sought to explain these high rates of speciation; most
focusing on the well-studied biota of the Neotropics. The goal of this research
project is to better understand biotic diversification in the tropics by
focusing on Madagascar, a natural laboratory for such work. Due to its
isolation, Madagascar is well suited to explore how organisms diverge and
persist in fragmented habitats without the confounding influence of migration to
or from adjacent areas. The researchers will study speciation of ants, which as
a group, are younger than the island itself. Thus all 700+ species known from
Madagascar are derived from transoceanic colonists, whose speciation and
diversification on the island has left a genetic signature of these processes in
their descendants. By employing molecular data and genomic methods the
scientists will explore the history and the factors influencing the
diversification of Malagasy ants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This high diversity in
Madagascar, the comprehensive sampling of the endemic ants, and the availability
of newly developed, low-cost DNA sequencing technologies will allow this study
to test recent advances in methods of ecological niche modeling, delimiting
species, and inferring relationships. These data also will allow rigorous
testing of existing hypotheses of biotic diversification and examination of
whether temporal and ecological commonalities exist in patterns observed among
taxa. This will be one of the broadest assessments of tropical diversification
to date and will greatly enhance understanding of 1) the biological history of
Madagascar, 2) the role of landscape features and environmental change on
biological diversification, and 3) the extent to which modeling methods can
contribute to the delimitation of distinct species. The project will train
graduate and undergraduate students.