* 1120225
* Redefining Cdc14 Phosphatase: Exposing Roles in Flagellated Cells Through Studies of an Oomycete
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2014
* USD 719,620.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a protein called
Cdc14. The protein was described initially as a regulator of the replication of
nuclei during cell growth, and is generally assumed to play that role in most
organisms. However, recent findings conflict with that traditional model. This
research will bring a new perspective to the Cdc14 story by examining
Phytophthora infestans, a plant pathogenic microbe that was the cause of the
historic Irish Famine of the mid-1800's and is still a major threat to food
production. P. infestans grows by forming hyphae that make stationary spores
that in turn release swimming spores. Its Cdc14 is needed to form the swimming
spores, and much of the protein localizes to the swimming apparatus, also known
as flagella. To learn more about the function of Cdc14, experiments will be
performed to define precisely where in the cell the protein resides, learn how
it is targeted to those locations, test how it influences swimming spore
behavior, and study proteins that may be regulated by Cdc14. This work will
contribute to the development of a unified theme to explain the function(s) of
Cdc14 in P. infestans and other species. It will likely also be relevant to
understanding the formation and evolution of flagella, which are central to the
life cycles of both single-cell and multicellular organisms.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phytophthora and its relatives cause numerous
destructive diseases on plants and animals in agriculture and natural
environments. The research may lead to ways to prevent losses in those systems,
for example by identifying cellular targets that if inhibited would block
infection of hosts. The work also integrates research, education, and outreach,
as it will train a postdoctoral fellow, graduate students, and undergraduates.
The investigator has a record of supporting undergraduate research by students
from under-represented groups, and providing the oomycete research community
with experimental tools and training. Such activities will continue throughout
this project.