* 1120186
* Assessing the evolutionary history, taxonomy, and genetic diversity of Pueraria (Fabaceae: tribe Phaseoleae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Ashley Egan, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 09/30/2013
* USD 508,056.00

Kudzu (Pueraria montana var. lobata) is a noxious, invasive weed in the U.S.
that presents a significant threat to native biodiversity. Since its
introduction ~130 years ago, this legume has literally engulfed thousands of
square miles and cost millions of dollars in eradication measures. Considering
its economic and ecological impact, it is surprisingly understudied. This
project will integrate the efforts of citizen scientists, graduate and
undergraduate students, and collaborating scientists from four Asian countries
to examine the evolutionary history, taxonomy, and genetic diversity of the
genus Pueraria in an effort to understand invasiveness in the kudzu species
complex and determine how Pueraria species relate to other legumes, including
several of economic importance such as soybean (Glycine max) and jicama
(Pachyrhizus erosus). Extensive fieldwork will be integrated with genetic and
geographic analyses to determine how many introductions of kudzu have taken
place in the U.S., from what genetic source(s), and how genetic diversity and
interplay within and among Pueraria species and populations have influenced
range expansion.

This work will integrate education and research to provide educational
opportunities for K-12, post-secondary students and the public through programs
connected with Earth Day Activities, A Time for Science Nature Center, citizen
science, and an innovative ecotourism venture within Great Smoky Mountain
National Park. Results may aid in kudzu eradication efforts by informing
management practices.