* 1120370
* Employing Models of Evolution and Protein Translation to Infer Protein Production Rates from Genomic Data
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Michael Gilchrist, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2015
* USD 711,501.00

Intellectual Merit: Protein translation is one of the most fundamental and
universally conserved biological processes. As a result, a detailed
understanding of the steps involved remains a major research focus in molecular
biology and cellular biology. Most knowledge of protein production is limited to
results from laboratory experiments. However, if selection on translational
errors and efficiency contribute to the evolution of the codons used to create a
protein, it follows that genomic data will contain information on the nature and
importance of these forces. A major challenge facing the scientific community is
how to extract such information in an efficient and biologically meaningful
manner. The goal of this research project is to develop statistical techniques
that will allow scientists to efficiently extract and interpret this
biologically important information from an organism's genome. The major outcomes
of this work will include the ability to estimate key biological parameters,
such as the direct cost of protein translation, the frequency at which different
errors occur, and the average expression level of every gene within a
genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide direct
hands-on research training at the interface of mathematics and biology for
students at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels. These
students will present their results at local and regional meetings, including an
Annual Undergraduate Research Conference hosted by the National Institute for
Mathematical and Biological Synthesis (NIMBioS). In addition, the PIs will serve
as mentors for undergraduates participating in an ongoing NSF-sponsored Summer
Research Experience for Undergraduates and Veterinarians (REU/REV) program
sponsored by NIMBioS. This REU/REV program actively promotes the involvement of
students from underrepresented groups, including women and minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, by the
Evolutionary Processes Cluster in the Division of Environmental Biology, and by
the Advances in Biological Informatics Cluster in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure.