* 1120054
* Collaborative Research: Southern Amazonian birds and their symbionts: Biodiversity and endemicity of parasites from the most diverse avifauna on Earth
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,02/28/2015
* John Bates, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 02/28/2015
* USD 569,290.00

This project involves several parasitologists from the USA, Brazil, Bulgaria,
and Ukraine that will collaborate to survey, study, describe, and archive
parasites associated with birds in five geographically isolated regions (areas
of endemism) of southern Amazonian Brazil. The research will involve collection
and deposition of museum specimens for research and will use both physical
characteristics and genetic data from both the birds and their parasites to
describe this poorly known segment of biological diversity in the world's
richest ecosystem. At over 6.5 million km2, Amazonia is estimated to harbor more
than one tenth of the world's species. Brazilian Amazonia harbors the most
diverse bird fauna on earth (~1300 species), yet the parasite fauna of Amazonian
birds is almost completely unstudied. Parasites are incredibly diverse and make
up 30-70% of life on earth.

This project has a number of important societal benefits. First, this work
fosters international collaboration between US and Brazilian researchers and
students, who will travel between these institutions to teach, learn, work, and
collaborate to further the understanding of birds and their parasites. Training
of a diverse pool (including underrepresented groups) of US and Brazilian
graduate and undergraduate students will augment the diminishing pool of
expertise working on understudied parasite groups. This study also will have
long-term value because parasites are known to have important consequences on
the health, behavior, demography, and evolution of their hosts (including humans
and other animals). Parasites are known to cause or spread disease among and
between hosts. Thus, through modern approaches to gathering and archiving the
material collected, this study will employ cutting edge research to make
substantial lasting contributions to our knowledge of the diversity,
distribution, and evolutionary history, of avian parasites in Amazonia, and
therefore will have important human and wildlife health implications far into
the future. Lastly, this research is a novel collaborative effort to gather data
needed to conserve the biodiversity of the Amazon, the richest fauna on earth.