* 1120383
* Growth, allocation, physiology and architecture: morpho-physiogical adaptations to climate in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Stephen Tonsor, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 11/30/2015
* USD 735,208.00

This project relies on extensive knowledge of the basic biology of Arabidopsis
to understand how plants adapt to climate. Integrated analyses of the genetics
of developmental timing, architectural allocation, photosynthetic water use
efficiency, growth, and reproductive yield will be compared among plants raised
under conditions that mimic a climate gradient associated with altitude in the
native range of the species. Because the exact locations of natural populations
are known, adaptations of plants raised in the laboratory can be compared
directly with native environmental conditions, where temperature and moisture
govern plant survival and seed yield. Growth curve analysis will be used to
account for plant yields (fitness), while also testing the major intrinsic and
extrinsic factors influencing plant growth and yield. Growth curve analyses
developed by this project can be easily adapted to other systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the biological underpinnings of plant
adaptation to climate is critically important for breeding crops and
understanding natural diversity. This basic research will have broad impacts;
the same genes that control development and physiology in Arabidopsis function
in all plants. This research will contribute to education at multiple levels as
well as to recruitment to careers in science. The project includes collaboration
with two non-profits to provide a summer science camp for primarily African-
American middle school students from underserved schools in the area.