* 1120537
* Evolution of a Novel Larval Body Plan - the Nemertean Pilidium Larva (Phylum Nemertea)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Svetlana Maslakova, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 517,864.00

The pilidium is a fascinating planktonic larva found in one group of marine
nemertean worms. In this group of worms the development is maximally-indirect.
This means that the two life history stages, the planktonic larva and the
benthic adult worm, are built and function entirely differently. The young worm
forms inside the pilidium larva over the course of many weeks, then erupts from
the larva during catastrophic metamorphosis, and promptly devours the larval
body. Many marine invertebrate animals have similarly indirect development. In
many of those the development has been abbreviated or simplified, giving rise to
direct development, in which the larval stage, if present, resembles the adult.
In nemerteans, however, it is clear, that indirect developmental mode evolved
from ancestral direct development. This project aims to investigate what changes
in development contributed to the evolution of the pilidium larva. The general
approach is to compare fates of homologous embryonic cells and expression of
developmental regulatory genes in nemertean species with and without the
pilidium. The results will clarify the evolutionary origin of the different
domains of the larval body and the adult rudiments inside the pilidium, and shed
light on how the antero-posterior axes of the body plan is established in
nemerteans with direct and indirect development. This project is expected to
contribute significantly to central issues in evolutionary developmental
biology, such as the origin of novel animal body plans. This project provides
training and research opportunities for diverse undergraduate and graduate
students, including community college students, many of which are from
underrepresented groups. Finally, this project, by maintaining a molecular lab
and advanced microscopy facility at a marine biological field station, expands
its research and teaching capacity and serves visiting scientists from other
institutions.