* 1120835
* RUI-Investigating the Mechanism of GLO-1 Rab Function in C. Elegans Lysosome-related Organelle Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Greg Hermann, Lewis and Clark College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2015
* USD 413,345.00

Intellectual Merit: The cells of complex organisms contain a diverse array of
discrete functional units called organelles. These compartments carry out
essential cell activities and are broadly conserved within and between species.
Lysosomes, one type of organelle found within nearly all plant and animal cells,
function as major sites of degradation. Interestingly, in many cell types,
lysosome-related organelles (LROs) co-exist with conventional degradative
lysosomes due to the activity of specific pathways mediating the formation of
LROs. However, most of the known factors that mediate LRO formation also
function in the construction of lysosomes, raising the question of what controls
the specific formation of LROs. A family of homologous Rab proteins, which
generally act as switches to regulate the processes involved in moving material
between organelles, have been identified that function in the formation of LROs
but not conventional lysosomes. This project explores the hypothesis that these
Rabs control LRO-specific formation processes by investigating the activity of
the GLO-1 Rab protein that functions in the construction of an LRO called the
gut granule. Gut granules are found within the intestinal cells of the model
genetic organism C. elegans and are analogous to organelles in mammals that
function in the synthesis/storage of substances mediating pigmentation and blood
clotting. Briefly, the research will identify the cellular site of GLO-1
function, the regulators of GLO-1 activity, and the processes controlled by
GLO-1. As GLO-1 is highly conserved, this research will provide important
insights into the mechanisms mediating the formation of LROs in a diverse array
of cells and organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The research will
involve 30 undergraduates a year in collaborative, investigative, and original
research. Undergraduate students working in the PI's research laboratory and
upper division Cell Biology course (enrollment 24) will design, implement,
interpret, and present the results of their experiments investigating the
function of GLO-1 in LRO formation. The PI will participate in HHMI and Miller
Foundation supported initiatives at Lewis &amp; Clark College to increase the
representation of underrepresented groups in science by mentoring the studies of
LRO formation by local high school and community college students in the
research lab. Ultimately, this work will provide hands on scientific training
for a large and diverse array of students, many of whom will progress on to
careers in research and education