* 1120906
* Hawaiian land snail biodiversity:  Systematics, phylogenetics and conservation status of a vanishing fauna
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Brenden Holland, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David Mindell
* 07/31/2015
* USD 682,500.00

Land snails help maintain healthy ecosystems, act as indicators of environmental
integrity, and have distinctive evolutionary, ecological and cultural legacies
that are important in understanding biodiversity. The Hawaiian Islands support a
spectacular diversity of land snails (&gt;750 species), comparable to the
continental USA and Canada combined. Unfortunately they have not been
comprehensively studied this century, and are vanishing fast; 90% may already be
extinct. By documenting and identifying the remaining species, assessing their
diversity and clarifying their taxonomy and relationships through phylogenetic
analysis, this project will provide the basis for further study of their biology
and conservation in a manner not possible before. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
postdoctoral researchers, two graduate, five undergraduate, and multiple high
school students will be trained in techniques ranging from systematics to field
surveys and museum curation. Broad multidisciplinary research training will
foster the next generation of conservation biologists and systematists while
providing the means to conserve a vanishing fauna. Results will be widely
available through peer-reviewed publications, public workshops, and electronic
resources, providing data for a more profound understanding of evolution and
biodiversity and giving conservationists the tools to develop appropriate
management strategies.