* 1120138
* U.S. CMS Operations at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Daniel Marlow, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Coles
* 06/30/2017
* USD 43,794,718.00

The goal of this proposal is to realize the physics discoveries made possible by
the investments of the U.S. NSF, the U.S. DOE, and others in the Compact Muon
Solenoid (CMS) detector at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. The
community of U.S.physicists working on CMS comprises approximately 930
individuals from 49 institutions. This proposal encompasses the activities
needed to create the conditions for those individuals to carry out their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Discoveries made at the LHC
could have revolutionary effects on our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the
unification of forces, the origin and stability of matter, the ultimate
underpinnings of the observable universe, and the nature of space-time itself.
The LHC, which began operation at ?Ã£s = 7 TeV in 2010, is expected to reach its
design energy (14 TeV) and luminosity (10**34 cm&amp;#8722;2s&amp;#8722;1)
during the period covered by this proposal. Early physics papers from CMS have
demonstrated the excellent performance of the detector and the analysis chain.
The collaboration is poised to explore the standard model Higgs mechanism during
the next few years and will probe a wide range of possible phenomena that lie
beyond the standard model. U.S. physicists, who constitute approximately 30% of
the CMS collaboration, have led many of the early analyses and have made
important contributions to virtually all of them. U.S. groups are well
positioned to continue this leadership into the discovery phase of LHC
operations. It is thus essential to ensure that the detectors developed,
constructed, and brought into operation by U.S. groups continue to function at
the highest levels of performance; and that data acquired by CMS is made
available for analysis by U.S. physicists. There are four main funding
categories covered by this proposal: Detector Maintenance&lt;br/&gt;and
Operations (M&amp;O) and Software and Computing (S&amp;C), Detector Upgrade
R&amp;D, and Common Operations, which includes education and outreach (E&amp;O).
The uses of the combined resources of the NSF and the DOE on CMS are managed by
the U.S. CMS Operations program and are monitored by the Joint Oversight Group
(JOG) composed of representatives of the two
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: LHC research includes advances
in technology in several areas, support for university scientific
infrastructure, and the opportunity to attract students and the general public
to exciting frontier science. Numerous outreach and education possibilities
exist, many of which are already being implemented in programs such as QuarkNet.
The extensive computing facilities and the interconnecting networks that were
established in the past few years will be maintained and expanded. The CMS
detector contains a variety of subsystems with numerous technological challenges
in areas such as radiation hardness of materials and circuits, precision
measurement of ionizing radiation, precision alignment, high-density inter-
connecting of electrical signals, and many aspects of computing and data
transfer. CMS institutions, often working with industry, have made or
implemented innovations in these areas, and R&amp;D continues as part of this
proposal. The engineers, technicians, and computer professionals supported in
conjunction with the proposed work will maintain and/or add much-needed
infrastructure at their respective institutions, facilitating future educational
and research opportunities while maintaining a reservoir of the hard-won
knowledge gained thus far in building the CMS detector.