* 1120399
* SNM:  Technologies for Nanoparticle Monolayer Self-Organization and Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Nelson Tansu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,100,000.00

PI: James F Gilchrist&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1120399&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to advance the fundamental
manufacturing science of nanoparticle monolayer self-assembly and deposition as
a unit operation for commercial nano manufacturing. Specifically, the proposed
project will investigate the fundamental aspects of self-assembly methods,
incorporate these discoveries into continuous roll-to-roll commercial-scale
processes, and develop novel applications that utilize these processes. These
processes will enable production of nanoporous membranes, flexible dye
sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), and light emitting diodes
(LEDs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
scalable nanomanufacturing program focuses on development of two separate but
fundamentally related continuous processes that deposit self-assembled particle
arrays on substrates. The first process focuses on convective deposition, and
the second process focuses an automated Langmuir-Blodgett deposition. Both
processes utilize capillary interactions of particles confined in thin films for
directed particle self-assembly. Experimental and computational methods for
exploring the fundamental mechanisms, limitations, and stabilities of each of
these processes will advance rational scale-up and continuous operation and
determination of new deposition control parameters. This fundamental insight
will serve as the foundation for identifying expanded uses and target
applications. To ensure feasibility and robustness of these processes, three
energy and bioengineering-related applications will be developed in tandem
utilizing self-assembled particle depositions derived from these processes.
These include development of nanostructured dye supports in dye sensitized solar
cells (DSSCs), coatings and internal structures for light emitting diodes
(LEDs), and large-are periodic nanoporous membranes for molecular to viral
separations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of broadly applicable, commercial particle
monolayer deposition processes could have far-reaching impact on a multitude of
industrial applications. Fundamental research on colloidal self-assembly via
capillary interactions and concomitant research into fundamental scientific
aspects and scalable production of nanoporous membranes, DSSCs, and LEDs could
also impact a wide variety of scientific disciplines and industries, and could
lead to significant advancements in key areas of disease detection and energy
applications. Direct collaboration with industrial partners, including
Versatilis, LLC and PAower Optics LLC will guide efforts to commercialization.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the principles of scale-
up, surface science, particle technology, self-assembly, photovoltaics,
separations, and a multitude of characterization techniques. A primary student
initiative in collaboration with members of the Lehigh College of Education will
expose K-5 students to topics related to fundamental surface science and
scientific methods.