* 1120997
* Femtosecond Virus Structure Determination
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Uwe Weierstall, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 542,009.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to determine
the three-dimensional structure of viruses at atomic resolution. An accurate
knowledge of viral structure is necessary to understand the mechanism of
infection at the molecular level. Most enveloped viruses are not amenable to
crystallization and X-ray diffraction for structural studies. Having a rapid
method for structure determination of viruses, which does not require
crystallization, would be a transformative concept for structural biology. Using
the high intensity X-ray pulses generated at the world's first X-ray laser, the
Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) at Stanford, diffraction patterns from
aerosolized single virus particles were obtained with previous NSF funding. Due
to the short X-ray pulse duration of 10-100 femtosecond, each virus particle
generates a diffraction pattern before radiation damage destroys the particle.
Two dimensional images of the virus particles could be reconstructed from these
patterns. This research follows up on these first preliminary results and
expands the method to enveloped viruses, which need to be hydrated in order to
preserve their structure. The viruses are sprayed in a liquid jet in vacuum
across the X-ray beam using an injector developed at ASU with previous NSF
funding. The aim is to improve the resolution of the method by initially working
at an X-ray energy, where the contrast between virus and water is maximized.
Experiments at higher X-ray energy will follow with the goal to achieve sub
nanometer resolution with single virus particles. The patterns from many
particle orientations will be classified, sorted, merged and phased to form a
three-dimensional image of the virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;Outreach activities under this proposal include a partnership with
Arizona State University's Science is Fun program. Under this project, Science
is Fun will develop a physics based science demonstration and lesson geared
towards students in kindergarten through eighth grade. This project will be
developed according to national and state educational standards. In the Science
is Fun program, trained interns visit K-12 classrooms, facilitating science
demonstrations and hands on science activities for students and teachers in 21
school districts across the metro Phoenix area. In addition, the current on
campus lab tours will continue. Students in middle school through high school
who visit the Arizona State University campus will have the opportunity to tour
working labs. State of the Art imaging equipment will be made available for
school groups as part of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
project will form the basis for a new generation of instrumentation that may
rapidly solve virus structures, which are difficult to crystallize. This
interdisciplinary research will bring together elements of biochemistry,
molecular biology, fluid dynamics, coherent X-ray imaging, classification and
phasing algorithm development and in doing so will promote research and learning
in integrated science areas that will greatly benefit its participating students
and postdoctoral associates.