* 1120795
* SNM:  Continuous and Scalable Nanomanufacturing for 3-Dimensional Functional Biomedical Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,342,000.00

Diabetes, heart failure, and hepatic failure are diseases of enormous burden to
Americans. The effective therapies for these often lethal diseases require the
application of novel engineering concepts and technologies. Tissue engineering
holds great promise for the treatment of these diseases. Using biodegradable
scaffolds, cells are organized in close proximity to each other with a well-
defined 3-dimensional (3D) space for the formation of new tissues. While a
typical biological cell has a size of several microns, the interactions of cells
with the environment occur at a nanoscale. Fabricating such scaffolds with
micro- and nano-scale features has been a significant bottleneck for industrial
scale production of tissues. The goal of this research is to develop a novel
nanomanufacturing system, Hyperlens-Assisted Projection Stereolithography
(HAPS), with a sub-50 nm resolution for the direct-write of 3D, heterogeneous
biological scaffolds. The research tasks include: a) design and fabrication of
the hyperlens by combining simulation with experiments, b) integration of the
hyperlens with the projection stereolithography system, c) design and
fabrication of complex tissue scaffolds, and d) studying the growth and
phenotypical modulation of vascular endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells
using the scaffolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will help
to enhance the emerging US biomanufacturing industry for the production of
vascular tissues, skins, bones, and other tissues and organs. The proposed HAPS
technique will foster a giant step for scalable, continuous 3D nanomanufacturing
of not only functional biomedical devices, but also 3D nanoelectronics,
nanophotonics, and nanoenergy devices. Moreover, the results of this work will
provide inspiring teaching materials and interesting laboratory projects. The
proposed efforts of integrating research with education will offer
undergraduates and graduate students increased exposure to nanomanufacturing.
The proposed symposia and workshop will greatly enhance the impact of
nanomanufacturing research.