* 1120717
* Collaborative Research:   Meta-Ecosystems and the Upstream Legacy: Influence of Dissolved Organic Matter on the Structure and Function of Streambed Bacterial Communities
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* David Arscott, Stroud Water Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 841,799.00

Organic carbon, in the form of dissolved molecules transported in stream water,
is processed for energy by microorganisms that live on the streambed. That
processing constitutes a critical link in the global carbon cycle. The sources
of much of the stream carbon are the upper layer of soils within small
watersheds and algae that live in streams. Looking out over a drainage network,
the investigators will explore how the quality of the organic molecules changes
with distance downstream and how those changes influence the composition of the
communities of streambed microbes using that food resource. To characterize the
thousands of individual organic molecules dissolved in stream water and the vast
diversity of microorganisms living in streams, the research team will exploit
novel methods that link the new frontiers in molecular microbiology and
analytical organic geochemistry. This proposal will be carried out in waters
that range in size from small streams to small rivers within temperate and
tropical forests. The research goals include advancing knowledge of stream
ecosystems across drainage networks and forging a broad model of stream
ecosystems in the global carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
global carbon cycle is a critical scientific need of society and recent studies
suggest that freshwater streams and rivers play a significant role within it. By
better understanding the relationships between stream microorganisms and the
organic carbon in freshwater streams, this study will contribute to our overall
understanding of a key component of the global carbon cycle. Because
microorganisms are invisible to the naked eye, getting students excited about
the diversity of microorganisms and organic molecules and the complexity of
their ecological interactions is difficult. The research team will develop
educational materials that depict the basic concepts in microbiology and organic
geochemistry with an emphasis on the vital roles that microorganisms play in
aquatic ecosystems. At facilities within each of the study catchments the
investigators and their educator colleagues will hold two-day summer teacher
workshops to expose secondary school teacher to the microbial world of streams.
The workshops will be timed to allow participants to mirror the field and
laboratory activities of the scientists. In addition, 1 graduate student, 1
post-doctoral scientist, and 7 undergraduates will receive training during the
project.