* 1120833
* Regulation of the ER-associated Degradation by Importin Beta
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Shengyun Fang, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2015
* USD 695,487.00

Intellectual merit. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a large membrane-bound sac
for the production of many proteins in cells. However, a significant fraction of
the proteins become defective during production or due to pathogenic insults,
such as exposure to toxic agents or genetic mutations. To deal with this
problem, cells have evolved an ER protein quality control system to recognize
those defective proteins and extract them from the ER for destruction. When the
quality control process does not function properly, defective proteins build up
in the ER, which in severe cases can lead to cell damage and even cell death.
Therefore, how defective proteins are removed from the ER is a fundamental
biological problem, but unfortunately remains poorly understood. This project
will investigate an unexpected physical and functional interaction, discovered
in this laboratory, between importin beta and a group of other proteins in the
ER protein quality control system. Importin beta is well known for its function
in transporting proteins in and out of the nucleus. The research will establish
a new role for importin beta in ER protein quality control and thus will provide
new insights into the overall regulation of this important
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This project will involve high
school students, high school science teachers, a postdoctoral fellow, and a PhD
student. Trainees involved in this research will learn an integrative approach
to the novel ER protein quality control function of importin Ò using
interdisciplinary approaches, which will include molecular biology,
biochemistry, and cell biology. To foster high scientific achievement of
trainees, a questionnaire will be developed to assess the basic knowledge and
skills they learn. This information will also help to identify critical needs in
training that will be incorporated into the mentoring plans for future trainees
in the laboratory. The program will utilize established partnerships with local
high school science programs to broaden the participation of underrepresented
trainees. Science teachers involved in this project will help to recruit
students for this project and through these experiences will inspire other
students in their classes. Plans will be undertaken to foster collaborations
with laboratories at other institutions to share research results and resources
and to enhance outreach and training opportunities. Broad dissemination of this
research will be achieved by encouraging trainees to present their work at
scientific conferences and by distributing electronic educational materials
through the Internet.