* 1120912
* International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility - Cyberinfrastructure for Global Neuroinformatics
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Sten Grillner, Karolinska Institutet
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,400,000.00

The International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility (INCF) is a 16-country
effort to facilitate neuroscience data sharing, large-scale brain modeling, and
cooperation in neuroinformatics research and education. Neuroinformatics
integrates information across all levels and scales of neuroscience to help
understand the brain and treat disease. The INCF fosters international
neuroinformatics infrastructure, which promotes the sharing of data and
computing resources within the research community. The INCF also facilitates
development of applications that can be used by neuroscientists worldwide. The
mission of INCF is to facilitate the work of neuroscientists around the world,
and to catalyze and coordinate the global development of neuroinformatics. INCF
promotes the sharing of data and computing resources to the international
research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programs to be supported by INCF
during the 2011 to 2014 period are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digital Brain Atlasing:
fostering and coordinating interoperability, accessibility and global sharing of
reference databases&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ontologies of Neural Structures:
standardizing representation of knowledge as the fundamental framework
connecting neuroscience research worldwide&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-Scale
Modeling: promoting interoperable multi-scale model construction and simulation
sharing in neuroinformatics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standards for Data sharing:
facilitating international consensus and collaborations for metadata reporting
and archiving, and consequently advance data reuse and further
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training: evaluating and developing best practice
training for researchers/students with different backgrounds and high caliber
training materials in neuroinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The members
countries of INCF are Belgium, the Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany,
India, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, South Korea, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. participation in INCF.