* 1120356
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling evolutionary processes in avian species distributed across the Southern African arid-zone
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Rauri Bowie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* joseph miller
* 07/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

Arid ecosystems cover one third of Earth's land surface, and many have levels of
endemism as high as tropical biomes. Despite supporting a rich biodiversity,
arid ecosystems are generally overlooked as models for investigating
evolutionary processes. The southern Africa region is characterized by a high
interior plateau bounded on three sides by a steep escarpment, the presence of a
west-to-east gradient of increasing moisture, and hyper-arid to humid habitats.
This complex topography and climatic variation is reflected at the landscape
level with seven distinct vegetation types or biomes. Despite a large number of
endemic species (the greatest regional concentration in Africa), the role of
evolutionary, ecological and climatic processes in shaping bird population
histories has been sorely neglected in southern African arid ecosystems. This
proposal aims to understand the processes that have driven the diversification
of 12 bird taxa in the southern African arid zone by fully utilizing the tools
provided by molecular ecology and species-distribution modelling.

A collaboration between the University of California-Berkeley, Texas A&M
University, and several southern African institutions -- including universities,
museums and conservation agencies -- this proposal will include the training and
exchange of graduate and postdoctoral scholars, and involve undergraduate
students in research.