* 1120624
* Ghosts of Evolution Past: Resurrecting an Extinct Ancestral Enzyme to Understand the Origins of Modern-day Biochemical Activities
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2016
* Todd Barkman, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2016
* USD 264,177.00

Intellectual Merit: Proteins are molecular machines that carry out the work of
cells, tissues and organs and ultimately orchestrate the development of
individuals. In spite of the central role proteins play in the biology of life,
the mechanisms promoting the evolution of protein functions remain unclear.
Ideally, proteins of ancient organisms would be studied in order to understand
how function changes over time and how the same function can evolve
independently in distinct proteins. Because ancient organisms are extinct, this
study will use a paleomolecular approach to resurrect extinct proteins to study
the history of protein functional evolution. For this research, a 300 million
year old ancestral protein and its descendants will be synthesized for a group
of plant metabolite-producing enzymes in order to test several hypotheses. The
first hypothesis to be tested is that the ancestral enzymes begin as generalist
"jack-of-all trades" and later give rise to specialized descendants after gene
duplication. This hypothesis has never been tested for any diverse enzyme family
and thus the results will fill a void in understanding the pattern of protein
functional diversification. The second hypothesis to be tested is that numerous
distinct mutational paths exist which allow different ancestral proteins to
evolve similar functions. In this case, the mutational paths leading to the
independent evolution of caffeine synthesis activity in the coffee and tea
lineages will be recapitulated. Convergent evolution of enzyme activity has
never been investigated at this level before so this study will illuminate the
detailed mechanism by which it occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
This study will provide insight into plant defense and the production of
important secondary compounds like caffeine, thereby having potential
implications for agriculture and metabolic engineering of plants. In addition,
this research may have implications for protein engineering because ancestral
enzymes provide useful points from which to initiate selection for desirable
activities because of their broad spectrum of capabilities. Undergraduate and
graduate students will perform all of the laboratory experiments required for
this study and present their results at conferences and as manuscripts detailing
their findings. Also, the conceptual issues presented here are implemented as
one theme in a senior-level Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution course in
which adaptive hypotheses for protein evolution are proposed and statistical
tests are designed to test the predictions. An evolutionary theme also forms the
foundation of a companion Molecular Biology Laboratory course in which
experiments are used to test hypotheses related to the effects of natural
selection on protein functional evolution by performing gene cloning, protein
expression, enzyme assays, and site-directed mutagenesis. As such, the proposed
research and these two courses provide students with an integrated and
conceptual perspective on protein evolution that unites their training in
chemistry and biology.