* 1120255
* ATD Collaborative Research:  Statistical Ensembles for the Identification of Bacterial Genomes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Adrian Dobra, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 342,591.00

This research focuses on reducing bioterrorism threat by integrating tools from
genomics and statistics in ways that have not been previously examined. The
investigators develop novel statistical theory and computational tools for
accurate pathogen detection based on next generation sequencing data. Key
research directions involve (i) classification by sequence enrichment; (ii)
comparison of empirical clusterings and reference genomes; and (iii) shrinkage
estimation and model selection in hierarchical log-linear models. In addition to
an in-depth characterization of the theoretical properties of these new
statistical inference techniques, the investigators perform a thorough
assessment of their practical importance in the context of the detection and
identification of bacterial genomes. This assessment is done using publicly
available data from sources such as the Human Microbiome Project, the NCBI Short
Read Archive, the European Bioinformatics Institute, and the Broad Institute.
The applicability of this new methodology is broad and relates to high-
dimensional settings in which choosing an appropriate class of candidate
statistical models is difficult. The investigators study statistical ensembles,
combinations of techniques that have been shown to provide more reliable
inferences than any single statistical approach. As opposed to existing work
which combines models from the same class, this new framework concerns ensembles
that cross class boundaries and optimally combine inferences from multiple
models from several model classes. These ensembles are expected to have distinct
advantages over existing approaches, such as robustness to model
misspecification and improved predictive performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new statistical methodology developed in this proposal has the potential to
substantially improve the response of federal and international agencies to a
bioterrorism attack through a rapid identification of differences in microbial
genomes and their accurate classification as harmless or potentially pathogenic.
The impact of these algorithms for pathogen detection on both information
technology and civil infrastructure is maximized through their implementation in
user-friendly, open-source computational tools and software that will be freely
available to the public. The project also has a significant educational and
mentorship component for students and postdoctoral fellows who are interested in
enhancing our ability to respond rapidly and appropriately to (i) incidents of
bioterrorism, and (ii) microbial threats to public health.