* 1120946
* Biochemical Mechanism of Regulation of Phytochrome Interacting Factor 1 by Light
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Enamul Huq, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 10/31/2015
* USD 565,059.00

Light is a critical factor regulating plant growth and development. For example,
red and far-red light regulate important processes like seed germination and
greening. The phytochrome family of photoreceptors monitors the red (R)/far-red
(FR) light and initiate these responses. This project will elucidate poorly
understood biochemical mechanisms of phytochrome action.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Degradation of critical regulatory proteins (transcription factors)
both in the dark and light has been shown to play a central role in
photomorphogenesis. In general, two classes of light signaling factors are
regulated by degradation: Positive regulators of photomorphogenesis such as HY5,
LAF1 and HFR1 are degraded in the dark and negative regulators called
Phytochrome Interacting Factors (PIFs) are degraded in response to light.
Although dark-induced degradation of positive regulators has been thoroughly
investigated, light-induced degradation of PIFs is less well understood. This
project will use biochemical, molecular and genetic approaches to elucidate
early events in the light-induced degradation PIF1 under blue, red and far-red
light conditions. Light-induced degradation of PIF1 relieves the negative
regulation by PIF1 to promote seed germination and greening, and inhibit
hypocotyl growth.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project
include fundamental advances, human resource development, and training. Since
PIF1 is a primary phytochrome-signaling partner whose stability is regulated by
phytochromes, the project will provide fundamental information on these
important processes. Moreover, as transcription factors are critical regulators
of all developmental processes, understanding the mechanism of PIF1 regulation
will be enabling for agricultural biotechnology and biomass production. Project
results and the research tools developed will be distributed through
publications, conference presentations, and website postings as well as directly
from the laboratory. This project will provide needed training for
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students in modern functional genomics
and molecular genetics. Finally, aspects of the project will be actively
integrated into undergraduate and graduate classroom teaching.