* 1120304
* RIG: Behavioral, circuit and single-cell analysis of the effects of aversive experience on non-defensive behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Riccardo Mozzachiodi, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2014
* USD 173,973.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Exposure to aversive stimuli drives an organism to budget
its behaviors by augmenting certain responses and reducing/suppressing others.
Characterizing how experience differentially regulates the activity of
behaviorally-relevant neural circuits is paramount to understand the means by
which external stimuli produces distinct behavioral modifications. &lt;br/&gt;
The long-term goal of this project is to analyze the effects of an aversive
experience on distinct behaviors, using the mollusk Aplysia californica. This
model system permits one to directly relate behavioral modifications to changes
in the underlying neuronal circuits and, further, to modifications in identified
neurons. When presented with repeated noxious stimuli, Aplysia exhibits a well-
characterized long-term (&gt; 24 h) learned enhancement of defensive responses
(i.e., long-term sensitization, LTS) and a previously unexplored long-term
suppression of a non-defensive behavior (i.e., feeding). In addition, aversive
experience reduces the excitability of B51, a ?decision-making? neuron critical
for the elicitation of feeding. The goals of this project are to: 1) analyze the
neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the long-term suppression of feeding
induced by LTS training at both the circuit and single-cell levels and 2)
develop an in vitro preparation that co-expresses cellular correlates of both
sensitization and suppression of feeding. &lt;br/&gt;This project will be
conducted at Texas A&amp;M University ? Corpus Christi, which is a Hispanic-
Serving Institution serving the population of South Texas. The proposed research
activities will contribute to broadening participation of Hispanic and other
underrepresented groups, by providing neuroscience training opportunities for
the students of South Texas. The experiments will be conducted mainly by
graduate students, under the supervision and mentorship of the PI. Undergraduate
students will also engage in neurophysiology research by participating in all
the aspects of the project.