* 1120031
* Collaborative Research:   Multimodal Communication, mate choice and predation risk
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Michael Ryan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 07/31/2017
* USD 779,266.00

We receive and analyze information from our environment through multiple senses
(i.e. sensory channels). When we interact socially, for example, we not only
listen to someone?s words but we also read their body language to interpret
their meaning. But how does information from different sensory channels interact
to influence our social decisions? In this series of studies how acoustic and
visual cues influence mate choice decisions will be determined in the túngara
frog. As do most frogs, túngara frogs advertise for mates with loud and
conspicuous mating calls. Females compare mating calls among males and use this
information to choose a mate. But the female?s decision is also influenced by
the presence of a visual cue, the male?s large and conspicuous vocal sac. Using
robotic frogs it has been shown that females prefer a calling male with a large
inflating-deflating vocal sac to a male producing the same call but without a
dynamic vocal sac. To build upon those results to address several fundamental
questions about how acoustic and visual cues interact to influence female
decision making the following will be determined: What is the relative value of
acoustic and visual cues? Does the addition of visual cues influence a female?s
memory of calls? Do visual cues aid in recognizing individual males in large
choruses? Does the addition of a visual cue influence the time it takes for
females to make decisions? All of these studies will provide insights into how
animals, including humans, integrate information in the environment around them
through different sensory channels. In the process of this work, approximately
25 students, many of them women and minorities, will be trained in the use of
robotic technologies to study behavior.