* 1120760
* Collaborative Research: Extending the potential for hydrogen isotope tracers in ecology:  experiments, biochemistry and field studies
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Seth Newsome, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 230,436.00

The hydrogen isotopic composition of animal tissues has become as a valuable
tool in the investigation of animal movements and the study of habitat use.
However, the biochemical foundation needed for animal ecologists to confidently
apply isotopic analyses to ecological problems has yet to be adequately
revealed. This project will address that knowledge gap by advancing our
understanding of fundamental processes controlling isotopic composition in
tissues of vertebrates. New methodologies will be applied to analyze compound-
specific isotopes of individual amino acids in animal tissues and to determine
whether hydrogen can be directly routed from dietary amino acids into tissues.
Biosynthetic mechanisms responsible for determining hydrogen isotope patterns
observed in bulk tissues will be explored in a series of laboratory experiments.
Results from this research will address the magnitude and degree of variation in
isotope discrimination for animal tissues, and the biochemical mechanism of
hydrogen incorporation into an animal's tissue from its food and water. To
accomplish this work, the fish species tilapia will be reared in tanks with
water and food components having unique and controlled isotopic compositions.
The isotopic composition of individual amino acids, particularly those that are
indispensible for growth, will be measured to trace incorporation from dietary
protein, carbohydrate, lipid, and water into fish tissues. The research will be
extended to a population-based study of black-throated blue warblers, for which
the hydrogen isotopic composition of individual amino acids from feather, bone,
and liver tissues will be measured from three locations that span the
continental range for this bird species in North America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will advance a new methodology
and provide foundational knowledge for isotopic approaches to the study of
animal ecology and behavior. The project will develop and teach a graduate level
course on isotopic ecology, involve undergraduate students in the laboratory
research, and conduct outreach to high school biology classes to foster
understanding of biochemical ecology. It will also support workshops designed to
raise awareness of the potential uses of stable isotopes in the biological
sciences and set the stage for future collaboration with researchers in several
Latin American countries.