* 1120382
* SNM GOALI: Carbon Nanotube Superfiber to Revolutionize Engineering Designs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2015
* Mark Schulz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,155,685.00

This Scalable Nanomanufacturing (SBM) project aims to fundamentally modify
nanotube synthesis and processing steps enabling the properties of nanotube
superfiber to exceed those of existing fibers. Different forms of superfiber
including yarn, braid, sheet, and fabric materials will be prepared. The
approach to form superfiber is by synthesizing carbon nanotube arrays or forests
of nanotubes, post-treating the arrays, and spinning the arrays into fibers.
Technical advancements will be achieved in this project based on experimental,
analytical and computational approaches that enable scale-up of the
extraordinary properties of short nanotubes to bulk fibrous materials. The major
technical roadblock to scale-up is that defects occur during manufacturing of
long nanotube arrays. To remove this barrier, new methods and approaches of
substrate engineering, base flow synthesis, thermal healing of defects, micro-
spinning, and coating will be combined to improve the quality of nanotubes. The
expected outcome is to design carbon nanotube superfiber materials with
breakthrough properties, and to scale up superfiber manufacturing for
commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project will
be to allow industries to replace their incumbent materials with superfiber
materials that are lighter, tougher, stronger, and carry more electrical
current. This project will provide the technical horsepower needed to close the
gap between the properties of short research-grade nanotubes and commercial
nanotube bulk materials, thus enabling American industry to manufacture a new
fiber material which will revolutionize the engineering designs of dozens of
products. The research will provide a better understanding why nanotubes have
defects, why nanotubes stop growing, why fiber does not achieve the strength of
nanotubes, and how to overcome these barriers. This project will also design new
spinning and post processing approaches for long nanotubes that allow
manufacturing scale-up and commercialization. An academic-corporate
collaboration will help to transition the new technology into applications.
Education and outreach activity in the project will focus on teaching students
including underrepresented and high school students about nanotechnology and
product innovation. An international Nanotechnology Materials Workshop will be
held each year and include student presenters. Research results will be
disseminated through editing a book on nanotube superfiber, journal and
conference publications, and a web site. Results from the project will be
integrated into classroom teaching.