* 1120015
* Collaborative Research: Belowground drivers of aboveground nutrient cycling and productivity in growing forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2015
* USD 325,792.00

Young, fast-growing forests can sequester huge amounts of carbon, but this
potential is expected to be limited eventually by the nutrients required for
biomass growth. Some forests are more productive than expected, given their age
and available soil nutrients. In lowland Costa Rica, for example, experimental
plantations were still highly productive and cycling large amounts of nitrogen
after 22 years of growth. The broad aim of this research is to understand why
these tropical forests remain productive. Specifically, this project will
address the hypothesis that highly productive forests supply more carbon
belowground to fine roots and soil microbes. Increased belowground allocation is
expected to promote nutrient cycling largely through greater exploitation of
soil resources by fine-root growth and microbial processes, which feed back to
stimulate aboveground forest growth. A combination of large-scale and small-
scale experimental approaches will be used to evaluate how carbon allocation to
roots, symbiotic root microbes, and free-living soil microbes influence carbon
and nitrogen cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
provide an improved understanding of the belowground pathways underlying
tropical forest biogeochemistry, thereby advancing our ability to model and
predict the role of forests in current and future global carbon and nitrogen
cycling. This new information will inform planning and development of potential
mitigation strategies in response to increasing atmospheric CO2. Furthermore,
the project will facilitate student mentoring, field based student education,
and international collaboration. To increase participation by underrepresented
groups, an inquiry-based special short course in Tropical Field Biology will be
offered; undergraduate students will be identified and recruited by the
Directors of NSF Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation Programs for
Wisconsin and Illinois. The goal is to introduce these students to ecology and
instill confidence and inspiration that will encourage them to apply for future
research fellowships, and ultimately to graduate school.