* 1120249
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Genetic and Demographic Determinants of Population Responses to Emerging Infectious Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Kelly Zamudio, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2017
* USD 740,545.00

This proposal examines the genetic composition and demography of amphibians
experiencing different stages of chytridiomycosis, an infectious disease caused
by the amphibian-killing fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. Chytridiomycosis
has caused widespread declines and extinctions of amphibian populations in
Central America. This project will identify the front of the epidemic wave in
the Darien region of Panama, and directly compare populations before and after
exposure to the pathogen. This study will measure variability in immunological
genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) across populations and
species of frogs with varying exposure to this disease, and combine these
genetic findings with a population demographic analysis of declines and
recovery. These data permit an understanding of the genetic and demographic
factors contributing to this wildlife disease.

This project generates important data on the roles of genetic and demographic
factors in immunity to an infectious disease that is a serious threat to New
World amphibian biodiversity. Results of this project will be important in
conservation efforts and allow researchers to take into account long-term
maintenance of adaptive evolutionary potential in conservation research and
captive breeding programs, detection of natural resistance, and management of
captive stocks. The research results will be used in outreach through media and
educational programs, to increase awareness of the use of science in
biodiversity conservation. Finally, this project includes a significant training
component that makes international research opportunities available to
undergraduates, graduates, and post-docs, and makes special efforts to provide
opportunities to under-represented students.