* 1120572
* Pollinator Diversity and Foraging Specialization
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Berry Brosi, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2015
* USD 526,250.00

Insect-mediated pollination is a critical, and often limiting, step in the
reproductive cycle of many wild plants and crops. Thus, understanding the
effects of losing pollinator species is a question of central importance for the
long-term persistence of healthy, functioning ecosystems and for the security
and productivity of our agricultural enterprise. This project focuses on
pollinator floral fidelity, or how closely a single pollinator species interacts
with a single plant species over the short term. Such fidelity is of key
importance to plants, because pollinators with low fidelity visit many different
plant species in a single foraging trip, thus transferring the wrong kind of
pollen between individual plants and reducing the number of seeds they produce.
This project will investigate the hypothesis that competition between pollinator
species is positively related to pollinator floral fidelity. If this hypothesis
is true, as is suggested by theory and pilot data, loss of pollinator species or
populations could reduce floral fidelity in the pollinators that remain, thereby
leading to unanticipated reductions in plant reproduction. To test this,
manipulative experiments will be conducted in subalpine meadows in the Colorado
Rockies where we selectively - but temporarily and non-lethally - remove an
abundant pollinator species from a plot, and assess the floral fidelity of other
pollinators both before and after the manipulation. The effects of these
pollinator removals on plant reproduction will also be preliminarily assessed.
In addition, this project investigates flower fidelity in experimental foraging
trials in the lab, where pollinator and plant diversity and abundance can be
controlled. This work may have implications for the effects of pollinator losses
on plant reproduction, especially given ongoing pollinator declines around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the research results, the broader impacts of
this project include its conservation implications; the training of a post-
doctoral research fellow; improvements to the pollen and bee reference
collections at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory; and development of a
pollination classroom module for fourth graders that will be implemented in
under-resourced schools in Atlanta and widely disseminated.