* 1120890
* SNM:  Electronically Controlled Surface Assembly of DNA Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* William Goddard, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,250,001.00

The goal of this Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) project is to develop a
scalable and inexpensive process for manufacturing integrated systems of DNA
constructed nanodevices and metamaterials. Structural DNA nanotechnology is
unique in its ability to arrange nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes,
proteins, quantum dots, and metal nanoparticles into arbitrary varieties of
rationally designed nanoscale geometries. Some such structures have already
demonstrated potential as sensors, transistors, optical components,
nanomechanical manipulators, and experimental platforms for basic science.
Because DNA nanostructures are self-assembled, it is possible in principle to
cheaply produce large quantities of future nanodevices for widespread
technological application. The key challenge is the integration of these devices
into functioning systems in a way that is compatible with mass manufacturing. At
present, there is no viable technological vision for doing so, very limited
pertinent knowledge regarding the issues and challenges, and limited efforts in
addressing these problems by researchers in the field. The aim is to remedy this
situation by combining the development of more versatile DNA based
nanostructures with the exploration of entirely novel concepts for
electronically monitoring and controlling the assembly of DNA nanostructure
arrays. Another aim is to improve qualitatively our ability to interface DNA
nanostructures with functional nanoscale materials and provide powerful new ways
to monitor and guide DNA based self-assembly. This project is based on DNA
nanostructures that will undergo surface initiated self-assembly into much
larger 2D and 3D arrays. The long term vision is a bench-top factory, in which
functional nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes and proteins are assembled
with the help of DNA into high quality nanostructures arranged according to a
macroscale system layout. Assembly will be monitored both electronically and
optically to allow real time assembly optimization and error control. The
finished product will be printed onto low cost substrates for sophisticated
functions such as disease diagnosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this project includes cost-effective manufacturing of large scale functional
nanomaterials, as well as a comprehensive education and outreach program
including the mentoring of graduate students, undergraduates and K-12 students,
including underrepresented groups. In addition to direct mentoring of graduate
and undergraduate students, the PIs have a strong record of outreach activities,
which will be continued and expanded during the proposal work period. This
includes participation in programs to engage high school teachers in research
related activities (UCR), playing a vital role in Quality Education for
Minorities (QEM) and Minorities in Mathematics, Science, and Engineering (MSE)
programs at Caltech, and involving high school students in nanotechnology
research and close collaboration with scientifically-oriented arts and
entertainment groups (NYU).