* 1120094
* Workshop: Weather, Climate and Communication: More than just Talking about the Weather; 2011 American Meteorological Society Annual Meeting; Seattle, Washington; 23-27 January 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* William Hooke, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 02/29/2012
* USD 24,835.00

This grant provides funds for the American Meteorological Society (AMS) Policy
Program to support 18 communication faculty, post-docs and students to attend
their week long Annual Meeting and a companion weekend workshop on communicating
weather and climate in order to create and nurture an interdisciplinary
collaboration that would cross invisible boundaries that may or may not exist
between research disciplines and practitioners. Although hazards researchers and
practitioners, including meteorologists and climatologists, have made great
strides in physical science, humans still choose how they will react to weather
and climate information. Communication scholars, journalists, psychologists and
sociologists, to name a few, have also made great strides in their research,
focusing on message creation and societal response to risk or environmental
issues. However, only a small portion of the overall field is dedicated to the
weather and climate context; even less is being used in practice. Although both
disciplines have much to offer each other, research disciplines and practice
often create invisible boundaries that may or may not nurture multi-disciplinary
collaboration. To build true partnerships, scholars need to attend, participate,
and actively listen to each other beyond a fifteen-minute presentation. The AMS
will help create an environment to establish and formalize research and practice
collaborations.

Both disciplines have much to offer society at large. The weather and climate
community focuses on increasing our understanding of the hazards that affect our
world. The communication community focuses on how to create messages and an
effective communication environment to convey the risks and science of such
hazards. The true benefit to society is when these two communities come
together. Research alone does not lead to a safer society. When research
communities combine with practice, then society can see the true value and
benefit of all the research involved. This single grant will set into motion an
ongoing series of collaborations between these communities that will fuel and
sustain a continuing and growing societal benefit.