* 1120923
* CEMRI for Photonic and Multiscale Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Stephen Forrest, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 13,739,466.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center of Excellence in Materials Research and
Innovation* (CEMRI) at the University of Michigan's Photonic and Multiscale
Nanomaterials (C-PHOM) Center is focused on developing novel multiscale
materials for nanophotonics. Light-matter interactions can be controlled both by
engineering the electronic properties of the material on the single-nanometer
scale, and by incorporating materials into structures that control the
propagation of light on the scale of a fraction of the optical wavelength and
longer. Materials that are engineered to simultaneously access these multiple
length scales simultaneously are referred to as multiscale materials; their
development constitutes one of the most exciting frontiers in materials research
and in photonics today. Center activities are focused on two interdisciplinary
research groups (IRGs) and a coordinated program in diversity, education, and
human resources development (EHRD). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IRG1 is dedicated to
wide-bandgap nanostructured materials for quantum light emitters. The program
will develop wide-gap materials, particularly GaN-based nanostructures,
establishing inorganic semiconductor nanophotonic structures with large bandgap
and high exciton binding energy for high-efficiency visible light emitters,
lasers, energy conversion, and novel quantum devices. The proposed research
includes the epitaxy and synthesis of GaN-based nanostructures, their
structural, electrical, and optical characterization, their application in laser
spectroscopy and quantum optical studies, investigation of strong coupling
phenomena, polariton lasing, high-efficiency visible LEDs, and microcavity
lasers. This effort is centered at the University of Michigan, with partners at
the University of Illinois Urbana Champaign and Queens College
CUNY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IRG2 is focused on advanced electromagnetic
metamaterials (MM's) and near-field tools. Metamaterials are nanostructured
mixtures that behave as homogeneous optical materials with electromagnetic
properties unattainable with naturally existing materials, such as negative
refraction, cloaking, plasmonic hot spots, and super-resolution. This IRG will
investigate MM's - particularly chiral, quasiperiodic and hyperbolic MM's - and
MM-inspired structures with unusual properties such as near-field plates and
hyperlenses, and develop understanding leading to potential applications in
communication, sensing, and imaging (notably sub-wavelength imaging). The IRG
consists of a partnership between the University of Michigan and Purdue
University, and additional collaborations with Wayne State University and the
University of Texas at Austin. Both IRG's include extensive interactions with
national labs (Sandia and Argonne) and with overseas
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key feature of the center mode of research
in a CEMRI is that it provides a framework for the close integration of research
with educational and outreach initiatives, at the high school, undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral levels. Specific programs to be implemented include
undergraduate involvement in CEMRI research via both a Michigan and an
international ("City of Light") research experience for undergraduates (REU)
program, a focused program for regional high school students from schools with
large underrepresented group enrollment, a coordinated system for recruiting
underrepresented groups into higher education, and an entrepreneurship program
to train PhD students and postdocs and encourage translation of technology
developed in the center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*An NSF Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center (MRSEC)