* 1120478
* Mechanisms Coupling Membrane Protrusion and Matrix Adhesion During Cell Migration
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kris DeMali, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2014
* USD 600,000.00

Cell migration is a basic biological process that is essential for all life. In
order to migrate, a cell must coordinate the extension of membranes (protrusion)
and their adhesion to the underlying matrix. Mechanisms for regulating both
membrane protrusion and cell adhesion have been extensively studied. However, it
is still is not known how these discrete steps are integrated. This lack of
information prevents a current and comprehensive model for cell migration to be
developed. Vinculin is an actin binding protein that is recruited to cell
adhesions; it establishes linkages between cell adhesions and the actin networks
that provide the driving force for membrane protrusion. Vinculin forms two types
of actin assemblies that can mediate this linkage. These include branched actin
networks and bundled actin filaments. The function of these diverse actin
assemblies and how they are integrated to regulate cell migration is not known.
This lack of information represents a major gap in our knowledge with respect to
how cell migration is controlled at the cellular and organismal levels. This
research will determine how the bundling and branching activities of vinculin
are integrated to produce cell movements. At the completion of this project,
novel mechanisms for coupling protrusion and adhesion will be identified and
information for how these events are integrated will be attained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this work will be the development of a contemporary model for cell
migration. Such a model will advance the field as it will serve as a foundation
for testing how new molecules affect cell migration and will ultimately promote
migration research by lowering barriers for entry into the field. Intellectual
merit for these studies also derives from the innovative combination of
biophysical, biochemical and imaging approaches that will provide unprecedented
integrative and quantitative insight into the mechanism of the biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
have broad impacts because it will have far reaching implications for a number
of groups. Firstly, it will influence scientists across disciplines since cell
migration is essential for numerous biological processes. Secondly, the work
includes outreach to high school girls. The intent of this workshop is to alter
the preconceived notions that high young women have about scientists and
scientific careers, to facilitate their entry into scientific careers, and to
enlist them as scientific ambassadors to disseminate information to the
community. This feat will be accomplished by providing the high school students
with the opportunity to execute some aspects of the research and by exposing a
program at the University of Iowa that provides opportunities for high school
students to conduct research in a laboratory. Thirdly, the project will also
support a partnership between the PI's laboratory and a biochemistry professor
from a rural liberal arts college that does not offer post-graduate programs.
The liberal arts professor will aid in the execution of the research and learn
how to make quantitative measurements of migrating cells. Finally, this project
will continue to support the pre-doctoral training of graduate and undergraduate
students in the PIs laboratory.