* 1120500
* Collaborative Research:  Deconstructing the temperature-size rule:  an integration of mechanistic and selection analyses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Joel Kingsolver, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2017
* USD 506,597.00

One of the most common patterns of phenotypic plasticity in biology is the
Temperature-Size Rule: many insects, reptiles, amphibians and other organisms
raised at higher environmental temperatures are smaller as adults. Is this
pattern an adaptation?is smaller better at higher temperatures?or an inevitable
consequence of the effects of temperature on physiology and development? Recent
studies with two agricultural pests, Tobacco Hornworms and Imported
Cabbageworms, show that both larval (caterpillar) nutrition and rapid evolution
can reverse the Temperature-Size Rule, leading to larger adults at higher
rearing temperatures. These exceptions to the rule provide a unique opportunity
to understand the developmental mechanisms and selective causes of this
widespread pattern of phenotypic plasticity. The proposed studies integrate
laboratory and field experiments with mathematical models to explore how larval
nutrition, oxygen limitation, hormonal regulation, and natural enemies
(predators and parasitoids) interact to generate the Temperature-Size Rule and
its exceptions. These studies will provide a new mechanistic and evolutionary
understanding of how plant quality, climate and seasonal weather interact to
determine body size and ecological success in Tobacco Hornworms and Imported
Cabbageworms, two important agricultural pests in the US. Research and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at UNC and Duke, and
outreach via Public Television, the North Carolina Museum of Life and Science,
and the San Francisco Exploratorium, are integral components of the project. In
addition, a citizen science program for Imported Cabbageworms (i.e., Cabbage
White Butterflies) will be developed that involves community gardeners and
organic farmers in North Carolina and other states.