* 1120376
* Effects of urbanization on pollination services
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Kevin Matteson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2014
* USD 156,037.00

Urban agriculture is increasing in the United States, with vegetables and fruits
often grown in private and community gardens as well as larger tracts of vacant
land. These small-scale agricultural efforts may contribute to urban
sustainability and can provide food security for those living in low-income
inner city neighborhoods with limited access to fresh produce. Despite the
potential social, nutritional, and ecological benefits of urban agriculture,
little is known about the pollination services that support such efforts. Many
crops grown in urban gardens benefit from or are dependent on pollination by
insects, especially bees. However, while studies have found some bees to be
prevalent in florally-diverse urban habitats, bee diversity or abundance also
have been shown to decrease with increasing urbanization. Therefore, pollinator
communities may vary across the urban landscape due to local management of
floral resources (e.g., flower plantings along city blocks) as well as
development intensity at larger spatial scales; these factors may then influence
pollination services across the urban landscape. To determine how pollination
services are distributed across the urban landscape, this research will (a)
evaluate changes in pollinators and their response to floral resources across a
gradient of urban development, and (b) determine how these biotic changes affect
the consistency and magnitude of pollination services. The research will take
place in Chicago, IL, the third largest city in the United States. In addition
to sampling pollinator communities, this study will use an experimental "mobile
garden" on the back of a pick-up truck to quantify directly pollination services
across the city. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; An assessment of pollination services in
cities will increase understanding of the potential sustainability of urban
ecosystems. This knowledge can be applied to increasing yield in urban
agriculture, potentially contributing to food security in densely populated
neighborhoods. This project will train undergraduate and graduate students
through participation in research and educate Chicago residents about the
importance of pollinators. Finally, the research will inform urban planners
about the ecological attributes, at both neighborhood-block and landscape
scales, that affect the ecosystem service of pollination.