* 1120940
* Student Travel Support for the 2011 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control.   To be Held in Orlando Florida, December 12-15, 2011
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Edwin Chong, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal requests support for student travel to the 50th IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control (CDC), which will be held in Orlando, Florida, December
12-15, 2011. The IEEE CDC is the annual flagship conference of the IEEE Control
Systems Society and one of the premier international conferences in the field of
control theory and applications. The funds will provide partial support for up
to twenty students from US colleges and universities to attend the conference
and present their research results. INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Control theory is
ubiquitous in modern, complex, technological systems, from automotive to
aerospace systems, biomedical systems, industrial automation systems, robotics,
and a host of other systems. It is increasingly evident that current research on
many technological frontiers is heavily influenced by foundational ideas from
control and system theory. The recent 49th IEEE CDC received over 2100
submissions and accepted around 1100 for presentation, many of which are co-
authored by students together with their faculty advisers. The intellectual
merit of the proposed use of funds is that graduate students will see first-hand
how the foundations of control and systems are evolving and shaping the
frontiers of research in many applications domains. BROADER IMPACT: With over
1200 anticipated research presentations, including several plenary lectures,
workshops and exhibits the CDC provides attendees with exposure to the state-of-
the-art in emerging areas of control research and technology. The broader impact
of this travel support is that it will help train the next generation of control
researchers and practitioners. The future security and well-being of the United
States relies on maintaining pools of trained scientists and engineers in
critical areas such as control technology. Moreover, the 50th CDC will be held
jointly, for the second time, with the European Control Conference, further
enhancing the broader impact. The students to be supported under the proposed
project represent the future technological leaders of the IEEE Control Systems
Society, which is the world's leading professional organization in the
discipline.