* 1120629
* RIG: Testing the Effect of Context on a Nest Association Mutualism of Stream Fishes in a Comparative-Advantage Biological Market Framework
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Emmanuel Frimpong, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2014
* USD 206,549.00

Most ecological studies of species interactions have focused on negative
consequences such as competition, predation, and parasitism. However, different
species also can interact in nature so as to enhance each other?s ability to
reproduce, grow, or survive. The intensity and consequence of these mutualisms
is hypothesized to be dependent on environmental conditions. This project will
address that hypothesis through a study of a common interaction among fish
species in North American rivers and streams. Nest association is a phenomenon
whereby one or more species deposit their eggs in the nest of a host species and
leave the care of the nest to the host. Although mostly considered mutually
beneficial to the species involved, current understanding of nest association
lags critically behind other mutually beneficial interactions known in nature.
This research project will focus on Bluehead Chub and Mountain Redbelly Dace, a
pair of fish species commonly found in the New River basin in Virginia. How
species trade services in terms of egg production and nest maintenance to
benefit each other?s reproduction and survival of offspring will be examined
through in-stream experiments. In particular, this research will determine how
important this trade is to each species when nesting material is scarce and when
there is high threat from other fish that may eat eggs on the nest. Previous
research suggests that nest association may be one of the key mechanisms by
which many stream fishes continue to survive degradation to stream quality
caused by urban and agricultural development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this project will help resource managers working to maintain fish species
diversity in stream habitats subject to disruption through various land uses and
invasive species. This project will provide research experiences for
undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in biology and ecology,
including students from the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, an under-
resourced university with over 90% African American student enrollment.