* 1120950
* Evolution of Neural Circuits for Locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Paul Katz, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2016
* USD 725,000.00

Neuroscience and medical science rely heavily on the concept that similar
behaviors in different kinds of animals are produced by shared mechanisms in the
brains of those animals. For example, behavioral testing in rodents is used to
predict the efficacy of drugs on human behavior. It is imperative that we
understand the extent to which similarity in behavior predicts similarity in
neural mechanism. This project uses electrophysiology combined with
computational simulations and molecular biology to examine this important
question in the readily accessible nervous systems of nudibranch sea slugs.
These animals have relatively simple nervous systems with individual nerve cells
(neurons) that are individually identifiable not just from animal to animal
within a species, but also across species. Furthermore, there is a tremendous
diversity of these species that perform one of two types of swimming behaviors.
These studies examine the extent to which neurons and neural circuits differ in
species that behave similarly. The project also examines a fundamental question
of whether the configuration of a neural circuit is a unique solution to
producing a particular type of behavior or whether there are many ways for the
behavior to come about. Finally, the project examines whether similar
neurochemical signals are used in species that produce similar behavior.
Information about the neurons and neural circuits is being shared in an online
repository called www.NeuronBank.org. The broader impact of the project also
involves further developing the molluscan neuroscience gateway
(www.squishybrain.org) for sharing research about these animals. This work is
important because of what it will reveal about how behavior is produced in
different species.