* 1120976
* WORKSHOP: Support for Conferences and Mentoring in Political Methodology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jeff Gill, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 188,034.00

This project supports the Society for Political Methodology's efforts to support
underfunded graduate students, expand mentoring and networking efforts for women
and members of underrepresented groups, as well as to develop new inclusive
programs for making the subfield more accessible to groups with historically
lower participation in the activities of the subfield. During the award period
the project will: (1) ensure that qualified, but insufficiently-funded graduate
students can attend and participate in our highly successful Summer methodology
meetings, (2) continue holding small thematically oriented meetings that
emphasize particular technical skills and foster a high level of networking and
mentoring, and (3) continue a series of small meetings for women methodologists
that deliberately mix senior leaders in the subfield with young, emerging
scholars who can benefit substantially from such close personal interaction.
This includes maintaining and developing multiple venues for presenting,
discussing, and advancing quantitative methods in political science, with a
direct focus on finding, mentoring, and enabling under-represented groups in
political methodology. Since all of the programs and initiatives in this
proposal are targeted at individuals in these circumstances, the effect is to
dramatically widen the access to the intellectual breadth of methodology. The
summer meeting is well known in the discipline for faculty-student interaction,
network formation between junior and senior faculty, and revealing the process
of creating new knowledge in quantitative political
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodology plays a special role in the large,
diverse field of political science, since it reaches across other areas of
research in the discipline, with a history of providing knowledge and tools that
help researchers who are not themselves self identified as methodologists. Thus
the planned investment in graduate students and increased inclusion of
underrepresented groups from this support will have an impact that stretches
across the discipline.