* 1120316
* Collaborative Research:  Testing mechanistic connections between sex, foraging and parasitism along an ecological gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Spencer Hall, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 214,155.00

Individuals of the same species often differ in important traits, and these
differences are known functions of genetic and environmental influences. For
most species, however, a mechanistic understanding of the origin and maintenance
of individual variation is still missing. This project proposes mechanistic
connections among three seemingly unrelated traits: investment in sexual versus
asexual reproduction, feeding performance on rich versus poor resources, and
susceptibility to parasites. The investigators hypothesize that differences in
feeding rates create a causal chain of relationships that ultimately promotes
the maintenance of diversity through basic ecological mechanisms. To test these
ideas, the research combines monitoring of biodiversity and diseases in natural
populations with laboratory experiments designed to disentangle genetic versus
environmental factors shaping the traits of individuals. By determining how
seemingly unrelated traits are integrated into distinct strategies, and
examining how the frequency of different strategies varies along a natural
ecological gradient, the research will provide novel insights into the
ecological pressures maintaining phenotypic and genetic variation in natural
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will significantly
advance understanding of how diseases spread and how biodiversity is maintained.
Diverse educational opportunities will be provided for undergraduate students,
graduate students, postdoctoral scientists, and research technicians. The
investigators will develop a public lecture series, a summer science camp, and a
new biology-mathematics course, and support activities focused on recruitment,
retention and mentoring of students from under-represented groups.