* 1120375
* Collaborative Research:  Reconstructing Airflow in the Nasal Cavity of Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Brent Craven, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 07/31/2014
* USD 543,197.00

The mammalian nose houses a complex set of paper-thin bones known as turbinals.
Turbinals are involved in both the sense of smell and conditioning inspired air,
and yet their function is not well understood. This is true despite the fact
that a better knowledge of nasal anatomy and function is essential for progress
in predicting particulate deposition in human airways, improving intranasal drug
delivery, and the development of artificial sniffers for the detection of
dangerous substances such as explosives. Some of the most important questions
about turbinal function concern aspects of airflow through the nose. How do they
direct air to the olfactory region? Are there separate pathways for respiration
and olfaction? What can differences among species in the architecture of the
turbinals tell us about the efficiency of odorant reception and heat and water
conservation? To answer these questions, this project brings together scientists
from two disparate fields, biology and engineering, to advance our understanding
of respiration and olfaction. By combining modern high-resolution medical
imaging, state-of-the-art models of flow, and data on nasal soft tissue
distribution, this cross-disciplinary collaboration will be the first to apply
novel computational modeling tools (e.g., 3-D anatomical reconstruction,
computational fluid dynamics [CFD]) and experimental measurement techniques
(e.g., use of anatomically-correct transparent physical models) to develop new
form-function relationships for the nose. To do so, the 3-D nasal anatomy of
five mammal species will be reconstructed from magnetic resonance images (MRI)
of intact heads, computed tomography (CT) scans of their bony turbinals, and
laboratory analysis of the distribution of olfactory vs. respiratory tissue. To
enable future studies, paired sets of MRI scans of intact heads and CT scans of
the cleaned skulls will be used to develop a method that corrects CT-derived
image data of dry skull specimens for the absence of nasal mucosa. This will
permit the study of nasal airflow using existing museum collections of skulls
alone rather than intact heads, thereby greatly expanding the range of species
and function that can be studied. Finally, to increase knowledge of nasal
function beyond the two relatively short-snouted groups that have received the
most attention, viz., primates and carnivores, the turbinals of 10-15 ungulate
species will be reconstructed from CT scans of dry skulls and analyzed for
turbinal dimensions. &lt;br/&gt; Over 10,000 CT slices of the skulls of 11-16
species of mammals, as well as paired sets of MRI scans of intact heads and CT
scans of skulls for three individual mammals will be generated. All new scans
will be deposited in the NSF Digital Morphology Library at the University of
Texas, Austin (www.digimorph.org) for public access within 5 years of receiving
funding for this project. Similarly, all of the numerical CFD models developed
during this study will be made available via a website to be established by the
PIs and hosted by Penn State University. Numerous graduate students and
undergraduates will be trained in aspects of both biology and engineering as
part of this project. Minority graduate and undergraduate students will be
recruited through dedicated programs at each institution, and the investigators
will continue their ongoing outreach efforts to high school students and lay
audiences.