* 1120716
* Conference: 2011 CSHL Conference on Neurobiology of Drosophila, Cold Spring Harbor, NY Oct. 3-7, 2011
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 21,220.00

This Neurobiology of Drosophila conference focuses on advances made using the
combined power of genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, cell biology,
electrophysiology, imaging, and behavioral analysis to address fundamental
issues in neurobiology using the model organism Drosophila melanogaster. A
driving principle of the entire field is that the lowly fruit fly, while seeming
to have little in common with humans, shares many of the same genes, molecules
and neural wiring ?albeit far simpler ? with vertebrate animals. Building on one
hundred years of research in fly genetics, the fly neurobiology field is a
burgeoning field of endeavor with many laboratories around the world making
significant advances in the field. Understanding how these systems work in
Drosophila has enormous relevance to our efforts to elucidate how these things
function in higher animals, with consequences including how we think about brain
evolution and other major themes of research in humans. Many of the research
techniques that are developed for use in the fly have considerable utility in
research into nervous system function in vertebrates and mammals. The aim of the
conference is to provide a forum to bring together a diverse group of scientists
and young investigators working in different areas of the field of fly
neurobiology.