* 1120513
* Mechanisms Regulating Subcellular Distribution of the Thyroid Hormone Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2016
* Lizabeth Allison, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2016
* USD 1,082,957.00

Intellectual Merit of Project: Trafficking of regulatory proteins into the cell
nucleus, where genetic information is stored and processed, is fundamental to
the organization and functioning of all living cells. Not surprisingly, this
cellular traffic control is highly regulated and is directed by special signals
called nuclear localization signals (NLS's), found within proteins destined for
the nucleus. The NLS's directly interact with special transport proteins called
importins that help guide the cargo into the nucleus. This project explores the
signals regulating traffic control of thyroid hormone receptors, essential
proteins which either activate or silence the expression of target genes in
response to thyroid hormone, and play a pivotal role in development and
metabolism. Specifically, the project will determine: 1) which importin serves
as the primary carrier for the two NLS's in the thyroid hormone receptor; 2) the
role that multiple NLS's play in regulating thyroid hormone receptor
distribution and functional diversification, and 3) whether protein turn-over
and routing to the proteasome, a special cellular component that acts like a
garbage disposal system, play a role in thyroid hormone receptor trafficking.
The thyroid hormone receptor provides an excellent model system for studying the
role of multiple import and export signals in mediating traffic control of key
regulatory proteins in the cell. This research will enhance general
understanding of NLS structure and function, refine predictive tools, and
provide insight into how a dynamic balance between nuclear import, retention,
and degradation of regulatory proteins modulates the expression of essential
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of Project: A fruitful collaboration
with faculty and undergraduates at Hampton University, an HBCU, will be
continued. Opportunity for a diversity of undergraduates to gain hands-on
experience with the scientific process will be provided. In the wider context,
new techniques will be introduced to the departmental confocal microscope user
group, and research activities will be integrated into an undergraduate lab
course taught each Fall. Master's students will have the opportunity to gain
experience in lab management and to develop their teaching skills through
training and supervising undergraduates in the lab. This project will contribute
substantially to human resource development in science, by preparing
undergraduates and graduate students to go on to other graduate programs,
medical school, veterinary school, secondary education, and industry, to name a
few. In particular, this project will enhance the professional development of
participants from groups underrepresented in science.