* 1120802
* Support for travel to the 18th International Botanical Congress- to be held July 23 - 30, 2011 in Melbourne, Australia
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Richard Olmstead, Botanical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

The International Botanical Congress (IBC) is the largest international
conference in plant biology and extends the broadest disciplinary coverage of
any such conference. The IBC is held every six years and will take place in
Melbourne, Australia, in 2011. This grant will support travel for graduate
students, postdocs, and early career faculty (within three years of first
appointment), who are presenting the results of their research, to attend the
upcoming IBC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IBC serves a critical role in
international communication within and across disciplines in plant biology, as
well as a valuable opportunity to establish international collaborations.
Participation is particularly valuable for young scientists as they establish
their careers. The opportunity to reach so many scientists within any individual
discipline creates an unequaled opportunity for exposure by a young scientist.
The once-in-six-years frequency of the Congresses means that for most young
scientists, who are about to complete Ph.D.s, find a job, or compete for tenure
in their academic institutions, there is only one opportunity to participate in
an IBC during these critical stages of professional development. For the young
scientists supported by these travel awards, connections made here will be
career-altering and will create life-long collaborations that will enhance their
development as scientists.