* 1120944
* Regulation of Arabidopsis immune function through RIN4 sub-cellular localization and exocyst interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* David Mackey, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 01/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Plants employ a branched immune system that prevents disease in the vast
majority of plant-microbe interactions. One branch recognizes pathogen
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that are contained within conserved
microbial molecules. A second branch recognizes effector proteins, which are
pathogen-encoded virulence factors. These two branches utilize common signaling
pathways and induce common outputs, yet little is known about the mechanistic
basis of intersections within the network they comprise. The RIN4 protein of the
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana is a hub protein with key roles in regulating
both branches, thus a detailed understanding of RIN4 will provide fundamental
insight into the function of the plant immune system. The work will address
three aspects of RIN4 function. Changes in the sub-cellular localization of
RIN4, which are induced by bacterial effector proteins, have distinct effects on
the activity of the two branches of the plant immune system. The proposed work
will determine how sub-cellular localization of RIN4 affects its defense
regulatory function. Preliminary data also indicate that RIN4 interacts with
components of the plant exocyst, which is a multi-protein complex that regulates
vesicle trafficking and membrane fusion events that play important roles in the
function of the plant immune system. The proposed work will determine how
interaction of the exocyst with RIN4 contributes to plant immune function.
Finally, RIN4 functions in guard cells to regulate stomatal aperture in response
to bacterial infection. The ability of plants to prevent invasion by
epiphytically growing bacterial pathogens depends on their ability to close and
keep closed their stomata. Control of guard cell function by RIN4 and bacterial
effector proteins that target RIN4 will be investigated. The research aims will
be addressed using plant pathology, molecular, biochemical, and cell biological
methods.

Broader Impacts: The trend to use agriculture to fuel as well as feed the world
places great demand on optimizing crop productivity. To most effectively breed
and/or engineer disease resistance in food and biofuel crops while minimizing
deleterious side effects, such as reduced yield, requires fundamental knowledge
about connections within the network comprising the plant immune system. Though
the work will be done in the Arabidopsis thaliana model system, the findings
will be applicable to agriculturally important plants, as RIN4 homologs have
been identified in all land plants examined and demonstrated to play important
roles in immune function of several crop plants. Findings will be presented at
meetings and published in peer-reviewed journals. The PI has a proven record of
working with underserved groups at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral levels, including the recent graduation of an Hispanic Ph.D. student.
Funds from the project will also support participation of students from small
liberal arts colleges in the Summer Undergraduate Research Experience program at
The Ohio State University. Finally, the PI will participate in the organization
and instruction of a module focusing on the plant immune system during the 2012
Summer Practical Workshop in Functional Genomics at Ohio State.