* 1120187
* SNM:  Continuous and Large Scale Nanomanufacturing of Graphene and Carbon Nanotube Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Anastasios John Hart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,299,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project addresses fundamental challenges in key
aspects associated with scalable synthesis, patterning, and integration of
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene. Novel high-throughput scalable
nanomanufacturing (SNM) techniques are being pioneered with the capability of
continuous processing of revolutionary carbon-based devices and hybrid systems,
promising a transformative leap in the commercialization of carbon
nanomaterials. The success of this work may jumpstart bulk production and
practical large area applications based on graphene and CNTs. The project also
implements a strong outreach and educational plan aimed at promoting science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education among underrepresented
groups. The knowledge and experience gained in these fabrication technologies
are being made available to the broader scientific community through conference
presentations, journal publications, and the user network of the NSF-supported
National Nanofabrication Infrastructure Network (NNIN), where the University of
Michigan is one of the NNIN sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
objective of this project is to invent and develop new high-throughput SNM
technologies that will bring graphene- and CNT-based nanomaterials and their
hybrids to practical large-area applications in electronics, optoelectronics,
and mechanics. A multidisciplinary approach has been adopted to address
fundamental roadblocks hindering continuous nanomanufacturing of carbon
nanomaterials. A fundamental understanding of processing mechanisms enables the
design of machines and processes that in turn provides high-throughput
manufacturing of nanoscale structures, devices, and systems using carbon-based
materials. The project includes building a laboratory-scale machine for
continuous chemical vapor deposition (CVD) synthesis of CNTs and graphene on
flexible substrates, and the integration of a suite of novel and scalable
patterning and modification techniques suitable for large-area carbon
nanomaterial films. Together, the SNM technology is being used to build and test
CNT- and graphene-based hybrid photovoltaics, metamaterials, and high-surface-
area filters. The project also implements a summer research opportunity program,
and creates a mobile educational exhibit and associated activities that can help
engage underrepresented student at conventions of the national societies such as
the National Society of Black Engineers. Students are receiving cutting-edge
training in nanotechnology, while gaining valuable experience in understanding
what is necessary to commercialize nanomaterials and manufacturing processes via
interactions with industrial partners.