* 1120206
* Dissection of an Insulin-like Signaling Network Controlling C. Elegans Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* L. Ryan Baugh, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 806,272.00

One of the wonders of nature is how a single cell can develop into a
multicellular animal with the form and function characteristic of the species.
Animal development is remarkably reproducible even when environmental conditions
fluctuate, suggesting that fitness depends on mechanisms that buffer development
from variation. The Baugh Lab at Duke University seeks to understand the
physiological mechanisms that result in such developmental homeostasis. The lab
investigates how nutrient availability governs post-embryonic development in the
roundworm C. elegans. Worm larvae respond to starvation by arresting development
and increasing resistance to environmental stress (eg, heat, freezing,
oxidation, pathogens, high salt, UV radiation, low oxygen, etc). Arrested larvae
can survive starvation several weeks, which is longer than the normal lifespan
of fed worms, but they respond rapidly to feeding and resume development.
Insulin-like signaling controls this remarkable physiological transformation
between arrest and development. However, the genome encodes 40 insulin-like
signals, raising questions about their specificity and functional dynamics,
while the function of individual signals remains largely uncharacterized. A
genetic approach will be used to identify the insulin-like signals and signaling
centers that promote development in response to feeding. A molecular approach
will be used to investigate the regulation of all 40 insulin-like genes and to
determine the influence of feedback on signaling dynamics. Graduate and
undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented backgrounds, will
be trained to perform the experiments and taught to write about and present the
findings. With completion of this work, specific details critical to
understanding how developmental homeostasis is maintained in this well-
characterized model system will be learned, impacting research on organismal
biology and insulin-like signaling in a variety of other systems.