* 1120840
* RIG: Biochemical and Structural Studies of the Bcr Multienzyme Polypeptide
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,10/31/2013
* M. Nidanie Henderson, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit Cells employ sophisticated communication systems to manage
their activities. One important component of these systems is a family of
enzymes called protein kinases. These enzymes transmit signals by
phosphorylation, a process by which phosphate groups are added to specific
downstream communication elements. A detailed understanding of cellular
communication therefore demands a thorough understanding of every type of
protein kinase. This project focuses on the Bcr (breakpoint cluster region)
kinase, which has no apparent structural similarity to better-studied kinases.
How then does Bcr catalyze phosphorylation when it lacks the organization of
amino acid components found in all other protein kinases?

Since the order of amino acids in a protein determines how the protein folds
into its particular three-dimensional structure and functions, one possibility
is that Bcr's unique sequence of amino acids uses a novel structure to promote
phosphorylation in a way so far unknown to scientists. Another possibility is
that the divergent sequence in Bcr, similar to other atypical protein kinases
(aPKs), will still adopt the typical kinase fold. The latter could be true for
Bcr but would not be the complete story. In Bcr, the distribution of amino acids
resembles those of unstructured proteins. This implies that the kinase domain
may rather adopt an extended or unfolded structure natively and exhibit a
disorder-to-order transition when active. The clear way to distinguish between
these possibilities is to investigate the structure and function of the Bcr
kinase domain. Biochemical and biophysical methods will be used to determine the
structure of this protein, which will be deposited and publicly available in the
Protein Databank. The structure of Bcr will resolve the very perplexing question
of how Bcr functions and add substantially to our knowledge of protein kinase
structure and function, in general.

Broader impact This project will provide Carleton College undergraduate
students and mentored high school students and teachers with hands-on experience
with lab techniques, data presentation and analysis. As a number of
computational, biochemical, and biophysical techniques will be used to perform
this study, the didactic possibilities for participants are enormous and will
engage students at all levels in basic science studies. This interdisciplinary
project will introduce students to the physical and chemical approaches that are
currently used to address biological problems, encouraging students with varying
scientific interests to seek out further opportunities in biology. Moreover, as
one of two African American female science professors at Carleton College and
one of few minority science professors in general, the PI is a role model to
women and underrepresented students within the college and beyond. Support of
this project will advance the PI's research program, foster a diversity of
emerging scientists, broaden the scientific workforce, and in turn, its pool of
role models.