* 1120200
* MPS-BIO: Collaborative Research: Physical Mechanisms Regulating Sperm Chemotaxis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Roman Stocker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2014
* USD 433,413.00

Despite a century of intensive research, fertilization is one of the least
understood fundamental biological processes. Chemical signaling between gametes
through fluid-borne cues occurs in diverse taxa with highly divergent
reproductive strategies and is thought to play a fundamental role in
reproduction. Still, it is unclear how chemical communication between gametes
occurs under natural conditions. A critical determinant of the effectiveness of
chemical cues and their influence on the motility of male gametes is ambient
fluid motion. Fluid motion may promote cell interactions by bringing gametes
together or alternately may inhibit adhesion and binding, yet very little is
known about the effects of flow on the motility and chemotaxis of male gametes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing methods have limited ability to study the role of
physics and chemistry in mediating gamete behavior and fertilization. It is very
difficult to accurately control fluid motion and chemical cues at microscopic
scales. In this project, state-of-the-art microfluidic approaches will enable
unprecedented control over microenvironments naturally inhabited by gametes.
This study will take a comprehensive approach and apply microfluidics to
determine the roles played by physics and chemistry in gamete interactions. The
proposed research, to be carried out under the guidance of PIs Jeff Riffell (U.
Washington), Roman Stocker (MIT) and Richard Zimmer (UCLA), is thus structured
around two principal aims: (i) determine the impact of chemical cues on male
gamete motility and on fertilization success; (ii) establish the effects of
fluid motion on the motility of male gametes and their response to chemical
cues. The synergy and complementarity of expertise between the three PIs will
enable an in-depth characterization of the biomechanics of male gamete swimming
and of chemical communication between germ cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
comprehensive and interdisciplinary approach of this study will have broad and
diverse impacts on science and society. A better understanding of male gamete
chemotaxis will arise from the use of microfluidic technology and provide new
knowledge on reproduction and conservation biology. At the same time, the
advances fostered by this study in attaining control of fluid flow and chemical
cues at the microscale will provide a broad methodological framework for diverse
areas of biology. The intimate combination of physics, biology and chemistry in
this study will provide ample training opportunities for students at high
school, undergraduate and graduate levels, emphasizing under-represented groups
in science, through (1) a collaboration with the Summer Institute for Life
Science (SILS) at the University of Washington, a 4-week hands-on summer
institute that provides grade 4-8 teachers with research experience; (2) the
development of a 3-hour science experience to be offered through MIT's Edgerton
Center Outreach Program, designed for high-school students to promote hands-on
experience in science; (3) the creation of a new course module at UCLA and the
involvement of 3-4 UCLA undergraduates in research, each quarter; these
undergraduates will be drawn from underrepresented groups through the UCLA CARE
(Center for Academic and Research Excellence) and the UC LEADS (Leadership
Excellence through Advanced DegreeS) Programs; and (4) the training of graduate
students and postdoctorates in cell biology and microfluidics. Together, these
programs will foster outreach and science education at multiple educational
levels. Broad dissemination of results in technical and popular literature, in
the tradition of all three PIs, will complement this outreach plan.