* 1120516
* REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION WITHIN SPECIES AS A CONSEQUENCE OF GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION IN COMMUNITY INTERACTIONS IN CHORUS FROGS
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Emily Lemmon, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 749,237.00

Reproductive interactions constitute a potentially powerful force driving the
evolution of mating behaviors, particularly when species interact with different
combinations of other species across geography. Theory predicts that if the
various species that constitute the local community vary across the range of a
particular species, different populations of that species may experience
pressure to evolve different mating behaviors. This diversifying selection may
cause the rapid divergence of populations within a species as males evolve
different signals across populations and females evolve preferences for local
signals. The purpose of this project is to determine whether geographic
variation in the species that constitute the local community has caused a
particular frog species to evolve into multiple distinct species through direct
selection on reproductive traits. This work will be accomplished by integrating
behavioral experiments, genetic data, and ecological studies throughout the
distribution of the study species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents
one of the first empirical tests of theoretical predictions that reproductive
interactions among different species can cause diversification within a
particular species. This phenomenon is a cryptic but potentially widespread
mechanism of speciation. The project supports the training of a postdoctoral
researcher, graduate students, and undergraduate students in a diversity of
biological fields and technologies. Two important components of this work are a
biology outreach program to home-schooled students and a public outreach program
to monitor the health of local amphibian populations.