* 1120682
* What determines elevational distributions of Andean Birds?  The relative importance of species interactions and physiology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Mark Chappell, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2015
* USD 799,999.00

Tropical mountain ranges have more bird species than any other region on earth.
One reason for this high diversity is that bird communities change dramatically
from the lowlands to the tops of mountains as species drop out and are replaced
by others. The proposed research seeks to understand why so many species are
restricted to just a portion of the elevation range available on the slopes of
tropical mountains. The Manu Road in the Andes of southern Peru was chosen as
the study site because it has the highest bird species diversity in the world
(>1000 species). The researchers will first seek to determine the range of
elevations that each species can potentially occupy based on their ability to
tolerate different temperature ranges. Then, for species that do not occupy the
entire range of conditions that they can tolerate physiologically, the
researchers will study how interactions with other species, such as predators
and competitors, may instead determine where species can live.

Tropical mountains have been targeted as the region where climate change will
have the greatest impact on plants and animals with small ranges. More than a
quarter of the world's endangered bird species are restricted to narrow
elevation ranges on tropical mountains. Over the next century, many species of
tropical mountains will have to move upslope as temperatures increase. Anything
that prevents species from successfully moving to new environments upslope will
greatly increase their risk of extinction. Currently, however, almost nothing is
known about tolerances of any tropical species to changing temperatures. Species
interactions are also likely to affect the extent to which species can move
upslope in response to warming temperatures. This research will be the first to
provide these data for many different species in a hyper-diverse region. The
research team will also interact extensively with local communities, train many
students from the US and from Peru, and generate resources such as photo-
illustrated bird guides that can be used by the general public.