* 1120390
* Ecosystem transformations along the Colorado Front Range: Prairie dog interactions with multiple components of global environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Laurel Hartley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 858,704.00

Grassland plant communities along the Colorado Front Range are responding to
directional changes in climate, increased atmospheric carbon dioxide, increased
nitrogen deposition, and invasion by many non-native plant species introduced by
humans over the last century. A warmer climate and relatively wetter non-growing
season appear to support a new group of plant species adapted to the new
conditions. These species may also be affecting the ecological role of an
important plant consumer known to have very large impacts on the biological
diversity of grasslands. Prairie dogs, animals whose presence is critical to the
presence of many other species, are believed to interact with invasive plants
such that plant community dynamics are dramatically altered from what they were
under historical reference conditions. This study will measure how the new plant
species are exploiting climate and resource changes, document how grazing
activities by prairie dogs are influenced by these species, and assess the
effects of the interactions on plant species change and soil erosion.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it tests the hypothesis that
directional changes in climate and concurrent changes in plant species can alter
the role that an animal has in maintaining the structure and function of
grassland communities. This project will train undergraduate students, graduate
students, and a postdoctoral researcher in environmental change ecology, and
will provide the subject material for a senior-graduate course in scenario
planning for natural areas in an era of rapid environmental change. The
researchers will use this study to engage K-12 students, teachers, stakeholders
and managers in searching for solutions to conservation problems.