* 1120823
* SNM:  Development of Ink-Jet Based Low Cost Roll-to-Roll Nanopatterning (i-R2R Nano) with Demonstration in Thin Film Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* C. Grant Willson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,300,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches: The overall research objective of this
Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) award is to develop high speed, ink-jet based
roll-to-roll nanopatterning (i-R2R Nano) for cost-sensitive applications such as
thin film photovoltaics (PVs). The specific objectives include: (i)
Investigation of top-down (nanoimprint) and bottom-up (nanoparticle or block co-
polymer) R2R nanopatterning; (ii) Development of enabling technologies for high
throughput R2R processes (&gt;50 ft/min) with a total patterning cost target of
&lt;$2/m2; and (iii) Optimization of broadband light trapping in nanostructured
a-Si PVs on flex substrates using aperiodic plasmonic structures to obtain
significantly enhanced efficiencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The basic scientific
contributions will include: (i) Nano-fluidics, material rheology, multi-scale
mechanics modeling, and real-time sensing/control for high-speed i-R2R systems
and processes (ii) Design of imprint materials, solvent based self-assembly
materials, and interfaces for rapid pattern formation in TD and BU processes;
and (iii) Novel material integration and device design for optimum light
trapping in thin film PVs on flex substrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This interdisciplinary program will create fundamental knowledge in the
areas of high-speed R2R nanopatterning with low material usage, and in the
design of controlled nano-structures for high efficiency PVs. Thin film PVs is
representative of the most demanding nano-scale requirements and cost
constraints among the various potential applications of R2R nanopatterning. The
outreach activities will promote innovation/entrepreneurship; and synergistic
activities at the undergraduate level through the UT-Austin Equal Opportunity in
Engineering T-REX program.