* 1120487
* Why are tropical mountains unique? Herpetological inventories and evolutionary biogeography in the montane Brazilian Atlantic forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Ana Carnaval, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 503,328.00

Habitat conversion and accelerated climate change pose an unprecedented threat
to montane regions, leading to increased concern for biodiversity in these
areas. Given their narrow thermal niches, tropical montane amphibians and
reptiles are particularly vulnerable to environmental change. Investigating the
mechanisms responsible for diversification and species persistence in mountains
is therefore imperative. This project will study 15 species of lizards and
glassfrogs in the Brazilian Atlantic forest to test the hypothesis that
topographic complexity and climatic stability are responsible for
diversification and population persistence in montane regions. The project
combines inventories in 13 poorly-studied sites, climate-based models of species
distributions, molecular studies afforded by DNA sequencing, and physiological
assays.

Understanding the processes that underlie endemism in tropical mountains will
advance studies of biodiversity patterns and contribute to biodiversity
prediction worldwide. Field and laboratory data will enable reassessments of
species boundaries, identifying new species and morphologically cryptic
lineages. Physiological data will directly inform conservation of taxa under
risk of climate-related extinction. This project will provide educational and
research opportunities for three undergraduates per year, one graduate student,
and one postdoctoral associate in a minority-serving urban campus, significantly
increasing exposure of underrepresented and underprivileged students to trans-
disciplinary, collaborative, field-based work.