* 1120283
* THE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND FUNGAL DISEASE ON ANDEAN MONTANE FROGS
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Vance Vredenburg, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The amphibians are long-term survivors, having endured four previous planetary
mass extinctions. Through these extinctions, not only did all three orders of
amphibians escape extinction, but most families and genera survived. However,
the global loss of biodiversity is accelerating, and amphibians are the most
threatened group of vertebrates. There are many potential causes for this, but
an emerging infectious disease, chytridiomycosis, caused by a highly infectious
fungal pathogen, is implicated in mass die offs and extinctions worldwide.
Effects of climate change on amphibian physiology has been proposed as a
mechanism initiating chytridiomycosis epidemics in Central and South America on
the assumption that increased temperature variability reduces amphibian immunity
to fungal infection. This project will investigate whether exposure to elevated
temperatures increases susceptibility to disease by measuring thermal stress and
infection dynamics in frogs at a range of sites in the Peruvian Andes. This
project will also delineate the historic and present distribution of the fungus
in highly susceptible amphibians throughout South America. Preserved museum
specimens collected at many sites throughout South America over the last 8
decades will be tested to determine if fungal pathogen emergence is coincident
with collapse of amphibian populations. Available site-specific climate data
from the past 5 decades will be used to evaluate whether large-scale climatic
events or warming trends are associated with the emergence of this fungal
pathogen and subsequent extinction of amphibian species.

Results from this research will inform conservation efforts to prevent loss of
amphibian species in tropical regions. Understanding the factors that contribute
to outbreaks and subsequent persistence of disease in amphibian species is
essential to developing strategies that can avert the loss of biodiversity and
mitigate the impact of epidemics. This project will support an early career
scientist, strengthen collaboration between researchers in the United States and
Latin America, support the research training of a postdoctoral scholar, and
provide field research experiences for two graduate students.