* 1120113
* RIG: Enzymatic Detoxifying Systems for Diet-derived Chemicals in Herbivorous Marine Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jason Biggs, University of Guam
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 194,134.00

Diverse chemical compounds play critical roles in the defenses of many marine
organisms and can influence the community structure of entire ecosystems. This
complexity reaches a peak on tropical coral reefs, which are well-known targets
for prospecting biomedical agents. Although many marine natural products have
been studied for biomedical activity, yielding important information about their
biochemical effects and mechanisms of action, much less is known about
predators' abilities to overcome these defenses. It is important to understand
how predators cope with poisons in their diet (from prey biochemical defenses)
and how these systems parallel human's ability to remove foreign chemicals that
are encountered in their every day lives (drugs, pollutants, toxins, etc.) This
project's use of herbivorous reef fish to define mechanisms of tolerance to
chemically-rich diets will help fill important gaps: Fish that have evolved in
(and depend on) chemically-rich coral-reef environments should be valuable
models for studying mechanisms of xenobiotic tolerance. This knowledge will help
to develop marine natural products as biomedical resources for humans; and,
mechanisms of xenobiotic tolerance in herbivorous fish will provide fascinating
and potentially insightful counterparts to mechanistic studies in well-studied
terrestrial organisms such as insects. The vast majority of vertebrates are
fishes, yet little is currently known about how fish tolerate their preys'
biochemical defenses especially in tropical marine communities, where these
mechanisms can be assumed to be highly developed. A state of the art genetic
approach will characterize all genes expressed in the liver of S. spinus, a fish
species that broadly represents chemically resistant tropical herbivorous
fishes. These genes will be used to build a microarray chip to quantify changes
in gene expression in response to differing environmental conditions. All gene
sequences will be submitted to the National Center for Biological Information
(available on http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.) This work will provide an
opportunity to define diet-driven adaptive mechanisms in tropical herbivorous
vertebrates for the first time, and increase understanding of herbivore offense.
Guam's island community has strong ties to the ocean, making marine science a
valuable opportunity for presenting locally relevant scientific concepts and
methods to a public to whom science often seems foreign. Public presentations
and paid summer high-school research internships and the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate biology majors will help to expand these
opportunities. A better understanding of tropical fishes' mechanisms for coping
with dietary xenotoxins can contribute to resource-management efforts to
minimize impacts from nuisance species' of alga (e.g., cyanobacteria and other
'harmful algal blooms'; ciguatera poisoning). This project also has potential
for initiating additional collaborative efforts towards ecologically relevant
metabolomic and proteomic analyses of S. spinus. For people that depend on the
ocean for food, understanding why some natural products persist in marine food
chains can be equivalent to understanding the size and/or safety of their most
important resource.