* 1120013
* Collaborative Research: The genomic basis of dramatic, rapid, convergent evolution in the killifish Fundulus heteroclitus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Wesley Warren, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2014
* USD 48,481.00

Populations of the Atlantic killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) inhabiting urban
estuaries have rapidly and repeatedly evolved tolerance to extreme pollution
stress, yet the genetic changes that enabled this adaptive tolerance are
unknown. This grant will facilitate sequencing the full killifish genome, and
re-sequencing of genomes from many sensitive and tolerant populations, to enable
discovery of the genetic changes that facilitated tolerance to human pollutants,
and address whether there are a few or many genetic variants that confer
tolerance or sensitivity to pollution among the many different populations
inhabiting polluted sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major ambition of both
evolutionary biology and medical genetics is to identify the genetic variants
within and among populations that contribute to an individual's tolerance to
stress or disease. For example, human individuals vary in their sensitivity to
disease and environmental pollutants, and a portion of this variation has a
genetic basis. Studies of the genomic changes in killifish exposed to pollutants
provide an excellent opportunity to discover the genetic basis of individual
sensitivity to common environmental pollutants in a vertebrate animal that
shares many traits with humans. This research could identify genetic variants
that contribute to human sensitivity to environmental pollutant exposures and
also offer detailed insight into fundamental mechanisms of the evolutionary
process.