* 1120122
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  Understanding Robustness:  Institutions, Disturbances, and Performance in Spanish Irrigation Communities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Elinor Ostrom, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2012
* USD 12,189.00

Contemporary societies are increasingly exposed to common threats such as
pollution, climate change, or market crises that are the result of the
socioeconomic development process itself and manifest at global, regional, and
local scales. This situation has generated a new interest in understanding the
manner in which communities organize in response to threats in different
contexts. Research in natural resource management has been particularly
productive in that regard. In that vein, this research uses a large set of
irrigation communities located in northeastern Spain to understand how
characteristics of threats, the ways the local communities are organized, and
the physical environment may enhance the robustness of those
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing concern among ecologists
and political scientists about the need to study robustness from an
interdisciplinary perspective. This project contributes to theory building in
that direction by testing the impact of both social and environmental variables.
The research also helps improve decision-support computer programs that are
increasingly used for water management in Spain and other countries. Finally,
the research provides an inventory of sustainability threats and responses that
represents the reality of many irrigation communities around the world. The
inventory is useful for risk management in other natural resource sectors, so
the research team is sharing the inventory with communities and public
authorities.