* 1120901
* Center of Excellence for Materials Research and Innovation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* I-Wei Chen, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 21,592,280.00

The Center of Excellence for Materials Research and Innovation (CEMRI)*, hosted
by the Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter (LRSM) at the
University of Pennsylvania (Penn), pursues a program that provides crucial
support for faculty, post-docs, and graduate students drawn from different
disciplines to tackle complex fundamental materials problems that can only be
addressed in a truly collaborative mode, and that are likely to underlie future
technologies and economic needs of society. Four Interdisciplinary Research
Groups (IRGs) are central to the Center. The first group explores the interplay
of curvature- & elasticity-induced interactions in liquid crystals, colloids,
and on interfaces; new findings will thus generate new abilities to manipulate
soft matter using surface structures & membrane geometry. The second group
creates materials inspired by virology from novel synthetic macromolecules such
as self-assembled Janus dendrimers & designer proteins; the new materials, with
virus-like structure & functions, will be useful for sensing, communication, and
actuation. The third group investigates disordered packings of atoms, colloids
and grains to understand how localized rearrangements of constituents organize
under load; the new concepts generated will provide routes for predicting
whether materials are about to fail, and for synthesis of tough materials. The
fourth group, anchored by a world-class effort in nanocrystal synthesis &
assembly, builds novel inter-dimensional materials from these particles, and
measures emergent electronic, optical, acoustic and magnetic properties. In each
IRG, theory and simulation stimulate experiment and vice versa, and answers to
fundamental questions have implications for application and for the creation of
heretofore un-synthesized advanced materials with unique properties. The CEMRI
also supports Shared Experimental Facilities (SEFs) that enable the achievement
of research goals, student/post-doc training, and outreach to our community.
SEFs include X-ray scattering, electron and confocal microscopy, rheometry,
electronic/thermal transport, magnetic responses, optical spectroscopy, scanning
probe microscopy, and more.

The Penn CEMRI sustains creative educational and outreach programs for local
K-12 school students and teachers, for undergraduates from around the nation,
for Penn graduate students and post-docs, and for faculty, scientists, and
students/post-docs from partnering institutions in the region and across the
globe. A primary goal of the LRSM education and human resources development
effort is to attract more Americans to STEM fields and take them to the highest
educational level possible, with emphasis on underrepresented minorities, women,
and the disabled. In addition to standard outreach programs such as Research
Experiences for Undergraduates/Teachers (REU/RET), less common programs such as
our Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) with the
University of Puerto Rico, and distinctive programs such as our 4-week-High-
School-PSSI and Southern Africa initiatives, CEMRI outreach will expand to
include: the Girard School 7th Grade Science Camp for minority middle-school
students, a year?long materials science elective course for high school seniors
and associated workshops for teachers, annual materials exhibitions (with
connections to NOVA, Philadelphia Science Festival), and Science Caf√©s for the
general public. Local community is also embraced via imaginative telepresence
such as Cable TV programs and MAGPI videoconferences to high schools (HS).

The CEMRI pursues a multi-faceted strategy to reach out to industry, national
laboratories, and the international community. Currently, ~25 companies (small,
medium and large) are directly involved with the CEMRI, and our Shared
Experimental Facilities are widely used by local industries (~100 person-days
per year). The COMPASS (Complex Assemblies of Soft Matter) Laboratory was
started and will continue as a joint venture between the LRSM, Rhodia, and the
French CNRS. The CEMRI also continues to play a role developing national
synchrotron x-ray and neutron scattering facilities; more than 25% of CEMRI
faculty are currently involved with National Labs as users or in collaborative
projects; others serve on advisory panels. International links (i.e., joint
workshops, reciprocal visits by faculty/post-docs/students) of CEMRI with
institutes in Southern Africa, Germany, Japan, Taiwan, France, Romania, and
more, have cemented genuine research ties worldwide.

*a NSF Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)