* 1120794
* Tri-trophic consequences of herbivore diet breadth and plant resistance
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kailen Mooney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,999.00

A fundamental goal of ecology and evolutionary biology is to elucidate the
factors that determine what proportion of plant biomass is consumed by
herbivores. Ecologists have long recognized that predators play a role by
suppressing herbivore populations. At the same time, work by evolutionary
biologists has shown that the vulnerability of an herbivore species to predators
is determined by both plant nutritional quality and the diversity of plant
species included in that herbivore's diet. The work funded here seeks to
integrate these separate but complementary areas of research. The overarching
hypothesis to be tested is that plant nutritional quality and herbivore diet
breadth together determine an herbivore's vulnerability to predators. In so
doing, plant quality and herbivore diet breadth are predicted to determine the
importance of predators in plant protection, as well whether predators act as
source of natural selection that influences the evolution of plant nutritional
quality. The proposed work tests this hypothesis using an experimental garden of
native shrubs and their associated insect community. Genetic lines of plants
that vary in nutritional quality will be grown in experimental treatments with
herbivores alone and with herbivores and predators together. These plants will
be fed upon by one of two species of herbivore: an aphid that feeds only on one
plant species or an aphid that feeds on a wide diversity of plants. This
experiment will thus measure the effects of predators on herbivores and plants,
and how such effects are determined by herbivore diet breadth and plant
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact is an initiative to
establish a public garden of native shrubs in the University of California-
Irvine Arboretum, one of two botanical gardens featuring the native flora of
California in Orange County (population &gt; 3 million). This display will
provide the public with a hands-on demonstration of the variation in plant
traits that determine its nutritional quality for herbivores, as well as
information on the natural history of the associated insect community. The
garden will also serve as a key resource for independent research and teaching
opportunities for undergraduate students.