* 1120482
* Nutrient Foraging by Mycorrhizal Roots of Different Morphology: Are Roots and Fungi Complementary?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Roger Koide, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2015
* USD 554,473.00

Root traits that influence nutrient foraging in different plants are poorly
understood. In most plants, roots form a symbiotic association with mycorrhizal
fungi that may improve the ability of the plant to forage for nutrients.
However, species differ in the extent that mycorrhizae can benefit nutrient
uptake, and this is likely related to root morphology, including root diameter
and root hair abundance. The PIs hypothesize that tree species with coarse roots
with few or short root hairs forage in nutrient-rich patches by relying heavily
on mycorrhizal fungi, while tree species with more rapidly growing roots that
produce many long root hairs forage for nutrients by proliferating their roots,
increasing root hair development and altering the rate of nutrient uptake. The
project will be primarily conducted in a 14-year-old planting of 16 different
tree species that vary widely in root morphology, although additional studies
will be conducted in natural forest stands and in growth chambers. This study
will improve the theoretical basis by which plant roots can be used for
calculating the influence of vegetation on elemental cycles, improve predictions
of vegetation responses and feedbacks to climate change, and increase the
understanding of roots needed for better management of crops and trees for food
and fiber. There will be a strong educational component to this research,
including the training of three graduate students, undergraduate training in
research and international exchanges of students and scientists.