* 1120243
* Floral development, conservation genetics, and horizontal gene transfer in the world's largest flowers, Rafflesiaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Charles Davis, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2016
* USD 465,000.00

The holoparasitic plant clade Rafflesiaceae possesses the world's largest
flowers, which are up to 1 meter in diameter. Evolutionary investigations have
indicated that this enigmatic group is derived from within the spurge family,
Euphorbiaceae (Malpighiales), which produce minute flowers. To add to their
mystery, some of the Rafflesiaceae genome has been acquired from their obligate
grapevine hosts by host-to-parasite gene transfer. The aims of this project are
to i) elucidate the evolution of floral morphology and development in
Rafflesiaceae using traditional and cutting edge imaging technologies combined
with comparative functional genomic data; ii) implement conservation genetic
techniques to assess genetic diversity in this host-parasite symbiosis; and iii)
establish the importance of horizontal gene transfer in Rafflesiaceae using next
generation sequencing (NGS) technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of this project include: i) develop new methods to assess morphological
synapomorphies and homologies in difficult groups via the use of approaches that
integrate phylogeny, comparative developmental morphology, and functional
genomics; ii) set new priorities for developing proper conservation management
strategies of species that exhibit highly specialized symbioses; and iii)
establish a paradigm for conducting phylogenomic studies that will allow us to
assess both the magnitude of gene transfer and the functions of transferred
loci. A major outreach component of this grant will be to partner with Cambridge
Public Schools to integrate phylogenetic thinking into their life sciences
curriculum.