* 1121650
* The Impact of Pack-MULEs on Plant Genome Evolution and  Mechanisms of Sequence Acquisition
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Carol Buell, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,490,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project focuses on Pack-MULEs, a special group of
"jumping genes" (transposable elements) that are abundant in plants. A unique
feature of Pack-MULEs is their ability to duplicate, reorganize, and shuffle DNA
fragments in the genome. As a result, Pack-MULEs are potential "gene machines",
capable of generating new genes or modifying existing genes and thus
contributing to gene and genome evolution. Despite the abundance of Pack-MULEs,
little is known about often Pack-MULEs acquire new gene functions or the
mechanisms by which these elements duplicate DNA fragments. This research will
determine how many of the 3,000 Pack-MULEs in rice encode bona fide proteins and
will study the function of a subset of Pack-MULE-associated proteins. In
addition, this study will elucidate the impact of Pack-MULE formation on
existing genes and determine the factors that promote sequence duplication by
Pack-MULEs. Together, these studies will contribute to better understanding of
how transposable elements shape genome evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: Students at different levels will be trained with cutting-edge
approaches in molecular genetics and computational biology. This project will
assist undergraduate students from under-represented groups in their application
for graduate study. Through a local public educational garden, this project will
provide education to K-12 students and other visitors on the importance of
plants for food and on genetic mechanisms that result in phenotypic diversity.
The research and education activity involved in this project will raise
awareness of the broader public that "genetic engineering" in nature is
associated with alternations at both the molecular and phenotypic level.