* 1121710
* Collaborative Research: Regulation of Cellular Mechanics by  Crosslinked Actin Networks - Role of Palladin and Alpha-actinin
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Arpita Upadhyaya, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 10/31/2014
* USD 382,545.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Cells in the body have a remarkable ability to
sense "stiffness" in their environment - that is, a cell can distinguish between
a hard substrate such as bone, and a softer substrate such as brain. This
ability is critical for many aspects of cell function such as migration, wound
healing and the proper formation of tissues and organs. In order to sense the
mechanical properties of their environment, cells adjust their internal
stiffness to match that of the external surface by reorganizing their internal
cytoskeleton, which is made of a dynamic network of microscopic filaments. The
main component of these filaments is a protein called actin. Various actin-
binding proteins crosslink the actin filaments and organize them into
multifilament bundles. Palladin is a newly identified actin cross-linking
protein that is important in organizing these filament networks. Previous
experiments have shown that palladin plays an essential role in embryonic
development: when the palladin gene is silenced in mice, it results in lethal
development defects that are characterized by a failure of cells to adhere
properly to a substrate and to migrate appropriately. These deficits may arise
because the cell's ability to adjust its internal stiffness is compromised in
the absence of palladin. This proposal will test the hypothesis that palladin,
by its ability to cross-link actin and its interaction with another actin cross-
linker, alpha-actinin, determines the structure and mechanical properties of
actin networks and enables the cell to sense its physical environment. Two types
of approaches will be used to address this question. First, the structural and
mechanical properties of actin networks assembled on a glass slide will be
measured to elucidate how actin cross-linking by palladin contributes to actin
organization. In addition, palladin levels will be genetically manipulated in
living cells to study how altered actin organization, cellular stiffness and
force generation impacts cellular mechano-
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
proposal will enhance the understanding of essential biological processes that
underlie cell movement and tissue formation. The training of graduate and
undergraduate students in interdisciplinary approaches from Physics and Cell
Biology will be an integral part of the work. The cell lines that will be
developed as part of this project will be made freely available to other
investigators following their publication. A graduate course in Cell Mechanics
will be developed based on the conceptual framework of this proposal. The PI and
co-PI will also encourage minority students as well as high school students from
the area to participate in research as part of the Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation program at the University of Maryland and the University
of North Carolina Research Apprenticeship Program. The PI will organize a one
week biophysics laboratory demonstration as part of the Summer Girls Program in
the Department of Physics to encourage participation of female students in
science and technology fields.