* 1121311
* Genetic and Molecular Dissection of Hyphal Anastomosis
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* N. Louise Glass, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2015
* USD 651,715.00

Scientific merit. Filamentous fungi are the primary degraders of plant cell wall
material in the environment. Some species are associated with the roots of plant
species in a symbiotic relationship that allows plants to gain micronutrients
from soil. Other fungal species are disease-causing agents in plants or
animal/humans. Filamentous fungi, both beneficial and pathogenic species, grow
by tip extension, branching and hyphal fusion to form an interconnected hyphal
network. This hyphal network is believed to be essential for transfer of
nutrients throughout ecosystems by root associated and saprophytic fungi and for
colony establishment and exploitation of resources in pathogenic fungi. Studies
on the filamentous fungus, Neurospora crassa, have revealed a complex and
carefully regulated biological process of germling/hyphal fusion. During
chemotropic interactions prior to cell fusion, published studies have shown that
the alternating oscillation of signaling proteins from the tip of one fusion
cell to its partner provides a compelling model for signaling between
genetically identical cells. Physiological differences occur over a short time
period and are associated with signal transduction feedback mechanisms. From
these studies, it is evident that N. crassa uses a secreted chemical language to
coordinate chemotropic interactions and cell fusion. The first objective of this
project is to elucidate the signaling mechanisms and the language that
filamentous fungi use to coordinate development of their hyphal network. Cell
fusion is an important developmental process during mating and during tissue
formation (i.e. the formation of multinucleate muscle cells and osteoclasts),
although the mechanisms associated with cell-cell fusion are not well
characterized. A second objective of this work is to identify additional
components necessary for cell wall disassembly/membrane merger (fusogens). The
ultimate goal of this work is to understand how the formation of the hyphal
network allows a fungal individual to perform the physiological and
developmental processes required to compete in nature and to complete its life
cycle.

Broader impact. Hyphal fusion in filamentous fungi is comparable to cell fusion
events between genetically identical cells resulting in syncytia, such as
myoblast fusion during muscle differentiation, trophoblast fusion during
placental development and between osteoclasts during bone formation. Thus,
studying cell-cell fusion in N. crassa provides a useful model for understanding
molecular mechanisms of cell fusion events in more complex eukaryotic species.
This project is an excellent training project as it incorporates live cell
imaging techniques and microscopy, as well as genetics, biochemistry, genomics
and molecular biology. It is expected that undergraduate researchers will be co-
authors on research papers, as for previous NSF awards. The cell biological work
on germling/hyphal fusion will continue collaborations with a mathematician
interested in fluid dynamics, a bio-nanotechnologist, and amateur mycologists. A
French television documentary that focuses on the analysis and function of a
filamentous fungal hyphal network is currently being developed in collaboration
with French documentarians.