* 1121943
* Assembly, Dynamics and Regulation of Chloroplast FtsZ
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Katherine Osteryoung, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,035,150.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The division of chloroplasts is a critical process
in photosynthetic eukaryotes. These organelles arose by endosymbiosis from a
free-living cyanobacterium and inherited several of their division components
from the cell division machinery in their prokaryotic ancestor. Foremost among
these is FtsZ, a member of the FtsZ/tubulin superfamily of cytoskeletal
proteins. FtsZ self-assembles into a central "Z ring" to initiate division of
the cell or organelle and generate force for membrane constriction. A crucial
difference between bacterial cell and chloroplast division systems is that the
bacterial Z ring is composed of a single form of FtsZ that assembles as a
homopolymer whereas the chloroplast Z ring is composed of two distinct forms of
FtsZ called FtsZ1 and FtsZ2 that coassemble as a heteropolymer and function
together in division of the organelle. The funded research will combine a series
of complementary approaches to probe the mechanisms, dynamic properties and
regulation of FtsZ1 and FtsZ2 assembly with the overall goal of advancing
understanding of the functional and evolutionary significance of the involvement
of two FtsZ types in chloroplast division. The experimental objectives are as
follows: 1) Analyze the kinetics of FtsZ1 and FtsZ2 assembly separately and
together to establish how assembly is nucleated and whether the assembly subunit
is an FtsZ1/FtsZ2 heterodimer. These and other analyses will also be extended to
related chloroplast FtsZ pairs from one red algal and one green algal species to
expand the evolutionary scope of these studies. 2) Analyze force generation at
different FtsZ1:FtsZ2 ratios using a novel liposome deformation assay recently
developed for bacterial FtsZ, and use a similar system to reconstitute
chloroplast Z rings inside liposomes. These experiments will reveal how
heteropolymer formation affects chloroplast Z-ring assembly and constrictive
force. 3) Analyze FtsZ1 and FtsZ2 assembly behavior and dynamics in a
heterologous fission yeast system using fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching as a powerful complement to in vitro and in vivo studies. 4) Use
quantitative fluorescence microscopy with tagged, functional fusion proteins in
Arabidopsis to investigate Z-ring composition and dynamics in vivo, including
whether the FtsZ1:FtsZ2 ratio changes dynamically during Z-ring constriction or
is regulated in concert with developmental changes in chloroplast division
activity. 5) Initiate functional analysis of plant-specific regulators of
chloroplast Z-ring assembly towards understanding how FtsZ self-assembly is
controlled in chloroplasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
research brings together the complementary expertise of the project leaders and
their lab members. One group, at Michigan State University, studies FtsZ from
chloroplasts using biochemical, genetic, and cell biological approaches in the
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The other group, at Duke University, studies
FtsZ from E. coli and other bacteria using in vitro biochemical and biophysical
approaches. Interaction among project personnel by email, video calling, and
exchange visits will provide an interdisciplinary perspective that has the
potential to catalyze new ideas and research directions. The new studies on
algal FtsZs will lay the groundwork for understanding how chloroplast FtsZs have
evolved in all photosynthetic eukaryotes. Since mitochondria, like chloroplasts,
originated from a bacterial endosymbiont and some organisms retain FtsZ for
mitochondrial division, the research will be relevant to understanding FtsZ
evolution in mitochondria as well as chloroplasts. In addition, because the
microtubule subunits alpha- and beta-tubulin evolved from FtsZ, the research on
chloroplast FtsZ heteropolymers may be relevant to understanding evolution of
the microtubule cytoskeleton. Finally, Arabidopsis ftsZ and other chloroplast
division mutants will be exploited to develop a teaching module for
undergraduate ecology students to explore natural selection on chloroplast
division and morphology. This will encourage critical thinking on the connection
between molecular events, cellular structure and population processes. The
research will also provide training for undergraduates in biological research.