* 1121925
* Arabidopyrones:  a new group of specialized plant metabolites from Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Clinton Chapple, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2015
* USD 579,327.00

It is estimated that more than 500,000 compounds are produced by members of the
plant kingdom; however, the process by which plants have developed the ability
to make these molecules is not well understood. Compounds known as
phenylpropanoids are particularly interesting because they have a wide array of
important functions in plants. They serve in the interaction of plants with
their environments, mediate certain aspects of plant growth, development and
pathogen resistance, and are important structural components of the plant cell
wall. For example, in corn phenylpropanoids known as flavonoids are important
for plant fertility, and have been suggested to control plant growth. Others are
important for plants' resistance to ultraviolet light. Another important example
is salicylic acid, a well-known signaling molecule in plant defenses against
pathogens. Phenylpropanoids have also been found to play diverse roles in
ecology. A host of compounds are given off by flowers to attract pollinating
insects. It has also been shown that plants produce compounds that inhibit
herbivory and others that inhibit the growth of competing plants. Finally, the
phenylpropanoid polymer lignin is necessary for mechanical support and water
transport from roots to leaves. Because of its abundance, it is also relevant in
an ecological context because it provides an abundant sink for carbon. All of
these examples make a compelling argument for improving our understanding of the
diversity of phenylpropanoid metabolism and its regulation. This research
project focuses on a new pathway of phenylpropanoid metabolism that has recently
been discovered in Arabidopsis thaliana. This pathway generates four previously
unknown metabolites that are named arabidopyrones. Pyrones are extremely
interesting molecules which have been shown to be cytotoxic and can be activated
by UV-light to form highly reactive products, suggesting that they may have
important biological roles with adaptive significance in the ecology of the
organisms that make them. Two of the enzymes that function in this pathway have
been discovered and will be characterized in detail as part of this project. One
of these belongs to a class of enzymes known as extra-diol ring cleavage
dioxygenases. Enzymes of this class can be found in a wide array of plant
species, which suggests that they are a widely conserved but poorly explored
component of plant metabolism. The ability of these enzymes to cleave catechol-
substituted substrates suggests that in addition to being involved in the
synthesis of some specialized metabolites, they may have a role in the breakdown
of compounds in plants, an area about which virtually nothing is known.

Broader Impacts This project will support the full-time training of two graduate
students and several part-time undergraduates. All of these students will be
trained in techniques from the fields of biochemistry, genetics, and molecular
biology, an interdisciplinary approach that will be essential to their future
success. Their strong background in biochemistry will provide them with valuable
skills that will allow them to pursue biochemical research in the modern
laboratories in the public or private sectors.