* 1121005
* Modification of the ABC Program and the Evolution of Floral Novelty
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Elena Kramer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 09/30/2014
* USD 549,998.00

The variety of life-from apples to zebras-is beautiful, engaging and excites the
imagination. The question of how different forms arise is one of the most
fascinating and important in all of biology. The flowering plants offer a
wonderful opportunity to investigate the genetic basis evolutionary novelty,
especially in the context of unique forms of floral organs. Most flowers display
a standard set of organs-sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels-but some have
evolved fifth organ types. This project uses the new model system Aquilegia
(columbine) to understand the genetic basis of novel floral organ identity and
elaboration. In columbines, standard floral organs may develop fantastic new
features, such as petal nectar spurs that vary in length from a few mm to over
12 cm. The project builds on previous studies to understand i) how gene
duplication has contributed to the evolution of a fifth, distinct form of floral
organ, the staminodium; ii) what other genetic changes contributed to the
evolution of the staminodium; and iii) how development of Aquilegia's petal
nectar spurs is controlled from a hormonal and genetic
standpoint.&lt;br/&gt;Training our next generation of scientists requires
getting students excited about the scientific process and familiarizing them
with the real day to day practice of science. Genetic annotation of the recently
sequenced Aquilegia genome will be used as the basis for a lecture/lab module in
the Crimson Summer Academy, a summer program at Harvard for academically
talented high school students from financially disadvantaged backgrounds. This
program will engage students with a wide range of topics including gene and
genome organization, gene evolution and the process of writing a publishable
scientific article.