* 1121214
* RUI:   Characterization of Notch Cis-Inhibitory Sequences in the Serrate Ligand of Drosophila Melanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Robert Fleming, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2015
* USD 316,665.00

The Notch signaling system is a cell-to-cell communication mechanism that is
found in virtually all multicellular organisms and allows developing cells to
acquire their specialized cellular types (neuronal, muscular, digestive,
reproductive, etc.). This system has many components, two of which are the main
focus of this proposal. These are the Notch signal receptor molecule and the
Serrate ligand that is capable of interacting with and affecting Notch receptor
activity. The Serrate ligand can activate the receptor when these molecules are
expressed on adjacent cells leading to the formation of different cell types.
Serrate can also inhibit the receptor when these molecules are co-expressed on
the same cell, preventing such cells from receiving a Notch signal and forming
distinctive cellular types. This proposal investigates the specific regions and
properties of the Serrate ligand that are responsible for inhibiting the Notch
receptor hence investigating a crucial mechanistic aspect for controlling
cellular specialization. The work utilizes targeted molecular-genetic mutation
of the Serrate molecule with subsequent expression of these mutated forms in the
fruit fly to investigate their effects on Notch signaling. The outcomes are
expected to fully define and characterize the regions of Serrate that confer the
inhibitory property of the ligand onto the Notch receptor and potentially define
regions essential for Notch activation. The evolutionarily conserved nature of
Notch system components allows for very broad applicability of the findings of
this study to the homologous molecules in vertebrates. Further, this study will
extend the understanding of cellular differentiation control in multicellular
animals including stem cell differentiation mechanisms. The study will be
conducted by undergraduate researchers providing these students with a strong
background in molecular and genetic tools for subsequent professional training
and development.