* 1121292
* Unraveling the role of iron-sulfur clusters in RNA polymerase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Daniel Lessner, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2015
* USD 613,795.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to elucidate the
functional role of the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters, recently discovered in
subunits of archeal and eukaryal RNA polymerase (RNAP). RNAP is a multi-subunit
enzyme that copies DNA to produce RNA, in a fundamental process called
transcription that occurs in all living cells and is the first step in gene
expression. The core subunits of RNAP are conserved in all three domains of life
(Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya). In structure and complexity, archaeal RNAPs
resemble those of eukarya, rather than the less complex RNAPs of bacteria, even
though both archaea and bacteria are single-celled organisms lacking nuclei.
Furthermore, Fe-S clusters are only found in the RNAPs of archaeal and eukaryal
species and are absent from all bacterial RNAPs. Specifically, Fe-S clusters are
found in the RpoD subunits of the RNAPs of some archaea and in the homologous
subunits of some eukaryal RNAPs. RpoD is not directly involved in RNA synthesis
but serves to promote the assembly of RNAP and regulate its activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These findings raise intriguing questions that will be
addressed in the project: What is the purpose of the Fe-S clusters in RNAP? Why
do only certain species contain them? How do the Fe-S clusters function to
regulate the assembly or activity of RNAP in response to environmental signals?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions will be addressed using the methane-
producing archaeon Methanosarcina acetivorans (Ma) as a model organism. MaRpoD
is predicted to bind two Fe-S clusters. Because M. acetivorans only grows in the
absence of oxygen, it is likely the clusters serve to regulate the assembly or
activity of RNAP in response to oxygen or oxidative stress. The specific aims of
the project include: 1) determine the number and type of Fe-S clusters in MaRpoD
and their redox-properties, including the sensitivity to oxygen. 2) Develop
strains of M. acetivorans capable of expressing mutant rpoD alleles to test the
affects on MaRNAP activity and Ma strain viability of the presence of defective
MaRpoD that are unable to bind Fe-S clusters. These studies are expected to
reveal whether the Fe-S clusters are critical for the formation and activity of
MaRNAP, and thereby to stimulate studies of the function and evolution of RNAPs
in other Archaeal or Eukaryal species. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the education and training of students
in the biochemistry, physiology, and genetics of strictly anaerobic
microorganisms and Archaea, a field that is underrepresented at all education
levels. The project will support two graduate students and provide research
opportunities for undergraduates. Undergraduates from diverse backgrounds will
be recruited from Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic-serving
institutions, and Tribal Colleges in conjunction with the University of
Arkansas? George Washington Carver research program. Each summer the project
will provide support for one of these students to conduct research in the
laboratory of the PI. The PI will continue to provide summer research
opportunities for Arkansas High School students by serving as a mentor with the
Upward Bound Summer Program in Math and Science at the University of Arkansas.
Students will be provided the opportunity to present their findings at the
Northwest Arkansas Regional Science and Engineering fair. An advanced
Prokaryotic Biology laboratory course for undergraduates will be enhanced,
integrating new findings, techniques, and concepts from the research project.