* 1121896
* Structural and Dynamic Studies of Catabolite Activator Protein Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Charalampos Kalodimos, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 622,186.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Genetic regulatory proteins target specific sites
within the genome and either enhance or repress transcriptional activity to
elicit cellular responses. The Escherichia coli catabolite activator protein
(CAP; referred to also as the cAMP receptor protein, CRP) is a universal
transcriptional activator that regulates the expression of over two hundred
genes. CAP has long served as the textbook example for understanding
transcription regulation. CAP has provided a classic model system for structural
and mechanistic studies of transcription activation. Mechanistic descriptions of
transcription activation, developed for CAP, are more nearly complete than
descriptions of any other examples of transcription activation. Nevertheless,
the complete structural basis for CAP-mediated transcription activation remains
unknown. Notably, over the recent years CAP has provided an excellent system in
which to examine the structure- and dynamics-function relationships that form
the basis of allostery. CAP has provided the first experimentally identified
system wherein allosteric interactions are mediated through changes in protein
motions, in the absence of changes in the mean structure of the protein. The
main objectives of this project are to use CAP as a model system to address
fundamental questions regarding allosteric regulation and transcriptional
activation. An integrated structural, dynamic, and thermodynamic approach will
be used to (1) characterize the dynamics of CAP mutants with altered allosteric
properties and their interaction energetics with DNA; (2) determine the solution
structure of the class I and class II CAP-dependent promoter subassemblies and
(3) determine the structural basis for the assembly of the entire CAP-mediated
transcription initiation complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;In addition to addressing fundamental biological questions,
this project will be used to train students in structural biology, biophysics,
and molecular biology, areas that are rapidly becoming integrated in 21st
century science. Postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to be involved in a multi-disciplinary project that aims at the
development of groundbreaking methodologies to enable the structural and dynamic
characterization of supramolecular protein complexes by high resolution NMR
spectroscopy. This will enable researchers to approach problems from a
multidisciplinary and interactive perspective, thus experiencing first hand the
utility of applying state-of-the-art methodologies to important biological
problems. The paradigm of combining structural, dynamic, thermodynamic and
kinetic approaches to study complex protein systems will be included in a new
course, currently designed by the PI, to exemplify the value of using an
interdisciplinary and quantitative approach to answer questions of scientific
importance. The course is intended for a large, diverse audience consisting of
graduate and advanced undergraduate students in the programs of Molecular
Biosciences, Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Biomedical Engineering and BIOMAPS
at Rutgers University.