* 1121054
* Molecular Mechanisms of Neurotransmitter Release
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Konrad Zinsmaier, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

How we perceive, move, feel, learn, and remember is a product of the ability of
nerve cells to form circuits that allow an extraordinarily fast and precise
communication processing information. Information is transferred from cell to
cell through specialized cell-cell contact sites, termed synapses. Despite
tremendous advances, understanding the molecular mechanisms facilitating,
maintaining and/or re-arranging synaptic function and/or structure remains a key
problem in contemporary neuroscience. Using a genetic approach, we identified a
new protein (WD40A) that is very similar from fruit flies to humans. We
hypothesize that WD40A may control the protein levels of another uncharacterized
protein (ATP8B) that may control the lipid (i.e., fatty acid) composition of the
synaptic membranes that facilitate information transfer from one nerve cell to
another. To better support this hypothesis, the role and significance of WD40A
for synaptic function and structure will be explored using electrical and
optical recordings to examine the effects of genetic mutations in WD40A on
synaptic function. In addition, genetic and biochemical approaches will be used
to characterize exactly how WD40A controls ATP8B protein levels at synapses. The
project will develop valuable research tools that will be made freely available
to the research community and will provide research opportunities for both
graduate and undergraduate students. This work is expected to characterize a
fundamentally new molecular mechanism that induces local changes in the lipid
environment of synapses aiding rapid communication among nerve cells. This
knowledge will significantly advance our understanding of how the brain is able
to compute information on a millisecond scale, and improve our ability to design
better medical approaches to treat or prevent some neurological disorders in
humans.