* 1121694
* An Integrated Analysis of Root Gravitropism
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Patrick Masson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 677,954.00

Plants prostrated by heavy storms tend to curve back upward, thereby lifting
their leaves, flowers and/or seeds up above ground, where they can continue to
grow and develop away from the soil moisture and pathogens. Crop plants also
display a more-or-less efficient curvature response to prostration, thereby
bringing seeds up back into a position that is amenable to mechanical
harvesting. This response is possible because all plant organs can sense their
orientation relative to gravity and light and direct their growth accordingly.
The MPI's laboratory is investigating the molecular mechanisms that enable plant
organs to use gravity as a growth guide. With this award, the PI and his co-
workers will use state-of-the-art molecular genetic strategies, including next-
generation sequencing and high-throughput identification of proteins, to analyze
global genome expression responses to gravistimulation in wild type and mutant
seedlings, thereby generating a global view of the molecular mechanisms that
allow plants to use gravity as a guide for growth. In the long term, results
derived from this project should yield information that will inform the design
of cultural, engineering and/or plant-breeding strategies aimed at improving
crop productivity in marginal lands or under conditions that expose them to
heavier winds and storms, a predicted consequence of global climate change. The
results will be published in the scientific literature, and the primary data
will be made available through public repository web sites such as the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) repository at the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). This project will also
include an important instructional component. In addition to involving a
postdoctoral fellow, graduate and undergraduate students in this research, the
PI will recruit high-school teachers and students to develop instructional
modules for K-12 education that integrate materials from this research, address
specific curricular needs, and are aligned with state and national science
standards.