* 1121372
* Biophysical Characterization of Concerted Microsecond Loop Motions and Their Role in Enzyme Catalysis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2017
* J Loria, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 01/31/2017
* USD 826,387.00

Enzymes catalyze chemical reactions that are essential for industrial
applications, energy conversion processes, and life. A better understanding of
how enzymes perform these chemical reactions will have a major impact on a large
number of scientific disciplines. In particular, deeper insight into how enzymes
change their three-dimensional shape is essential to this understanding, yet in
even the best characterized enzymes, the fundamental details of their molecular
motions remain only crudely understood. In this project, these motions will be
characterized and their role in enzyme catalytic function will be elucidated by
a powerful combination of experimental and computational techniques. These
experiments will be applied to the model enzyme, triosephosphate isomerase (TIM)
and will not only provide a better understanding of TIM enzyme function, but
will also provide important information about enzymes in general that will aid
research in a myriad of related scientific fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this research are to perform outstanding science on important
problems and to train young scientists to attack this and other scientific
problems from a variety of experimental perspectives and furthermore, to
challenge them to arrive at creative solutions. This goal will be accomplished
through three approaches. (a) Teaching. Students will be educated in fundamental
biophysical concepts through traditional coursework that includes detailed study
of relevant scientific literature. (b) Research Mentoring. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be mentored in scientific research. A particular emphasis
of this project focuses on recruiting undergraduates from geographically
underrepresented, rural Appalachia to participate in this research project. By
including students from geographically underrepresented areas this project will
enhance their educational experience and expand the training for those who would
not normally have such opportunities. (c) Facilitating Group Interaction. Often,
scientific problems require multiple approaches to achieve a solution. To
encourage students to integrate results obtained from multiple experiments, this
research project will promote interactions among students with diverse research
backgrounds. To this end, weekly joint group meetings with research groups that
focus on computational methods will be held.