* 1121575
* Multi-scale Studies of pH-mediated Viral Capsid Dynamics and Mechanics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Charles Brooks, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2015
* USD 677,164.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Viral capids are comprised of multiple copies of a
few proteins organized as icosahedral shells. These shells undergo significant
changes in shape and size during the virus life cycle - as they assemble, mature
and ultimately release their genetic material. This process in a number of
viruses involves pH-mediated changes in radius, and sometimes shape, e.g., as in
HK97, which swells and transforms from a highly rounded to a highly faceted
shape. The pH-induced changes arise from protonation equilibrium of ionizable
side chains and the concomitant loss/gain of bound ions. While structural
biology, via X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM, has provided glimpses of stable
structural states and occasionally intermediates, little is known in detail
about specific residues that are responsible for the pH-induced changes or the
energetic landscape that connects the two stable states. These studies are
directed toward establishing detailed atomic-level pathways and free energy
landscapes for pH-mediated shape/size changes in viral capsids of T number
varying from 3-7. Three systems that have been characterized from a structural
standpoint: CCMV (T=3), N(omega)V (T=4) and HK97 (T=7) will be examined with the
objective of: i) deriving pKa values of ionizable residues for the normal and
swollen states of these capsids using novel constant pH molecular dynamics
methods, ii) calculating the swelling conformational transition pathway, and
iii) deriving the pH-dependent free energy landscapes through simulation
methods. The resulting free energy pathways will reveal key interactions that
facilitate or hinder swelling and further understanding of the biophysical
forces that underlie this complex process. Additionally, driven by growing
interest in the physical and material properties of viral capsids, and desire to
understand these properties during the virus life cycle, which will inform
applications from biotechnology and material science to imaging and single
molecule manipulations, a new multi-scale computational method to calculate
elastic moduli that characterize viral capsids will be developed and applied to
the three systems noted above. This combination elasticity calculations and
studies of pH-dependent transition pathways will elucidate the elastic character
of the capsid during pH-mediated structural transitions, making connections to
ongoing single molecule experiments and development of finite element
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The calculations and
model development described above will yield significant new information about
the forces and processes that control virus capsid swelling and shape changes of
viral capsids during the virus life-cycle. Furthermore, the calculated pH-
mediated free energy landscapes will provide vital information on lynchpin
residues and interactions for biophysicists and physical virologists. The unique
combination of landscape sampling and constant pH MD will establish new
approaches to study pH-mediated conformational transitions, and the development
and application of a novel multi-scale approach will inform and extend single
molecule measurements and finite element modeling. The resultant software and
models will be made available to the simulation and modeling
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will engage in the development and
teaching of training workshops for students and postdoctoral researchers and
also conduct research training for undergraduate students working on this
project.