* 1121438
* Sequence Requirements for Small RNA Targeting in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Michael Axtell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2015
* USD 537,500.00

Intellectual Merit: Every cell in a given organism contains exactly the same DNA
genome, yet the organism contains many cell types that are differentiated and
highly specialized for certain functions. The functional differences between
various cell types with the same genome are dictated by the subset of DNA-
encoded genes that are activated (turned on) or silenced (turned off). The
control of gene expression (on or off) thus plays a fundamental role in shaping
cellular function in complex organisms. One type of gene expression control
mechanism is directed by small regulatory RNAs. Small RNAs function to identify
target RNAs in the cell by RNA-RNA complementarity. Essentially, if a given
small RNA has a good match in sequence to a given target RNA, that target RNA
will be prevented from being utilized further, and expression of the target gene
will be turned off. Small RNA-based methods of gene expression control are
prominent in plants, play important roles in normal plant growth and
agricultural productivity, and can be exploited in biotechnological applications
where control of gene expression is desirable. This project is seeking to
understand the rules by which small RNAs recognize their targets in plants. The
project specifically will examine the extent and configuration of matching RNA
bases required to allow small RNAs to recognize and regulate their targets in
plants. The outcome of this project will be a much more complete understanding
of how the small RNA-mediated gene expression system is able to discriminate its
handful of target RNAs from the thousands of non-target RNAs present in the
cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Small RNAs are known to control key
aspects of plant growth development, many of them with agricultural significance
in crop plants. Small RNAs also dictate the repression of vast portions of plant
genomes comprised of parasitic, so-called junk DNA. Manipulation of small RNAs
already plays a key role in many plant biotechnology applications, but without a
thorough understanding of how small RNAs work, these applications are limited.
The understanding of small RNA target identification provided by this project
should enhance such applications. This project also involves training of
scientists, a critical national goal, both at the Ph.D. level and undergraduate
level. One of the project goals will be used as a springboard for developing a
new laboratory course in RNA Biology at Pennsylvania State University, thus
enhancing scientific literacy and education of these students.