* 1121106
* Sensing more than a quorum:  The role of pheromones in the light-organ symbiont Vibrio fischeri
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Eric Stabb, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2015
* USD 503,257.00

Plants and animals are consistently colonized by bacteria, and
these&lt;br/&gt;symbiotic microorganisms often contribute to beneficial
processes and/or disease&lt;br/&gt;in their hosts. Many symbiotic bacteria
communicate using pheromone signals,&lt;br/&gt;allowing them to coordinate group
behaviors during infection. Such pheromone&lt;br/&gt;signaling is typically
called ?quorum sensing?, because high cell density is&lt;br/&gt;necessary for
pheromones to build up. However, a ?quorum? is typically
not&lt;br/&gt;sufficient to induce pheromone-mediated behaviors fully, and
bacterial&lt;br/&gt;pheromones are not simply census-taking signals.
Importantly, the pheromones&lt;br/&gt;may also function to communicate aspects
of the host environment among the&lt;br/&gt;bacteria. This project will use
genetic, molecular, microscopic, and microbiological&lt;br/&gt;approaches in
exploiting the tractable model symbiosis between the&lt;br/&gt;bacterium Vibrio
fischeri and its natural host squid Euprymna scolopes to&lt;br/&gt;examine the
relationship between conditions in the host and the symbiont?s use&lt;br/&gt;of
pheromones. Pheromone signaling was discovered in V. fischeri and
it&lt;br/&gt;remains among the best-understood model systems for such study.
The&lt;br/&gt;symbiotic infection occurs in transparent tissue that is only
colonized by V.&lt;br/&gt;fischeri, and pheromone signaling during infection
results in the emission of&lt;br/&gt;bioluminescence by the bacteria, making the
infection relatively simple and the&lt;br/&gt;regulatory output easy to monitor.
The scientific aims of this project are to&lt;br/&gt;determine what aspects of
the host environment lead to the induction of
bacterial&lt;br/&gt;bioluminescence and to determine what role pheromones play
in communicating&lt;br/&gt;conditions in the host. A third aim is to integrate
research on bacteria-host&lt;br/&gt;symbioses into undergraduate education, both
through direct emersion in&lt;br/&gt;research and through the generation of
materials to facilitate in-class discussion&lt;br/&gt;of scientific papers. The
project will provide insight into the environment&lt;br/&gt;symbiotic bacteria
encounter in a host, and how their perception of the host&lt;br/&gt;environment
can be integrated with their use of pheromones. The project will&lt;br/&gt;also
help train young scientists.