* 1121163
* Defining the Plant Cell Wall Xyloglucan Biosynthetic Complex Localized in Golgi
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2017
* Olga Zabotina, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 11/30/2017
* USD 698,419.00

Intellectual merit. Xyloglucan, a hemicellulose, is a major component of the
primary cell wall of many plants and provides important structural and
physiological functions. With the exception of cellulose, xyloglucan is the best
characterized cell wall polysaccharide, and considerable progress has been made
to identify and characterize the enzymes involved in its synthesis. Recently,
six Golgi-localized transferase enzymes were shown to be involved in xyloglucan
formation. However, the functional organization and regulation of these enzymes
in the Golgi membrane is currently unknown. Preliminary research for this
project found distinct hierarchal roles among three of the enzymes and
demonstrated that all six interact in pair-wise fashion with each other. The
scientific goal of this project is to define the structural organization and
functional regulation of this multi-enzyme complex during the synthesis of
xyloglucan in the plant cell in the model species, Arabidopsis thaliana.
Research results will help to establish the mechanistic basis for the functional
organization of the polysaccharide biosynthetic machinery localized in the Golgi
complex of this and other plant species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
The outcome of the project will facilitate the engineering of plants to produce
hemicelluloses with modified properties that will enhance development and
protection against environmental stress, and will increase industrial interest
in the use of plant polysaccharides. This research will be accomplished in
collaboration with Michigan State University and University of California at
Riverside. The collaboration will create broad opportunities and an outstanding
environment for undergraduate and graduate students to be trained through a
combined program of biochemistry, cell, and molecular biology. Undergraduate
students will be recruited through the Iowa State University Summer
Undergraduate Research Programs and the Program for Women in Science and
Engineering. A six-week summer research experience will be provided for one
intern each year. The project will also include a collaboration with the Iowa
State University Extension to convey scientific information on plant biomass
composition, formation, and modification to local biomass growers, land managers
and the general public through participation in annual workshops and the
creation of an internet webpage.