* 1121807
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Alternative strategies and evolutionary routes in the escalation of the bat-moth arms race: Ultrasonic stridulation in hawkmoths
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jesse Barber, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 269,234.00

Bat-insect interactions date back millions of years, and the shared evolutionary
history between echolocating bats and nocturnal insects have resulted in a suite
of unique defensive strategies. Tiger moths and tiger beetles have escalated the
arms race by beaming ultrasonic response signals back at bats. In tiger moths,
these sounds have been shown to warn bats of bad taste, function in acoustic
mimicry complexes and jam bat biosonar. The work proposed here builds upon this
research group?s recent discovery that hawkmoths also produce ultrasound in
response to bat attack. Unlike tiger moths, hawkmoths are not chemically
defended, only males produce ultrasound and the structure of the sound-producing
organ varies greatly across the family. This raises the prospect that anti-bat
ultrasound production may be linked to multiple additional behavioral
strategies, including cross-family acoustic mimicry, advertisement of physical
defenses and/or evasive flight, and mating behavior; and that hawkmoth
ultrasonic reply to bat attack has multiple independent evolutionary origins.
The research team will test these hypotheses by 1) high-speed filming
experiments of bat-moth interactions in the lab, 2) playback of bat echolocation
attacks to moths in the field and 3) construction of an evolutionary tree built
on molecular (DNA) data that will be used to examine the historical transitions
of sound production. A primary goal of this collaborative research project is
the training of a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student and several
undergraduate students. This proposal has been carefully designed to cross-
pollinate research labs and transfer knowledge and skills between PIs and
students. An exciting educational component is the use of live video streaming
of field expeditions directly to high school classrooms. This work will also
involve the production of a video highlighting the scientific method exploiting
the charisma of echolocating bats and some of the world?s largest and most
striking moths.