* 1121053
* Center of Excellence for Materials Research and Innovation at UCSB
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Craig Hawker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 19,130,940.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at the University of
California, Santa Barbara, also referred to as the Materials Research Laboratory
(MRL) serves as an innovation engine for discoveries in new materials. The MRL
is home to a scientific and engineering community that creates new collective
knowledge and fosters the next generation of scientific leaders. By enabling
modern technological advances, the high-impact research conducted within the
MRSEC program at UCSB has enormous societal payoff and is shaping the future of
technology, the environment, and medicine.

The MRSEC at UCSB addresses fundamental problems in materials science and
engineering that are critical to the future economic growth of the United
States. Current areas of interest include the support of interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary materials research and education of the highest quality in the
areas of self-assembling materials for new adhesives and materials for hostile
biological and underwater environments inspired by the common mussel. By
examining the unique properties of complex oxides prepared with unprecedented
perfection and purity, the MRSEC also aims to develop new microelectronic
materials that complement and even out-perform existing Si-based systems. New
strategies for materials that will significantly advance energy and
environmental applications are a key focus of the MRSEC at UCSB. Studies
designed to open up the science and engineering of robust and stable two-phase
nanoscopic materials with unprecedented magnetic, radiation-resistance and
thermal transport properties will push the US to the forefront of these
technologies. A prime driver behind the research activities of the UCSB
Materials Research Laboratory is to address problems of a scope and complexity
requiring the advantages of scale and interdisciplinarity that can only be
provided by a campus-based research center.

Outstanding Shared Experimental Facilities play a fundamentally important role
in the research of all MRL programs and additionally, broadly impact the
materials research community at UCSB, local and national companies, and
government laboratories. Expanding these highly successful facilities and
technology outreach programs are a major focus of future growth. An innovative
approach to engaging with industry allows the MRSEC to develop productive
partnerships which have resulted in numerous start-up companies and
collaborative programs with major corporations. These partnerships will continue
to be an economic engine for California and the United States. The MRSEC is also
committed to maintaining the prominence of materials research in the United
States through an integrated international outreach program that offers a
portfolio of opportunities for 2-way exchange of knowledge and researchers.
Recognizing the importance of Education and Human Resources, the MRSEC operates
an ambitious and award winning effort with a focus on K-12, and teacher
development, including specific programs designed to encourage members of
underrepresented groups to consider careers in STEM disciplines. The goal is to
ignite curiosity through hands-on experience, thereby fostering the next
generation of scientists and engineers.