* 1121024
* RNA Structure and Dynamics In Vivo
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Kevin Weeks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 860,016.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;RNA functions as the central conduit for
information in living systems. RNA molecules encode genetic information and also
serve as critical component in the catalytic and regulatory machinery in cells.
In one example, the ribosome is a finely tuned machine that translates the
information coded in messenger RNA into proteins. The ribosome contains two
large RNA molecules and many proteins and the function of this essential
cellular machine is governed by complex structural and dynamic interactions
among its protein and RNA components. In a second example, RNA viruses represent
perhaps the most successful replicating entities in our biosphere. Almost every
step in RNA virus replication involves highly evolved interactions between their
RNA genome and viral and cellular proteins. Extraordinary progress in
understanding the ribosome and RNA viruses has been made based on genetic,
biochemical, and high-resolution structure approaches. However, the impact of
the cellular environment on RNA function remains poorly understood. The
overarching vision of this project is to make the SHAPE (selective 2'-hydroxyl
acylation analyzed by primer extension) RNA structure analysis technology a
robust tool for analysis of RNA structure in cells and inside viral particles.
The specific research goals over five years of the project are to use SHAPE to
establish the structure of E. coli ribosomal RNA during protein synthesis in
healthy, growing cells and to determine the RNA genome structure of an
icosahedral plus-strand virus to reveal broad principles of viral RNA genome
packaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt; Accurate and efficient
technology for analyzing RNA structure inside cells has the potential to
transform many fields in the biological sciences. When fully developed, SHAPE
technology will allow synthesis of information obtained from high-resolution
structural approaches in highly purified systems with function and fitness
studies in cells. SHAPE technology is also sufficiently mature to serve as the
basis for a completely undergraduate-driven research endeavor, the Undergraduate
Transcriptome Project (the UTP). Undergraduates will, independently, carry out
the research on viral RNA genome packaging. The UTP is designed to help
undergraduates explore their potential for independent creativity, to fuel their
passion for science, to promote high-level mentoring by graduate students, and
to be a model for engaging undergraduates in a research university.