* 1121033
* STEM Outreach: Fostering Partnerships between Colleges/Universities and Jr. High Schools; April 9, 2011 in Washington, DC
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Carla Mattos, American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 03/31/2013
* USD 24,500.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to foster
outreach, service learning, and other educational and career development
partnerships between biochemistry and molecular biology faculty from Washington,
D.C. area colleges and universities with nearby high schools. The centerpiece of
this effort will be a workshop on outreach activities for science, technology,
engineering and mathematics [STEM] faculty - college, university, middle school,
and high school - held as part of the American Society for Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology's [ASBMB] 2011 national meeting to be held April 9-13 in
Washington, D.C. This workshop represents a joint initiative of the A-Bomb's
Minority Affairs Committee [MAC], Education and Professional Development
Committee [EPD], and Undergraduate Affiliates Network [UAN]. The immediate goal
of the workshop is to promote and facilitate the establishment of outreach
partnerships between faculty from Washington, D.C. area colleges and
universities with STEM teachers from local middle schools. The workshop is
divided into three parts. In the first part, several examples of successful STEM
outreach partnerships will be presented, followed by a panel style question and
answer period. In the second part, participants will be invited to try out some
example hands-on activities that can easily be adopted in the classroom. The
third part will consist of a networking luncheon that has as its goal to provide
space and time for teachers and faculty to develop potential partnerships. The
intent of this proposal is to support and incentivize the development of active
research partnerships by providing seed funds to design and implement hands-on
activities in their classrooms and also support relevant professional training
activities, thereby immediately impacting science learning for their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This workshop has the
potential of impacting science learning of numerous students often denied access
to quality instruction and experiences in STEM fields. Since the D. C. public
schools, the target audience for this pilot workshop, serve a student body that
is predominantly African American, the interactions that develop from this
workshop will heavily impact underrepresented minorities. It is expected that
the emergence of some successful local partnerships will provide both a spur and
guiding model for additional outreach programs in the area. The long-term plan
for this pilot project is to replicate similar workshops annually as part of the
ASBMB National meetings in the cities where these will be hosted (in the
immediate future are San Diego, CA, April, 2012 and Boston, MA, April 2013).
Successful alumni of the first workshop will be invited to speak at later
workshops. In addition, a survey of teachers in attendance immediately following
the workshop and nine months later will be conducted to assess the impact on
their teaching. Teachers that receive seed funds will be required to provide
assessment of student learning and interest in science as part of their project
reports. The outcomes of this workshop will be published in ASBMB Today and
disseminated on the ASBMB website.