* 1121842
* Plasticity in the Recognition of Flexible Ligands
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Deborah Wuttke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 962,000.00

This research project aims to understand the role of structural plasticity in
mediating binding specificity and affinity between protein domains and flexible
ligands. The specific recognition of a ligand is the key function of many
proteins, and forms the basis of the extensive networks that coordinate the
activities of central biological processes. In many biological contexts, a
protein domain functionally recognizes a family of related ligands while
discriminating against structurally similar ligands. The hypothesis to be tested
is that the recognition of related ligands is more structurally diverse than can
be inferred from a single structure of a protein-ligand complex. The rigorous
biochemical and structural analysis of the ensemble of conformations adopted at
biomolecular interfaces that is part of this research program will contribute to
our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of ligand-binding specificity.
Furthermore, this knowledge will provide insights for computational efforts
aimed at understanding and predicting ligand-binding specificity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will significantly advance our understanding of
the mechanisms that confer specificity in protein-ligand interactions, which are
essential to a wide variety of biological functions. In addition, the structural
and biochemical data will complement ongoing computational studies by others
that seek to model protein-ligand interactions. Furthermore, the program
outlined here promotes teaching, training and learning while advancing
scientific discovery. These activities occur through a well-designed and
thoughtful postdoctoral fellow and graduate student mentoring program, as well
as through teaching innovations in the undergraduate classroom. The PI also
participates in several programs to increase the participation of under-
represented groups, including women and minorities in science, ranging from
faculty, postdoctoral fellow and graduate student career mentoring to tailoring
the graduate curriculum to facilitate recruitment and retention of under-
represented minorities. This program supports the use of our regional high field
NMR facilities, including 800 and 900 MHz instruments equipped with cryogenic
probes. In addition to the normal avenues of dissemination of research findings,
including peer-reviewed publication and presentations at scientific meetings,
the PI participates in community outreach through science activities at local
schools and as a CU Wizard, orchestrating a community science show.