* 1121695
* Mechanistic and Structural Studies of Choline Oxidase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Giovanni Gadda, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2015
* USD 547,729.00

This research program focuses on the elucidation of the enzymology of choline
oxidase (CHO), an enzyme belonging to the class of flavoproteins that oxidize
alcohols to aldehydes or ketones. These enzymes catalyze the transfer of a
hydride equivalent from C1 of the alcohol substrate to a flavin cofactor that is
tightly or covalently bound to the protein moiety. Enzyme turnover is then
completed with the oxidation of the flavin via the transfer of electrons to a
specific acceptor, which in CHO and other oxidases is molecular oxygen. Despite
the biological importance of alcohol oxidations, the mechanisms of flavoprotein
oxidases that oxidize alcohols are still not fully understood. The specific
goals of this research program are to: i) Determine the timing for the proton
transfers in the reduction of molecular oxygen to hydrogen peroxide. ii)
Identify the catalytic base in the active site of the enzyme that initiates
alcohol oxidation. iii) Establish the importance of hydrophobic residues
controlling substrate access to an active site that is secluded from the bulk
solvent in relation to the quantum mechanical tunneling of the hydride ion in
catalysis. The experimental approaches will combine steady state kinetics, time-
resolved anaerobic substrate reductions, pH and kinetic isotope effects, as well
as mutagenesis and crystallography. The results that will be gathered will
significantly advance the knowledge and understanding of the enzymology of CHO
and of the structural and functional features that are required for efficient
catalysis and oxygen reactivity in flavoprotein
oxidases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will foster the integration
of exciting research with the education and training of minority students,
enabling them to develop skills and knowledge in mechanistic enzymology,
biochemistry, protein chemistry and molecular biology. This will equip future
generations of scientists with the tools that are in high-demand to fill the
existing gap between the wealth of information that is available at the genomic
level and the scientific knowledge at the post-genomes level, where knowledge is
lagging behind. The level of training acquired by students on the project will
advance the understanding of the enzyme under study. Most importantly, work on
this project will provide invaluable skills and knowledge for the next
generation of scientists in mechanistic enzymology . The educational activities
and outreach contribution will continue and expand in the annual Southeast
Enzyme Conference in Atlanta, in the Chemistry Graduate Program, and the Annual
Chemistry Department Poster Day at Georgia State University.