* 1121334
* Reverse Transcriptase-Related Genes and Their Biological Significance
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Irina Arkhipova, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 09/30/2017
* USD 993,560.00

Intellectual Merit: Reverse transcriptases are enzymes that perform DNA
synthesis on RNA templates. It is widely believed that reverse transcriptase
activity is mostly used by selfish genetic elements, such as retrotransposons
and retroviruses, for their own replication and propagation. The only known
exceptions are telomerases, which are encoded by single-copy genes and maintain
eukaryotic chromosome ends by repeatedly copying a small region of the
associated RNA template onto DNA. This project seeks to understand the
evolutionary origins and cellular functions of RNA-dependent polymerization by
studying novel reverse transcriptase-related genes found in diverse eukaryotes,
using computational, biochemical, and genetic approaches. Phylogenetic
distribution and relationships with other classes of reverse transcriptases,
enzymatic activity of the encoded products, and possible involvement in cellular
pathways will be investigated. These studies could reveal previously unknown
roles for RNA-dependent polymerization in living cells. Elucidation of
evolutionary origins and cellular functions of reverse transcriptase-related
genes is of fundamental importance and may be expected to have a major impact on
the fields of molecular biology, genetics, and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will have both
scientific and educational impacts. The results of the study are expected to
challenge the currently established views on the role of RNA-dependent
polymerization, which may be significantly under-appreciated. Educational
activities will include training of graduate and undergraduate students and
their direct involvement in research, which will result in student-coauthored
publications. Other activities will include: active participation in national
and international scientific meetings to ensure broader dissemination of the
results to members of the scientific community; organization of regional
meetings to provide venues for information exchange and training and, through
travel grants, to attract minority participants; and active involvement in
science fairs at local high schools. Outreach efforts will be aimed at bringing
results of NSF-funded research to non-specialists and the general public through
media interviews and contributions to popular books targeted at wider audiences.