* 1121872
* Understanding the Mechanism of Import for Bacterial Transporters
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Heather Pinkett, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2017
* USD 871,611.00

Intellectual Merit: This research program strives to understand how proteins
embedded in the cellular membrane allow compounds to enter or exit the cell.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-Binding Cassette (ABC) transporters work as
membrane bound molecular pumps to transport a broad spectrum of substrates,
including sugars, peptides or toxins, across cellular membranes. Present in all
organisms, ABC transporters can be divided into two classes, (i) "exporters" hat
mediate expulsion of unrelated substances across cell membranes and (ii)
"importers" which function to allow nutrients into the cell. In both classes,
ABC transporters use the energy source adenosine triphosphate to carry out this
biological process that is evolutionarily preserved across all organisms. By
combining biochemical experiments with structural biology, the PI seeks to
understand how the conversion of ATP to ADP controls the conformational changes
of an ABC importer, which in turn allows substrates to enter the cell. Since the
current mechanism of membrane transport for importers is incomplete,
understanding the transport process requires a comprehensive structural analysis
of one full length ABC transporter trapped in different conformations along the
transport process. This research program has set out to close critical gaps in
the understanding of the fundamentals of the transport mechanism in bacterial
pathogens. The results will yield insights into how type II transporters utilize
ATP hydrolysis to coordinate transport across all organisms, crucial for cell
viability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This research program strives
not only to advance knowledge of the ABC transport mechanism, but also to serve
as a training opportunity for high school, undergraduate and graduate students.
For the past two years, Northwestern undergraduate students have conducted
research alongside graduate students as mentored members of the PI's laboratory
team. In addition, in collaboration with Northwestern University's Institute for
Women's Health Research and the Young Women's Leadership Charter School of
Chicago, the PI has designed a science research module based on the ABC
transporter research aimed specifically at high school students. As part of the
Physical Science Weekend Academy (PSWA), a program developed for female high
school students, participants visit the Northwestern University campus to
conduct scientific research in the PI's lab. In addition to offering young women
scientific role models and hands-on experience conducting science experiments,
the PSWA program provides students the opportunity to make the connection
between studying protein structure and the ultimate program goal of
understanding protein function.