* 1121055
* Transcriptional and Post-transcriptional Regulation of Fruit Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Martin Yanofsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* philip becraft
* 07/31/2016
* USD 878,791.00

Fruits play a central role in agriculture since they are the harvested product
for many crop species. A detailed understanding of the major genes that control
fruit development is likely to lead to important agricultural applications that
will dramatically increase crop yield, such as increasing the number of seeds
per fruit, enlarging the fruit, allowing fruit growth in the absence of
fertilization, and controlling seed loss and dispersal. Arabidopsis has become
the model organism of choice for plant biologists worldwide, and our previous
studies identified the major genes that control fruit development in
Arabidopsis. Recently, a new type of gene, microRNAs have been shown to have a
major impact on the regulation of gene activity in plants and animals. These
microRNA genes have not previously been studied in terms of their roles during
fruit development. Our proposal aims to uncover the critical roles that these
microRNA genes play in the control of fruit development. The project will
provide advanced training for a postdoctoral scholar and undergraduate
researchers will also be directly involved. The project will participate in an
ongoing program with the vision of increasing the number of under represented
groups at every level of the scientific enterprise. Throughout the project,
fellowships will allow students from diverse San Diego and Los Angeles high
schools to participate in intensive and extended programs aimed at recruiting
them to science careers and aiding in retention. Thus, the project will impact
human resource development, understanding of central problems in plant science
and will also be applicable to a wide range of agricultural applications.