* 1121738
* Transcriptional Regulation of Maize Endosperm Development by IDD9 and IDDveg9 Duplicate Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Philip Becraft, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 11/30/2015
* USD 536,047.00

Endosperm is the major storage tissue of cereals and is vastly important for
human and livestock nutrition and, increasingly, for industrial purposes.
Endosperm comprises several different cell types, each with specific biological
functions that influence the biochemical composition and agronomic quality of
the grain. Understanding how these cell types are specified and elaborated
during development could enable the improvement of grain properties through
biotechnology or traditional breeding. This project focuses on an endosperm cell
type called aleurone. A maize gene was identified that controls the number of
aleurone cells as well as the development of aleurone cell characteristics. This
gene, called nkd, is duplicated on two different chromosomes and codes for a
transcription factor (a protein that regulates other genes) called IDD9/IDDveg9.
As such, the function of this gene is to regulate other genes that are important
for endosperm development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will use molecular
and genetic approaches to explore the biological function of the nkd gene in
endosperm development. The relative position of this gene in the regulatory
hierarchy that controls endosperm development will be ascertained by examining
the temporal and spatial expression patterns in normal maize grains compared to
mutants that are known to affect specific steps in endosperm development.
Genome-wide analysis of gene expression will reveal what genes are regulated by
IDD9/IDDveg9. Finally, a link will be explored between the nkd gene and the
plant hormone auxin. This research is expected to define key steps and molecules
in the regulation of endosperm (aleurone) development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the biological and potential agronomic implications, important
training opportunities will be afforded to young scientists. One postdoctoral
fellow, one graduate student, three undergraduate students and three summer
interns will contribute to, and benefit from, these research activities.
Emphasis will be placed on recruiting from area minority populations.