* 1121748
* Engineering a Competitive Advantage using Synthetic Biology and Microfluidic Technology
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Jeff Hasty, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,177,957.00

This project combines synthetic biology, microfluidic technology, and
computational modeling to probe metabolic networks in three model organisms in
dynamic environments and to study the evolutionary process of developing a
competitive growth advantage. A synthetic genetic oscillator will control
expression of essential metabolic enzymes in E. coli and Synechocystis (a
cyanobacterium), and the growth characteristics of these engineered organisms in
a periodically changing environment will be compared to wildtype, non-modified
organisms. In yeast, synthetic biology and microfluidic technology will be used
to "evolve" a well-characterized metabolic network and microscopy will be used
to identify changes that confer a growth advantage in a dynamic environment. The
combination of modeling and experimental approaches will provide insight into
how organisms can be modified, either through engineered or natural evolutionary
processes, to give them a growth advantage in fluctuating environments.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A quantitative understanding of
microbial evolution will contribute to the development of new strategies to
control microbial infections. An elementary school science program will be
developed in partnership with the San Diego Unified and North County school
districts. Project personnel and graduate students will work with elementary
school teachers to prepare the graduate students to teach hands-on experimental
science lessons that are integrated with the classroom curriculum.