* 1121669
* Functional Evolution of Flower Organ Identity Genes in the basal Eudicot Thalictrum: Implications for transitions in breeding and pollination systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ver√≥nica Di Stilio, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 08/31/2015
* USD 552,714.00

Over a century after Charles Darwin referred to the origin and diversification
of the flowering plants (angiosperms) as an "abominable mystery," answers to
this dilemma are finally attainable. Modern developmental biology and genomics
provide important clues: many of the genes controlling flower development have
been identified and, importantly, gene duplication is often associated with
diversification. This project will elucidate how the genes underlying floral
development assume different roles driving the remarkable diversification of
land plants. Thus, the project will advance the field of evolution of
development ("evo-devo"). The project also will inform efforts to modify floral
structure to benefit humanity; as the precursors of seeds, fruits and pollen,
flowers are the foundation of the entire human food supply.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant group used in this study, Thalictrum
(Ranunculaceae), has a diverse and uniquely useful combination of features:
unisexual and bisexual flowers, insect and wind pollination. Thalictrum is,
therefore, an excellent laboratory to determine the basis for transitions in
breeding and pollination system. The project will take advantage of cultivars
with modified floral patterns and experimental gene disruption to inform a model
of floral organ specification after gene duplication. A second aim is to
recapitulate transitions from hermaphrodite to female flowers, and from showy
insect-pollinated to inconspicuous wind-pollinated
flowers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage undergraduate researchers
through the university-sponsored programs including Genomics Outreach for
Minorities (GenOM-ALVA), NASA-SURP and HHMI Integrative Research Internships.
Activities will include participation in presentations at scientific meetings
and peer-reviewed publications. Outreach activities include participation in
National Laboratory Day, Native Plant Society talks and a website for data-
sharing.