* 1121425
* Signaling interactions between pattern- and effector-triggered immunity in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Fumiaki Katagiri, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

Plants have an immune system that is activated when they detect pathogen attack.
There are two modes of plant immunity, each triggered by different types of
pathogen-derived molecules as cues of attack. How these two modes of immunity
influence each other to modify the immune response is not well understood. This
project will precisely measure the influence of each mode upon the other and
seek to discover the plant proteins that mediate cross-mode interactions. Since
the two modes are central in plant immunity, this project will potentially
extend our understanding of how plants use their immune system to defend
themselves against pathogens. Potential applications of the work include tools
and knowledge to improve the performance of the plant immune system in
agricultural settings, which can lead to better control of crop diseases with
less impact on the environment. Another important aspect of this project is
training undergraduate students who have limited time for research work. While
this project functions as a pilot case for a new undergraduate training
platform, the platform will be easily expanded to involve more students at
multiple sites. Therefore, it has the potential to improve biology education for
a large number of undergraduate students. Since this project involves
statistical and computational components as well as biological components, post-
doctoral, doctoral, and undergraduate students will be trained in broad areas of
science and engineering.