* 1121563
* Identifying and Characterizing Genetic Interactors of DMC1
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Gregory Copenhaver, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2016
* USD 620,999.00

Intellectual Merit: Meiosis, the reductive division of the genome in preparation
for fertilization, is a critical biological process. During meiosis, homologous
chromosomes interact resulting in the heritable rearrangement of DNA through
reciprocal exchange between homologous chromosomes by processes referred-to as
crossing over and gene conversion. In most eukaryotes, these events ensure
proper chromosome segregation, facilitate DNA repair, and provide a basis for
genetic diversity. Molecular geneticists have made substantial progress in
understanding the basal recombination machinery, much of which is conserved in
organisms as diverse as yeast, plants and mammals. As a result, detailed models
describing recombination mechanisms have been proposed. In most organisms, a key
protein in these mechanisms is DMC1, which mediates the establishment of
physical linkages between homologous chromosomes during recombination. Intense
focus on DMC1 in several model organisms has revealed that its activity is
closely regulated by a host of mediator proteins. While DMC1 or similar proteins
(RecA homologs) are found in organisms as diverse as bacteria, fungi, plants and
animals, their mediators are not as well conserved. Indeed, the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana shares only four of the ten proteins proposed to regulated
DMC1 in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. As a prelude to this
project, ten mutants (suppressors) have been identified that may interact with
Arabidopsis DMC1. Understanding the proteins that interact with DMC1 (identified
as suppressors of dmc1 mutants) will enable the description of the mechanisms
that plants use to mediate meiotic recombination. In addition, expanding our
understanding of plant meiotic recombination has the potential for advancing
plant biotechnology including our ability to engineer plant genomes by
harnessing recombination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will
create opportunities for participation in cutting-edge research by young
scientists from under-served communities. In addition, the PI will continue to
participate in and develop a class for advanced undergraduates, graduates, and
postdocs that focuses specifically on meiosis and recombination - this class was
initiated as part of the broader impact efforts from a prior NSF award.