* 1121114
* Functions of the Arabidopsis immune adaptor protein SRFR1 in regulating effector-triggered immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Walter Gassmann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 11/30/2015
* USD 744,866.00

The immune system of any higher organism needs to respond vigorously to
microorganisms that pose a threat while simultaneously ignoring harmless ones.
Biologically speaking, this is a significant balancing act. To achieve this
degree of specificity, plants have evolved a special immune response, called
effector-triggered immunity, that allows the plant to detect harmful proteins
and to react both defensively and appropriately; as is true with humans, an
overly vigorous immune response can be harmful to a plant's own health. To
ensure an optimal immune response, the plant Arabidopsis thaliana has evolved a
type of "quality control" mechanism, a key component of which is a novel
protein, called SRFR1, that is conserved in animals as well as plants. This
project will determine whether SRFR1 dampens effector-triggered immune responses
by physically binding to positive immune regulators. Through a combination of
genetic, genomic, and biochemical techniques, the investigators will determine
how SRFR1 works and, specifically, how SRFR1 is induced to switch protein
binding partners in order to regulate different steps in the plant's immune
response. The project's outcome includes a better understanding of how plant
immune signaling is kept in check and, specifically, how a single protein can
regulate a whole signaling pathway through direct and dynamic interactions with
other proteins. This knowledge may aid efforts to produce crops with robust
resistance to pathogens while minimizing negative side effects on
yield.&lt;br/&gt;This project's broader impacts include the education and
training of a graduate student and a post-doctoral researcher. The project also
will be used in a larger effort by the University of Missouri to engage freshmen
undergraduate students in research experiences in plant biology. With
mechanistic knowledge of how plants fight off disease, society will be better
equipped to boost plants' natural immune responses, which would benefit
sustainable agriculture, biomass production, and the environment.