* 1121919
* Collaborative Research:   Systems-wide Spatiotemporal Patterning in Itk Function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2014
* Robert Murphy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2014
* USD 238,044.00

Cells are the basic units of life. They function by receiving signals from the
outside and processing these signals to regulate cellular behavior. Signal
processing is a complex process involving tens if not hundreds of cellular
components (referred to as signaling intermediates) that must interact with each
other to regulate cellular behavior. The amounts of such signaling intermediates
inside each cell vary as a function of time after receiving a signal from the
outside and as a function of their location in the cell. Jointly, these are
referred to as spatiotemporal patterns. Spatiotemporal patterns are critical for
understanding signaling efficiency in live cells, as enrichment of two proteins
in the same location at the same time increases the likelihood that they will
interact, i.e. their efficiency. Thus, an understanding of spatiotemporal
pattering is essential if we are to unravel the complex interaction network of
tens to hundreds of signaling intermediates, a great challenge in current
biology. The goals of this project are: 1) To acquire comparative image data
sets on many protein signaling intermediates under varying conditions of
cellular activation and to develop and apply image analysis methods to
accurately define the amount and location of the signaling intermediates within
a cell (the T lymphocyte). In addition, these methods will be applied to define
how the amount and location of these signaling intermediates vary with time as T
cells respond to the different stimuli. 2) Because the data and methods that
will be developed in this project will be of general interest and value for
understanding cellular signaling, they will be made publicly available on
servers. Other investigators will be given the opportunity to use these methods
to analyze their image data. T cell microscopy experiments will be executed for
collaborators, and the visual appeal of imaging data will be used to enrich high
school education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: In addition to
providing the research community access to the resources and data that will be
developed, this project will engage high school, graduate and medical students,
as well as two postdoctoral fellows. Undergraduate students from around the US
will be given opportunities to work on this project through the University of
Texas Southwestern Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship program (which
places an emphasis on recruiting underrepresented minorities). Dr. Murphy will
train and mentor minority students through a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates program at Carnegie-Mellon University.