* 1121386
* Genetic Control of Vulval and Uterine Coordination in C. elegans: egl-26 and vulF
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Wendy Hanna-Rose, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2015
* USD 408,000.00

Many if not most human organs have ducts or tubes that contribute to organ
function. The molecular and genetic mechanisms that direct cells to form the
walls of tubes surrounding open lumens are not fully elucidated. This project
aims to address the question "How do cells form tubes?" There isn't just one
answer to this question because the cellular rearrangements contributing to tube
formation in different organs and even within different areas of a single
biological tube are varied. However, it is important to understand multiple
specific examples of tube formation because failure of these biological programs
can result in birth defects (for example, lack of connection between two tubes
such as the esophagus and the stomach), and excess activity of these programs
can contribute to disease (for example, blood vessel formation promotes tumor
growth). This project will focus on understanding tube formation in the
reproductive system in the microscopic nematode C elegans. Genetic approaches
will allow discovery of new genes affecting tubulogenesis. By using microscopy
on live developing tissues, the specific changes in cell structure that
accompany tube formation will also be determined. Many biological mechanisms
first revealed in C. elegans have proven relevant to all metazoans. Thus, the
project has broad intellectual merit because tubulogenesis principles elucidated
in C. elegans will have corollaries in other systems and, thus, wide-reaching
significance to our understanding of organ formation. A core part of this
project is a formal course with an integrated research component that will serve
to recruit and train undergraduate students to pursue advanced degrees in
biology. Similarly, graduate students will be trained in preparation for
independent science careers. Thus, the project has broad merit in the
educational realm as well. An important outcome from the completed study will be
the preparation of the next generation of scientists.