* 1121188
* Functional of an Unconventional Myosin in Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Ray Gavin, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 150,001.00

Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;Internalization of particulates through
phagocytosis is of fundamental importance to diverse cell types including
professional phagocytes of the immune system and microorganisms that use the
process for capturing food. Internalized particulates are contained within
motile intracellular vesicles known as phagosomes. Fusion of phagosomes with
lysosomes provides the chemical environment for digestion of the internalized
particulates. In Tetrahymena, phagosomes appear to be vertically aligned, and
the alignment is maintained as phagosomes move toward the posterior end of the
cell. Motility of phagosomes either ceases or becomes random in a knockout of
MYO1, a class XIV myosin that contains MyTH4/FERM domains. Inhibition of actin
filament assembly induces random motility of phagosomes in wild type cells.
Therefore, both Myo1 and actin filaments are required for maintaining
directionality of phagosome motility. GFP fused to the FERM domain from Myo1
localizes to phagosomes, which appear to be attached to the longitudinal rows of
cytoskeleton basal bodies. This project aims to investigate directionality of
phagosome motility. The project will use motility of phagosomes in Tetrahymena
to test the hypothesis that directed motility of phagosomes involves the
interaction of the Myo1 FERM domain with basal body-associated actin filaments
that are putative tracks for phagosome motility. The hypothesis will be tested
in vivo and in vitro. For analysis of phagosome motility in vivo, the GFP-FERM
strain will be challenged with fluorescent beads as markers for phagosomes.
Time-lapse confocal microscopy will be used to monitor the velocity and
direction of phagosome motility in relation to the longitudinal alignment of
cytoskeleton basal bodies. It is expected that overexpressed FERM will compete
with endogenous Myo1 for binding sites and interfere with directionality of
phagosome motility. A prediction of the hypothesis is that disruptions in the
longitudinal alignment of cytoskeleton basal bodies will induce random motility
of phagosomes. To test this prediction, heat shock will be used to induce
discontinuities in the alignment of basal bodies. Phagosome motility will be
analyzed in the heat-shocked cells after they have resumed normal phagocytosis.
To further demonstrate that phagosomes navigate along longitudinal rows of basal
bodies, cytoskeletons will be isolated from the GFP-FERM strain. Nondenatured
total cell lysate from cells challenged with fluorescent beads will be added to
the cytoskeleton fraction, and phagosome motility will be analyzed. The outcomes
of this project will significantly contribute to our understanding of how
phagosomes maintain directionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;An education plan provides research training for
undergraduates and science workshops for middle school students. Research
students in the PI's laboratory learn more than how to use a specialized
technique in an experiment. They are participants in all phases of the research
experience including experimental design, data acquisition, data interpretation,
and preparation of data for publication. Research students are required to
attend biweekly departmental seminars that feature undergraduate research
presentations.