* 1121551
* Collaborative Research: Genetic and Biochemical Dissection of Plant Sulfate Transceptor
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Zhi-Liang Zheng, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 340,999.00

The goal is to understand how plants sense their nutritional status with respect
to the macronutrient sulfur (S). Plants are able to adjust their growth and
physiology in response to the level of mineral nutrients available to them in
soil. When nutrient level is low they become more efficient at nutrient
utilization. Very little is known about how plants sense nutrients or even what
exactly is sensed. The current project could set the stage for improving
nutrient use efficiency thereby reducing the input costs and environmental
impact associated with the use of fertilizers in
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A forward genetic approach has been used to
identify a gene that is involved in S-sensing in the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. The project will use both genetic and molecular approaches to
understand how the sensor functions. What is learned will be a breakthrough not
only for the field of plant S-nutrition, but also for the larger field of
nutrient receptors. The results from these activities will be disseminated at
symposia, conferences and in journal publications. The genetic resources
generated by the project will be made available to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative project between two
institutions, Lehman College of the City University of New York, a federally
designated Hispanic Institution, and Rutgers University. The project will
recruit minority undergraduate students and high school teachers to participate
in research at both institutions through an active exchange program. The aim is
to use a provocative research project to stimulate the interest of students from
minority groups to pursue careers in plant biology and to enhance the US
competitiveness in science.