* 1121019
* The host signal landscape recognized by Agrobacterium tumefaciens
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Andrew Binns, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2015
* USD 899,999.00

Agrobacterium tumefaciens is found as free-living bacteria in the soils of most
temperate and tropical climates. Certain strains of the bacterium can infect a
wide variety of plants and cause them to develop tumors. This occurs as a result
of the activation of a variety of molecular processes in the bacterium that
provide it with the capacity to induce plant tumors. Interestingly, some plant
species do not appear to respond to the bacteria by forming tumors and in plants
that do form tumors, certain tissue types seem significantly more susceptible.
The investigators are determining how the bacteria recognize that they are on a
plant - or more precisely in particular plant tissues. After coming into close
proximity with plant tissues the bacterium recognizes different chemicals
produced by the plant, including phenolic derivatives and certain sugars. Both
types of molecules are required to induce the synthesis of bacterial products
required to cause tumors to develop. Intriguingly, the distribution of these
molecules is not uniform around the plant. The investigators have designed a
series of experiments that will allow them to map the distribution of the
signals within the plant (thereby determining the 'signal landscape'). Through
these studies they will then be able to determine whether regions of the plant
that make tumors in response to the bacteria are the only regions of the plant
that make the appropriate signals. This, for example, could lead to the
identification of tissues that don't make tumors even when the bacteria are
'artificially activated' and thereby lead to an understanding of how these
tissues 'defend' themselves against the tumor causing actions of the bacterium.

A team of scientists whose areas of expertise comprise chemistry, biochemistry,
plant pathology, molecular biology, and microbiology will direct the project.
This provides a strong interdisciplinary training environment for postdoctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students. The planned experiments will provide
projects for three to six undergraduate students who work in our laboratories.
Students will get 'hands on' experience in molecular biological, biochemical,
and cell culture techniques and the opportunity to present their work to their
peers. Moreover, both PIs have been extensively involved in alternative
approaches to science education and can incorporate many aspects of the proposed
work into these projects.