* 1121326
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Causes and Effects of Costly Religious Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Eleanor Power, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 9,710.00

Doctoral student, Eleanor A. Power, supervised by Dr. Rebecca Bliege Bird
(Stanford University), will undertake research on the social consequences that
stem from the enactment of public rituals. Evolutionary anthropologists argue
that individuals are motivated to perform such rituals, especially costly ones,
because they provide actors with social capital. These scholars hypothesize that
devotees distinguish themselves through dramatic displays of devotion, gaining
reputation and fostering interpersonal bonds with co-participants. This project
will provide one of the first empirical evaluations of these hypotheses through
a combination of quantitative data collection and qualitative participant
observation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in a rural
community in Sivagangai District, Tamil Nadu, India. The site is appropriate
because rituals there entail particularly clear costs, which will highlight the
theoretical issues being investigated. In these rituals, devotees carry firepots
in lengthy processions, pierce their skin with hooks and spears, and painfully
contort their bodies when suddenly possessed by a deity. Detailed records of
villagers' participation in public rituals will be coupled with metrics of
individual reputation and group-level social cohesion to determine if the nature
of participation in public rituals influences one's reputation and one's social
capital in positive ways. The researcher will employ social network analysis to
enumerate the social consequences of ritual practice, both in terms of
individual gains in social capital and in terms of larger structural
consequences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to parse out some of the
social causes and effects of religious practice. While the data will be
collected in a particular South Indian village, the proposed motivations for and
consequences of ritual participation are meant to be general: reputational
gains, strengthened interpersonal bonds, and social cohesion are not particular
to this one village. Thus this project will result in a set of general claims
about how the nature and variability of public ritual performance are related to
social position and social structure. The project will have relevance for the
ongoing debates among evolutionary anthropologists, cognitive scientists,
evolutionary psychologists, sociologists, and economists about the function of
religion in society. Supporting this research also supports the education of a
social scientist.