* 1121560
* The Effects of Sleep Disruption on Adolescent Well-Being
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,04/30/2013
* David Maume, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 04/30/2013
* USD 57,410.00

SES-1121560 David J. Maume University of Cincinnati

ABSTRACT

"The Effects of Sleep Disruption on Adolescent Well-Being"

At a time when young people become increasingly aware of life's challenges and
begin to ponder their adult futures, they are chronically sleep-deprived and
struggle with threats to their health in the forms of substance use, depression,
and weight gain. Medical research focuses on the biological causes of adolescent
sleep disruption (i.e., going to sleep later because of the decline in melatonin
that accompanies puberty), but rarely considers youths' lives in context as a
risk factor for sleep and health outcomes. Social scientists emphasize how
support from,and connections to, family, school and peers reduce the incidence
of deviance and distress among youths, but ignore the potential mediating effect
of disrupted sleep on adolescent well-being. Further, medical researchers and
social scientists recognize that sleep patterns and health outcomes mutually
influence each other, but the preponderance of cross-sectional studies precludes
any determination of causal primacy in the sleep-health association among
adolescents.

This study integrates the contributions from social scientists and sleep
researchers in understanding sleep and adolescent functioning, while also
addressing the limitations of both literatures. Using the Study of Early Child
Care and Youth Development (SECCYD, a national longitudinal study of youths),
this study will examine changes in sleep habits, obesity, depression, and
substance abuse as youths transition from elementary to middle school. In
addition to developmental measures, the SECCYD has extensive measures of social
support from key actors in youths' lives, which is recognized by both sets of
researchers as important for healthy sleep, and physical and mental health.
Using multivariate regression models, three research questions are tested in
this project: 1) Relative to youths' biological development, how strongly do
social support measures predict changes in sleep habits between elementary
school and age 15? 2) Do problems in sleeping increase the reported incidence of
depression, substance use, and obesity in youths, or does the emergence of these
health problems disrupt sleep? 3) Because boys and girls develop at different
rates and live different lives at home, at school, at work and among peers, do
the pathways predicting healthy sleep and physical and mental well-being vary by
gender?

The results of this study will inform sleep research on the relative importance
of the social context of youths' lives in shaping and altering sleep habits. It
will inform social science research that ignores how sleep habits affect youths'
lives and adolescent health. Both sets of researchers will benefit from the
results of a longitudinal study examining gender differences in effects of daily
stressors and support on teen well-being.

Broader Impact The results of this study will address the cost and delivery of
health care to teens. Since the medical community bases its treatment modalities
on research findings, a study which points to the broader context of youths'
lives as important antecedents of sleep and functioning (and whether these
influences vary by gender), physicians may better identify youths who would
benefit from less-invasive counseling to improve youths' live and avoid the more
costly and invasive surgery and drug treatments for sleep and health problems.
Furthermore, since adult dysfunction often originates in adolescence, isolating
and arresting the causes of sleep and health problems among teens will reduce
the incidence of these problems later in life, lowering the total size of the
nation's health care bill.