* 1121972
* Developing Methods for High-resolution Measurements of Enveloped Virus Budding in Live Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Saveez Saffarian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2015
* USD 721,526.00

Intellectual merit. Understanding the mechanics of virus budding is the focus of
this research. This project employs state-of-the-art light microscopy to
visualize the interactions of viral and cellular proteins that work together to
facilitate the escape of mature viruses from mammalian cells. Many viruses,
including the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), which is the subject of this
research, and the better-known HIV, employ an escape strategy to exit cells once
they have invaded and replicated themselves. This escape strategy requires the
action of both viral and cellular proteins. Regular cellular proteins are
redirected from their normal cellular locations and activities to the sites of
virus budding. The exit process involves a large number of recruited cellular
proteins and thus is complex, and while many of the key proteins have been
identified, the manner and timing of their recruitment to the cell membrane and
the interactions between them are only vaguely understood. Through recombinant
virus technology and high-resolution live cell imaging, this project will
investigate the timing and mechanisms of protein recruitment to the membrane
thereby identifying rate-limiting steps and crucial interactions between
proteins. The insights gained through this research promise to increase our
basic understanding of the mechanisms involved in viral infection of
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This project draws heavily from
both biology and physics, two disciplines that have historically been separate
but which blend together powerfully in the emerging study of cellular
biophysics. Students will receive the important benefit of training in both
biology and physics, allowing them to approach biological problems using
rigorous quantitative analytical skills. This project embodies a strong
commitment to the education of women and underrepresented groups. The project
also involves outreach activities for both undergraduate and secondary school
students, including in particular recruitment of high school and junior high
school students from disadvantaged areas of Salt Lake City. This project
emphasizes multi-disciplinary training and student opportunities, and possesses
the potential to achieve important new insights into basic mechanics of virus
replication.