* 1121867
* Phase Behavior of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Rohit Pappu, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 852,875.00

A large number of proteins are involved in regulating the process of
transcribing genes. These proteins participate in distinct protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions. The union of a series of protein-protein and protein-
DNA interactions governs the overall fidelity and efficiency of the
transcriptional process. The conventional view is that the specificity of these
interactions requires that the relevant proteins adopt well-defined three-
dimensional structures in order to recognize their cognate protein / DNA
interaction partners. This view has been challenged by the observation that a
majority of the proteins involved in transcriptional regulation fail to adopt
well ordered structures in their unbound forms. These so-called intrinsically
disordered proteins or IDPs play central roles in the overall process of
transcribing genes. How IDPs manage to function without prior folding remains a
mystery. This project will attempt to make progress on this matter through
quantitative studies that blend computer simulations, polymer physics,
spectroscopic measurements, and functional assays. Progress will be achieved
through coordinated studies on three sets of distinct IDPs that are involved in
different steps of the transcriptional process. The studies will yield a
quantitative framework for describing the conformational ensembles IDPs, which
in turn will facilitate the deciphering novel mechanisms for molecular
recognition based on disordered as opposed to pre-folded proteins. These
mechanisms will have implications for understanding the responses of networks of
protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions to cues that lead to cellular level
decisions such as cell division, cell differentiation, and cell death.

The investigator's efforts in three synergistic areas will broaden the impact of
the project's research. 1) Graduate students and other trainees in the
investigator's lab have been involved in the Young Scientist Program (YSP)
http://ysp.wustl.edu at Washington University (WU). This program attracts high
school students from disadvantaged backgrounds into scientific careers through
activities that emphasize research and interactions between high schoolers and
trainees at WU. The YSP also recruits St. Louis inner city public high school
teachers to work with researchers in order to facilitate inquiry-based learning
in the classroom. Trainees from the investigator's lab will continue to
participate in the YSP. Additionally, St. Louis inner city public school
teachers will be recruited to spend some fraction of their summers working in
the PI's lab supported by funds from the YSP. If successful, this will enable
the translation of findings from the proposed research into teaching modules
that can be incorporated into high school science curricula. 2) The investigator
is actively involved in the McKelvey Scholars program at WU that supports the
research activities of undergraduates majoring in science and engineering. Women
make up more than 60% of this cohort and the necessary network has been set up
to bring these undergraduates to be actively involved in the project. 3) The
investigator is actively involved in outreach and public relations efforts for
the IDP subgroup within the Biophysical Society and these activities will
continue over the project period.