* 1121207
* Collaborative Research: Biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds and their Impacts in a Changing Temperate Forest
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Paul Shepson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2013
* USD 162,743.00

This project is a collaborative effort involving investigators from four
institutions with complimentary expertise in measuring and interpreting biogenic
volatile organic carbon (BVOC) compounds and associated reaction products. The
project is envisioned as part of a longer-term research initiative designed to
test the following hypothesis: "The impact of BVOC emissions on climate depends
on the structures of the BVOC; while isoprene can impact ozone production,
terpenes are more effective at nitrogen sequestration and aerosol production;
the change to terpene-dominance in forests will lead to more carbon
sequestration, other factors remaining the same." During year 1, the principal
investigators (PIs) will construct and test in the laboratory an automated
measurement system consisting of a sampling apparatus, a two-dimensional gas
chromatograph (GCxGC), and a calibration system to quantify ambient mixing
ratios of speciated BVOCs and reaction products hourly. The sampling apparatus
will concentrate BVOCs and reaction products and transfer to a GC fitted with
two secondary columns. One channel will feed a flame ionization detector (FID)
to quantify BVOCs and the other an electron capture detector (ECD) to quantify
oxidation products (including nitrates and hydroxynitrate). The general utility
calibration source will include a temperature-controlled bath containing
multiple compound-specific diffusion tubes and associated plumbing. During year
2, the PIs will deploy and continuously operate this novel semi-autonomous
measurement system at the Program for Research on Oxidants: PHotochemistry,
Emissions, &amp; Transport (PROPHET) site at the University of Michigan
Biological Station (UMBS) over a 4-week period during the growing season. The
goal of the field deployment will be to test the instrument's performance in
reliably quantifying a broad suite of heavy alkanes, alkenes, aromatics,
isoprene, montoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, aldehydes and ketones, and alcohols,
and organic nitrates in ambient air within and above the forest
canopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a semi-autonomous measurement
system for BVOCs and reaction products will enhance observational resolution for
investigations of interactions among forest dynamics, oxidation processes,
aerosol production, nitrogen and carbon sequestration, and associated feedbacks
on climate. Results from the project will also extend the PROPHET data archive,
which has been a valuable community resource for broader investigations of
forest-atmosphere interactions. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate directly in constructing and field testing the instrument. Results
will be disseminated through articles in the scientific literature and also
incorporated into an inquiry-based instructional webquest to help high school
students understand biosphere-atmosphere research in the context of global
climate change. This webquest would become part of a library of similar
educational resources at UMBS.