* 1121240
* Replication-Coupled Chromatin Assembly and Epigenetic Processes in S. cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Ann Kirchmaier, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 261,581.00

Intellectual Merit: Every time the genome is replicated, the epigenetic state,
which is controlled by chromatin organization, is either maintained to retain
cell identity or reset to establish a new cell identify. The pathways regulating
replication-coupled packaging of DNA into chromatin are largely unknown. This
research is aimed at understanding how proteins involved in this process
interact with each other during DNA replication to ensure proper maintenance of
epigenetic states and maintenance of genome integrity. Genetic, biochemical and
single-molecule strategies will be applied to define the relationships among
members of this evolutionarily conserved replication-coupled chromatin assembly
network in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. These results will be
important for uncovering how this network is organized at the levels of protein-
protein interactions, the sub-cellular location and the timing of these
interactions, and connections between multiple pathways within this network.
Mechanisms revealed by the research will contribute to understanding how the
chromatin assembly network enables downstream genome-dependent processes,
including: formation of silent chromatin, which inactivates gene expression;
maintenance of appropriate chemical modifications on histones; and resistance to
DNA damage. In addition, the research will produce broadly applicable strategies
for measuring protein-protein interactions in single, living or fixed cells or
in cell extracts at the single-molecule level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research will continue to encourage entry and promote retention of
students in science. This research will be conducted primarily by graduate and
undergraduate students and will provide an excellent opportunity for cross-
disciplinary training in the fields of Biochemistry, Genetics and Biophysics.
Graduate trainees will receive mentoring on career development, scientific
writing, presentation and Problem Based Learning teaching strategies while
conducting the proposed research. Trainees will share their findings with the
broader scientific community by presenting their results at departmental,
university-wide and international meetings, as well as in written publications.