* 1121049
* Nutrient-nutrient interactions in the small intestine
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ronaldo Ferraris, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

Molasses and fructose-containing syrups from agricultural crops are increasingly
utilized in the diets of humans and of animals in farms and zoos and may have
disrupted millions of years of adaptation to a relatively low sugar diet. This
drastic increase in dietary sugar content coincidentally parallels dramatic
increases in incidence of metabolic bone diseases. No previous study has been
able to conceptualize a mechanism underlying the link between excessive intake
of sugars and bone health. This investigator?s recent discovery that fructose
may inhibit intestinal absorption of calcium, a mineral required to build and
maintain bones, now provides a testable explanation of this link between
overconsumption of caloric sweeteners and bone disease. Intestinal perfusion,
cell culture, mutant mice and dietary manipulations, in combination with
molecular biological tools, will be used to examine how and why fructose
inhibits intestinal calcium absorption and eventually compromises bone quality.
Fructose likely decreases the concentrations of two important compounds. First,
it may bind to, then sequester a chemical required as fuel by intestinal
transporters that absorb calcium. Second, since fructose is suspected to disrupt
kidney function, it may also interfere with the manufacture by kidney cells of a
compound required to make these calcium transporters. Findings from this NSF
award should ultimately lead to nutritional recommendations that can minimize
the impact of increased sugar consumption on bone disease in humans and animals
that already cost the US health care system and agricultural/pet industries ~$20
billion annually. This award, which involves collaboration among American,
Japanese and French investigators supports the training of four young scientists
and provides the opportunity for student teaching of science in inner city high
schools.