* 1121648
* Early Seed Development Under Stressful Environments
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Dong Wang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2015
* USD 557,708.00

Ninety-seven percent of Earth's water is saline and two-thirds of the existing
fresh water deposit is locked away in snow and ice, leaving only one percent for
human use. Since the majority of fresh water is used to grow food, the changing
climate will challenge our food supply as drought events become more frequent
and intense. Therefore, it is critical to develop a new generation of crops that
can sustain productivity with reduced fresh water input. This project fills a
significant gap in our understanding on how unfavorable environment perturbs
seed development and ultimately affects plant productivity. Because seeds from
cereals (such as rice, maize, and wheat) are the primary source of calories, and
rice is an established model for cereals, this work will focus on how drought
stress adversely affects early seed development in rice resulting in reduced
seed size. Taking a molecular and biochemical approach, the project team will
identify rice genes that are critical for normal seed development, but whose
expression is altered by drought stress. This work will elucidate how seed,
arguably the most economically important plant organ as food source, senses and
adapts to a changing environment. This project will be important for developing
future crops that are needed for mitigating and adapting to changing climate.
The project will broaden participation in STEM workforce by training persons
with disabilities. The PIs will work with the Office for Students with
Disabilities at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) to recruit, and train
qualified individuals into project research activities. This project will also
contribute to The Plant and Soil Sciences eLibrary, an online repository of
science education materials, by building a new seed development module that is
accessible for students with learning disabilities.