* 1121832
* Replicated Ecological Speciation in Extreme Habitats: Patterns, Mechanisms, and Consequences of Multi-Trait Divergence
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Michael Tobler, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 12/31/2014
* USD 492,917.00

Hydrogen sulfide is a highly toxic gas that is lethal for most animals, even at
low concentrations. In southern Mexico, small livebearing fish of the genus
Poecilia have independently colonized multiple sulfidic springs, where hydrogen
sulfide naturally occurs in high concentrations. These fish provide an
opportunity to study how vertebrates have managed to survive in conditions that
are lethal for most other organisms. Adaptation in sulfide springs also leads to
reproductive isolation between sulfidic and non-sulfidic ecotypes, providing
insights about how new species evolve. The objectives of this proposal are to
identify convergent patterns of phenotypic and genetic differentiation in
replicated pairs of sulfidic and non-sulfidic habitats. This comparison will
reveal both traits and the underlying genetic changes that mediate sulfide
tolerance. The research addresses three basic questions: (1) How do complex
phenotypes evolve along replicated environmental gradients? Quantifying
phenotypic variation (including behavioral, physiological, and morphological
traits) in wild-caught individuals will identify convergent patterns of adaptive
trait divergence in replicated pairs of sulfidic and non-sulfidic fish.
Analyzing the same phenotypic traits in common garden-raised individuals will
shed light on how heritable differentiation and phenotypic plasticity interact
to express phenotypes in nature. (2) What are the genomic changes underlying
trait divergence? Next generation sequencing technologies (RNA-Seq) will be used
to identify genes that show signatures of divergent selection or differential
expression, which will be used to identify candidate genes underlying adaptation
to the extreme environments. (3) What are the functional consequences of the
divergent traits expressed under different environmental conditions for
reproductive isolation? Comparing growth rates of laboratory-reared fish exposed
to either sulfidic or non-sulfidic conditions will provide a direct link between
adaptation to sulfide and reproductive isolation in the form of immigrant
inviability. Understanding organisms? responses to naturally occurring stressful
environments can ultimately be used to better understand causes and consequences
of organismal responses to anthropogenically altered environments. The project
fosters collaboration in research and education between scientists and students
from the United States and Mexico. This project establishes a public outreach
platform for fish biologists to interact with fish hobbyist organizations as a
means to disseminate research findings to the lay public.