* 1121095
* Molecular and proteomic analysis of neurodevelopmental signaling in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Brock Grill, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

At present, we have a relatively limited understanding of how the human nervous
system develops. The complexity of our brains, which are composed of billions of
neurons that make trillions of cellular connections called synapses, has made
this a very important, but difficult problem to understand. The simpler nervous
systems of invertebrates, such as flies and nematodes, allow us to study the
basic and evolutionarily conserved mechanisms responsible for nervous system
development in a less complex and more manageable model system. &lt;br/&gt; The
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has emerged as an exceptionally powerful system
for studying how neurons develop and form their intercellular connections
(synapses). Our proposal uses biochemical, genetic and proteomic approaches to
study the molecular processes that regulate neuronal and synaptic development.
Specifically, we will utilize a previously characterized presynaptic protein
called rpm-1 to identify additional molecules that interact with rpm-1 to
facilitate neuronal and synaptic development. The successful completion of our
project will lead to new insights into the molecular mechanisms that control
development of the nervous system. Given that the molecules we study are
evolutionarily conserved from C. elegans to human beings, the knowledge we gain
will also be highly applicable to our understanding the mechanisms that drive
development of the human brain. &lt;br/&gt; Because C. elegans is a non-
parasitic nematode, is small in size, and is easy to manipulate, it is an ideal
organism for teaching students about nervous systems function. Our research will
be directly integrated with educating the community about neuroscience through
outreach efforts directed at elementary, secondary and post-secondary students.