* 1121517
* His fat made him do it:  modulation of Drosophila courtship behavior by an adipose-expressed gene product
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Ginger Carney, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2016
* USD 558,025.00

Animals receive environmental information, relay that information to the central
nervous system (CNS) and either initiate or abstain from a particular behavior.
To figure out how animals respond to changing environmental circumstances, it is
necessary to understand the formation and function of the neural circuits that
regulate the behaviors, including how these circuits are modulated. Since there
is a link between fat signals and motivated eating behavior, it is possible that
signals from fat tissue will be key players in regulating CNS function and a
variety of behaviors. The Carney laboratory uses the model animal Drosophila
melanogaster, which is genetically similar to humans, to figure out how changes
in fat signals, via their interactions with the CNS, alter the behavior of
animals. They have shown that molecules produced by fatty tissue influence
behaviors, including those important for reproduction. Currently this lab is
using genetic and molecular approaches to determine how changes in the
expression of a novel, candidate adipokine (i.e., fat-derived hormone) affect
brain function and reproductive behavior. As the occurrence of obesity rises
worldwide, it becomes increasingly important to understand exactly how signals
from fat tissue affect physiology and behavior. These findings will provide a
better understanding of neural and fat signaling interactions as well as a novel
framework for investigating modulatory effects of fat on behavior. Through the
research and outreach efforts associated with this work, graduate and
undergraduate students, particularly those currently underrepresented in STEM
fields, will be trained in experimental design and critical thinking skills.
Some of these students will utilize these skills as professional scientists,
while others will use the acquired knowledge and skills as physicians and in
other public health arenas, greatly expanding the reach of this scientific
training. Additional efforts will engage K-12 students in science via
interactive presentations in our community.