* 1121847
* Characterization of Aphid Nutrient Amino Acid Transporters with Focus on the Symbiotic Interface
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Daniel Price, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 07/31/2016
* USD 541,411.00

Alexandra C. C. Wilson&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #
IOS-1121847&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of Aphid Nutrient Amino Acid Transporters
with Focus on the&lt;br/&gt;Symbiotic Interface&lt;br/&gt;Symbioses such as
those between humans and their gut flora and the insect vector
of&lt;br/&gt;Chagas disease and its obligate bacterium are ubiquitous in nature
impacting human&lt;br/&gt;health, biodiversity and agriculture. Insects feeding
on mammalian blood or plant sap&lt;br/&gt;are united in their dependence on
intimate symbioses with bacteria that nutritionally&lt;br/&gt;compensate their
hosts. While the nutritional bases of these symbioses are
well&lt;br/&gt;understood, the processes and structures that mediate the
intimate interactions between&lt;br/&gt;symbiotic partners have been neglected
and remain uncharacterized. This project aims&lt;br/&gt;to functionally
characterize the processes and structures that mediate amino
acid&lt;br/&gt;exchange between aphids and their bacterial symbiont, Buchnera
aphidicola. Buchnera live&lt;br/&gt;within membrane-bound compartments inside
aphid bacteriocyte cells. The membranes&lt;br/&gt;of the bacteriocytes and the
specialized compartments present a challenge to amino acid&lt;br/&gt;exchange, a
process vital to aphid survival. Specifically, this project focuses on
studying&lt;br/&gt;the molecules that transport amino acids across membranes at
the aphid/Buchnera&lt;br/&gt;interface. The investigators will experimentally
determine the transport capability of&lt;br/&gt;amino acid transporters and use
microscopy to determine where these transporters are&lt;br/&gt;found. Research
and educational goals will merge in measurement of changes
in&lt;br/&gt;expression of amino acid transporter genes in response to dietary
amino acid supply&lt;br/&gt;providing inquiry-based research training for up to
96 undergraduates. Broadly this&lt;br/&gt;work benefits genomic studies in all
insect systems and additionally provides mentoring&lt;br/&gt;and research
training for one graduate student and one early-career researcher.
This&lt;br/&gt;project will be the first to functionally characterize the
processes and structures&lt;br/&gt;operating at the interface of an insect
nutritional symbiosis. Importantly, understanding&lt;br/&gt;how insects interact
with their symbionts has the potential to facilitate development
of&lt;br/&gt;targeted environmentally safe control of insect vectors of human
and plant disease.