* 1121129
* Molecular regulation of estrogen receptor gene expression in the adult brain
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Melinda Wilson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2015
* USD 474,000.00

This study investigates the molecular mechanisms by which critical genes are
differentially regulated in the male and female brain. The hormone, estrogen, is
critical for establishing structural and functional aspects of the brain in both
males and females. Estrogen functions through intracellular receptors that
mediate its action. Estrogen receptor gene expression is regulated differently
in the male and female brain after a neural injury, however, the molecular
mechanisms that regulate this expression are not known. In this study, the
effects of epigenetic modification of DNA on the expression of estrogen
receptors after brain injury will be examined in a rat animal model. Molecular
biological and histological techniques will be used to identify these changes.
It is hypothesized that estrogen receptor gene expression is differentially
activated by DNA demethylation after injury. The results of this study will
enhance the understanding of the inherent gender differences in the regulation
of gene expression in the brain. This project combines the fields of
neuroendocrinology with the rapidly growing field of epigenetics. In addition to
the answering fundamental questions in the field of neuroscience, the impact of
this study is enhanced by the involvement of multiple undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral students over the course of the study that provides a
fundamental scientific background to these students. The students are involved
in all aspects of this project from performing experiments to presenting the
findings. All students will be encouraged to present their data at University
events as well as at other regional and national meetings. Students also have
the opportunity participate in community events such as those associated with
Brain Awareness Week with the Society for Neuroscience. These events allow
students to interact with the public to educate children and parents alike to
importance of understanding how their brains function.