* 1121758
* Immune Mechanisms of Disease Resistance in Amphibian Skin
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Louise Rollins-Smith, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 04/30/2017
* USD 737,995.00

Amphibian populations are suffering unprecedented global population declines.
Although many factors contribute to these declines, overwhelming evidence links
many declines to an emerging infectious disease, chytridiomycosis, caused by the
skin fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. This global ecological crisis
provides a unique opportunity to study immune mechanisms of disease resistance
in wildlife species. The project will investigate immune mechanisms that protect
some resistant amphibian species in order to develop better strategies to
protect more susceptible amphibians. One set of protective factors produced by
frogs is the set of small skin proteins called antimicrobial peptides (AMPs).
Another possible defense is provided by the community of bacteria that live on
frog skin. A possible strategy to protect vulnerable amphibians is to transfer
protective bacteria that can interfere with the fungus from resistant frogs to
susceptible frogs. The project will identify new species of bacteria that
inhabit frog skin and release antifungal products. These studies will advance
our understanding of fundamental immune defense mechanisms in amphibians while
promoting education and training. New AMPs or bacterial products may have
therapeutic value for human medicine. The research will support amphibian
conservation efforts by development of treatment or management strategies to
protect rare endangered species in captivity until a time when founder
populations can be returned to the wild.