* 1121435
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Kin structure, conflict and caste formation: the evolution of sociality in Synalpheus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Dustin Rubenstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2015
* USD 598,900.00

The origin of cooperation is one of the major transitions in biology, is
intimately tied to family-living and the evolution of complex animal societies
including humans, and helps explain the impacts of certain pests like termites.
Why do some kinds of animals form complex societies, while other closely related
ones do not? Are complex insect societies similar to those of vertebrates?
Although researchers have long recognized similarities between social
vertebrates and invertebrates, the several conspicuous differences among social
animal groups have historically divided the field of social biology, leading to
distinct terminologies, approaches, and theoretical frameworks. Few studies have
systematically examined how explanations for sociality in vertebrates or insects
are related, or whether they apply to other family-living species. One promising
approach to resolving these issues involves testing different modes of social
evolution in a single group of related species that exhibits a range of social
systems. This comparative study will evaluate the evolution of family-living
within a socially diverse group that unusually exhibits traits of both social
vertebrates and insects, the sponge-dwelling snapping shrimp, Synalpheus. Using
molecular methods, this research will focus on how the cohesive (kinship) and
disruptive (conflict) influences of group-living interact to mold social
organization and how these interactions vary among closely related species,
which may serve as proxies for stages in the early evolution of family-living.
The results will illuminate several key problems, including the evolution of
altruism and cooperation, the roles of family structure and conflict in the
evolution of sociality, transitions among social systems, and links between
social evolution and the diversification of morphology and behavior. Social
shrimp have demonstrated high value in public education and outreach, and
findings on the evolution of family-living in these charismatic marine animals
will be disseminated to K-12 schools and the general public via an award-winning
website and school lectures.