* 1121844
* Numeracy Infusion Course for Higher Education (NICHE): A Project of The City University of New York (CUNY) Quantitative Reasoning (QR) Alliance
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Esther Wilder, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* teri murphy
* 03/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

The goal of the Numeracy Infusion Course for Higher Education (NICHE) project is
to increase the level of quantitative reasoning (QR) instruction and assessment
in undergraduate courses across a broad range of disciplines throughout the City
University of New York (CUNY) system. The primary tool of the project is a
course that teaches faculty: (a) to apply Quantitative Literacy/Quantitative
Reasoning (QL/QR) within a disciplinary context; (b) to articulate QR learning
goals/objectives that reflect best practices for teaching quantitative literacy;
(c) to identify and implement best practices for teaching QR, for example active
learning, collaborative student learning, writing with numerical information,
etc.; (d) to adapt and implement strategies for incorporating quantitative
reasoning into course instruction; and (e) to assess the effectiveness of QR
initiatives and use the assessment results to further improve instruction. The
intellectual merit of the project has several components. First, faculty
enrolled in the NICHE course engage in active and collaborative learning using
real-world data, thus experiencing the same progressive teaching methods that
have proven effective in undergraduate QR courses. Second, the effectiveness of
the project is being evaluated using a rubric that assesses the participating
faculty member's QR assignments and assessment materials; and then those faculty
are using the Critical Thinking Assessment (CAT) test with their own students.
Finally, the project is led by an interdisciplinary group of experienced STEM
faculty from throughout the CUNY system who are leaders in the development and
application of techniques for progressive QR instruction and assessment. The
broader impacts of the project lie primarily in its demonstration of a model for
engaging faculty throughout a large and diverse university system of campuses.
By identifying and cultivating a cadre of faculty leaders, who then serve to
recruit colleagues, the resulting community of faculty is expected to improve
the educational experiences of several thousand CUNY students annually. The
project is also providing tested QR learning materials and disseminating the
NICHE course materials to other institutions who are similarly committed to
improving the quantitative literacy and reasoning of their students.