* 1121276
* Collaborative Research: A General Approach to the Design of  Tailor-Made Glycan Recognition Protein Modules.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Sefika Ozkan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 607,331.00

Protein-carbohydrate interactions play an important role in several biological
processes, such as cell growth and differentiation, signal transduction,
apoptosis, and fertilization. From a molecular recognition perspective, glycans
are challenging ligands, in that they differ from each other simply by the point
of attachment to each other, or by the position of single hydroxyl groups.
Further, glycan based biopolymers are flexible and highly hydrated. The
objective of this project is to understand at the molecular level protein-glycan
interactions in a model system, and to use this knowledge to develop novel
glycan recognition proteins through an integrated computational and experimental
strategy. Starting from a natural glycan binding protein, cyanovirin, we will
explore the sequence space that supports high-affinity binding to the target
glycan in parallel, utilizing directed evolution on the experimental side, and
fast docking methods as well as explicit solvent molecular dynamics simulations
on the computational side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of
this proposal is twofold. First, the project relies on a highly
interdisciplinary approach, which offers students at the graduate and
undergraduate level a rich training experience. Second, the PIs participate in
outreach activities at the high school level both at Iowa and at ASU. At ASU,
Ozkan and Ghirlanda participate with this project to the ASU Math and Science
Teaching Fellows program run by CRESMET
(http://cresmet.asu.edu/MSTF/index.shtml). The program brings high school
teachers from disadvantaged schools in the Phoenix area to ASU for research
internships combined with intensive training in science education techniques,
and establishes a rapport between schools and university that continues through
campus visits. Margulis has created a mentor matching program
(http://mentor.chem.uiowa.edu/) that through the Upward Bound Program integrates
underrepresented high school students in research groups.