* 1121193
* Understanding DAWDLE Function in miRNA and siRNA Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Bin Yu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/29/2016
* USD 499,504.00

Intellectual Merit: Small RNAs, including microRNAs (miRNAs) and small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs), are key regulators of many biological processes.
Several RNA-binding proteins involved in general RNA metabolism are known to
play important roles in regulating miRNA biogenesis. A challenge is to
understand how RNA binding proteins affect miRNA biogenesis, as well as how the
miRNA processing machinery interconnects with general RNA metabolism. This
research targets these knowledge gaps. Preliminary studies demonstrated that
DAWDLE (DDL), an RNA binding protein from Arabidopsis, is required for the
accumulation of a subset of miRNAs and siRNAs. DDL interacts with pri-miRNA
(precursor of miRNAs) and DCL1 (the processor of pri-miRNA) and positively
regulates pri-miRNA processing. We hypothesize that DDL facilitates DCL1 to
access and/or process a subset of pri-miRNAs. Specific objectives are to: 1)
Analyze the role of DDL in miRNA biogenesis; 2) Analyze the function of protein
domains of DDL in pri-miRNA processing; and 3) Analyze the role of DDL in siRNA
biogenesis. This research will advance knowledge of processes leading to small
RNA accumulation, which in turn will improve future efforts at elucidating the
biological processes involving small RNAs and to refine small RNA-based
technology that has been used to improve agricultural production and human
health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will provide
training for a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student, undergraduate
students, and high school students. The PI is a faculty sponsor/mentor for
students participating in the Nebraska EPSCoR-supported Young Nebraska
Scientists program, which fosters research exposure and participation by
underrepresented minority high school students, and in the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln Undergraduate Creative Activities and Research Experiences
(UCARE) program. In addition, the PI pursues active collaborations with faculty
at local liberal arts colleges to help reach students that may not have ready
opportunity for research experiences. The PI is also integrating his latest
research into a new course, "RNA Silencing", offered to upper level
undergraduate and graduate students.