* 1121935
* VOSS-Collaborative Research: Evolution of Virtualized Design Processes in Project-Based Design Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kalle Lyytinen, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2015
* USD 182,062.00

Economic competitiveness relies upon innovation and digitized tools, services
and data representation. These innovations are required for organizations to
remain effective. Designers and design managers guide the evolution of digitally
enabled design capabilities by integrating different types of digital process
capabilities and resources. Such capabilities can also help optimize complex
systems (e.g., smart grid, pervasive healthcare). Building on organizational and
evolutionary theory, this project studies changes in organizational processes as
they incorporate innovative virtual elements. It applies a process modeling
framework to explore underlying mechanisms that generate patterns of change, and
uses computational tools in conjunction with theories of evolutionary genetics
to analyze longitudinal changes in organizational processes for integrating
virtualized innovations. Generative structural elements of design processes
(e.g., genotypes) give birth to surface-level design routines and variations
(e.g., phenotypes) over time. Processes are represented as sequences akin to
biological genes and their translated protein products. while combinations of
elements akin to DNA base pairs and their corresponding amino acids capture
essential traits of design activity. This new vocabulary helps us delineate
structurally the fundamental design task elements and their variation across
design task instances.

The study advances theoretical understanding of how digital capabilities alter
organizational processes. It shows how mutations emerge and how processes change
over time. It identifies strategies for embedding digital capabilities into
processes, and explores the impact of complexity. It advances instrumentation,
methodology and analytical techniques by describing digitally-enabled processes
and performing comparative, hierarchical, structural-analytical analyses of
event-sequence-based process data. It provides longitudinal data on the micro-
and meso-level changes in design processes from systematic studies of design for
cars, chips and buildings. Genetics research is used to evaluate design in light
of evolutionary models and agent-based simulations and to identify patterns of
integration of digital capabilities into design processes over time.