* 1121691
* The Systems Biology of Mammalian Puberty
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Kemal Sonmez, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/29/2016
* USD 759,998.00

During the last several years, investigators have observed an earlier initiation
of human female puberty, a worrisome trend because early puberty is associated
with increased risk for cancer, obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.
It has also become clear that the timing of puberty is under genetic control,
and likely determined by a host of regulatory genes. Yet, few attempts have been
made to identify the genetic networks controlling this critical milestone in
mammalian development. Drs. Sergio Ojeda (a neuroscientist) and Kemal Sönmez (a
computer/electrical engineer) have combined expertise and developed a
partnership between biology and engineering to test the hypothesis that a
repressive gene network operating within the brain controls the initiation of
female puberty. Using a combination of computational methods, systems biology
approaches and molecular strategies, they performed preliminary studies
revealing the existence of such a network and showing that it represses
subordinate genes, which if left unchecked, would unleash the pubertal process
prematurely. To disseminate their findings, Ojeda and Sönmez will partner with
the Institute for Systems Biology in Seattle to generate a database resource of
Web-based tools, links and protocols for analyses accessible via Internet. They
will also make their raw data, results, and codes available on their website
(www.sonmezsysbio.org), and deposit their data and results in public databases.
Because the research plan includes the participation of undergraduate students
and high-school students, The project will encourage young investigators to use
similar integrative approaches for the study of many other complex physiological
processes in mammalian systems. Theses studies will significantly enhance the
understanding of basic systems-wide mechanisms underlying the neuroendocrine
control of mammalian puberty.