* 1121146
* BRIGE: Robust Signal Processing Algorithms for Health Monitoring of Civil Infrastructure Subjected to Seismic Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Luis Montejo, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,522.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
provides funding for the development of a model-free signal-processing-based
methodology for rapid damage detection in civil structures subjected to
earthquake excitations. Advanced mathematical techniques for the analysis of
nonlinear-nonstationary signals will be engaged to develop algorithms capable of
identifying the occurrence and severity of damage from examination of the
structural response. Initial validation and calibration of the algorithms will
be performed using state-of-the-art nonlinear structural models that utilize
fiber-based distributed plasticity elements capable of replicating the
structural members' actual nonlinear hysteretic response including different
types of failures. Small scale shaking table tests will be performed to further
validate the algorithms developed. The educational and broadening participation
activities aim to increase the participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering. Such activities include shake table based structural design
competitions/demonstrations at underserved pre-college schools in Puerto Rico
and the development of a practicum course in signal processing and data
analysis.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to improvements in the
implementation of real-time structural health monitoring systems. This will have
a direct positive impact in the coordination of post-earthquake emergency
responses by local authorities. While the research program is designed to tackle
the early damage detection problem in civil structures subjected to seismic
loads, the fundamental knowledge developed will have an impact in any
engineering or scientific discipline dealing with signal processing, data
analysis, target/anomaly detection, damage simulation or health monitoring. The
interdisciplinary nature of the research presents unique learning opportunities
to our undergraduate and graduate students. The outreach activities will impact
a large number of Hispanic pre-college students through the University of Puerto
Rico Science on Wheels Educational Center.