* 1121637
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Between Community and Clinic: Households, Intermediaries, and Bureaucracy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Anna West, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Stanford University doctoral student Anna West, with the guidance of Dr. James
Ferguson, will conduct ethnographic research on citizenship, political
subjectivity, and the state as it develops in the context of household-based
health promotion, a practice found throughout the world but is especially
prevalent in developing countries. The research will be conducted in Malawi, a
sub-Saharan African country that is faced with a severe shortage of physicians
and nurses and so must rely on community health workers to implement national
and global health directives. Malawi's community health workers (CHWs), known as
Health Surveillance Assistants, are secondary school graduates trained to
deliver health education, provide basic curative care, and conduct disease
surveillance in rural homes. The CHWs' routine interactions with women and men
in rural households constitute an ongoing intimate encounter with the state,
which is otherwise absent in many remote communities. The researcher will
examine how these household-level health promotion encounters shape rural
Malawians' homes and domestic practices, political subjectivities, and
experiences of citizenship within broad ideological projects of national health
and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will conduct eighteen
months of fieldwork combining village-based ethnography with community health
workers and rural households in Malawi's Central Region, and institutional
ethnography and archival research on the role of community health workers in
Malawi's health system. She will explore three aspects of the health workers'
encounters with households: (1) how the CHWs represent biomedical values and
concepts of health in routine conversations; (2) how they position health
responsibility; and (3) how they engage in disease surveillance and routine
bureaucratic paperwork to generate a portrait of village health and rural homes
that influences health policy and intervention design. Data will be collected
through participant observation, semi-structured in-depth interviews, oral
history interviews, and content analysis of health policy
documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because by focusing on
the role of intermediaries and outreach workers in health and development
projects, it will shed light on the local dynamics and consequences of
translating large-scale global initiatives into routine service delivery.
Findings also will contribute to social science literature on the interaction
between health promotion, domesticity, and political subjectivities. Supporting
this research also contributes to the education of a social scientist.