* 1121147
* Neural Circuits for the Executive Control of Action
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Mark Laubach, John B. Pierce Laboratory, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 12/31/2014
* USD 560,800.00

This project will examine how neural activity in the medial frontal (or
cingulate) cortex changes as new behavioral tasks are learned for the first
time. The central issue is to understand how activity in this part of the brain
allows for learning from past mistakes in order to avoid future failures. The
experimental approach involves recording from chronically implanted arrays of
electrodes in the medial frontal cortex of rats as the animals learn to perform
reaction time tasks. These tasks are commonly used to study cognitive processing
in human beings. The expected results will include testing a leading hypothesis
in neuroscience that persistent activity in medial frontal cortex enables self-
control, e.g. the ability to wait calmly before acting. We predict that this
activity will develop in the medial frontal cortex during learning and will come
to predict how well animals are able to adjust performance after mistakes are
made. The potential impact of the study is that it will provide some of the
first data on how error-related activity develops in this part of the brain
during learning. Broader impact activities include data and computer resource
sharing on a website, a multi-lingual children's program on the brain, and
participation by undergraduates from a non-traditional research university in
cutting-edge neurobiological research.