* 1121310
* RUI: Regulation of 3-Dimensional Cell Motility during Vertebrate Gastrulation
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Douglas Weiser, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 09/30/2016
* USD 354,285.00

During the development of vertebrates large numbers of cells migrate to new
locations in the body. Cell migration is driven by complex mechanical forces and
is under precise molecular regulation. This proposal focuses on the molecular
regulation of cellular contractility driven my actin and myosin. This
constrictive power is one of the primary driving forces of cell movement. To
understand how cells regulate their contractility it is necessary to study live
cells in a living organism. Zebrafish provide an ideal and cost-effective
experimental model system for the study of cell movement and much of what we
learn in zebrafish can be translated to understanding human biology. Unlike
mammals zebrafish embryos are fertilized externally and are optically
transparent during early development. One can directly observe cell movement and
behavior using standard microscopy without any invasive procedures. This project
uses a combination of biochemical, genetic, cell biological and developmental
approaches to examine the role of the myosin phosphatase complex in controlling
cell movement. The outcomes of this proposal are expected to shed new light on
how cells regulate their movement in complex environments. This project involves
the training of undergraduate and master?s students. These students will gain
valuable experience in hands on data collection and experimental design which
assistant them in their future careers in research or medical fields. In
addition this project will synergize with advanced undergraduate coursework at
University of the Pacific such as cell biology and molecular biology, allowing
students to use zebrafish as part of there in class research projects.