* 1121866
* Characterization of the role of the bHLH transcription factor HLH-3 in the differentiation and function of neurons with gender specific roles in the nematode C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Aixa Alfonso, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2015
* USD 452,053.00

This project focuses on understanding the role of the hlh-3 protein in the
differentiation and function of neurons with gender-specific roles in the
nematode C. elegans. The long term goal is to determine whether HLH-3 is akin to
a master regulator responsible for transcription of genes expressed in a
dimorphic gender-specific neuronal circuitry, and as a result influences
distinct behaviors in hermaphrodites and males. Hlh-3 is known to function in
neurons of the egg-laying circuitry in hermaphrodites, and new evidence suggests
it also functions in neurons of males which mediate detection of chemosensory
and/or mechanosensory cues provided by the hermaphrodite. Not much is known
about the gene networks expressed in males and females that are orchestrated to
bring about gender-specific functions. This project utilizes molecular, genetic,
and behavioral approaches to characterize the mechanism(s) by which neuronal
function and animal behavior can be coordinated and regulated by a bHLH
transcription factor. In the nematode, gender-specific behaviors are controlled
by both gender-specific neurons as well as a shared neuronal circuitry. The
principal investigator?s laboratory is a newcomer to this area of research, but
this project will provide novel information that complements ongoing work in
other laboratories in the nematode community. The project is the basis for the
doctoral thesis of two graduate students and also provides research
opportunities to undergraduate students. The undergraduates will be involved in
further quantification of behavioral defects in males, creation of strains with
cell-specific reporters, and in the characterization of the cells and gene
expression patterns associated with phenotypes, if any. The data will be
presented and discussed at regional and national meetings as well as submitted
for publication in peer reviewed journals. Newly generated reagents will be
available to the C. elegans community.