* 1121172
* Dynamics of the Nuclear Pore Proteins and the Mechanism of Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2016
* Sanford Simon, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2016
* USD 921,460.00

Intellectual merit. Nanoscale molecular machines found in a cell exceed any
human creations in their intricacy and vastly exceed anything humans have
created for efficiency. These are responsible for cellular functions that range
from transporting objects across membranes to machines that synthesize, to
motors that move cargo from one location to another. For a few of the smaller
machines we have been able to merge our studies on the structure of these
machines, with our observations on what the machine is doing and, as result,
provide insight to how the machine works. Alas, our ability to analyze, and
therefore understand, the larger, more sophistical biological machines. This
project develops the computational tools to test how these machines work. The
first model to be studied is the pore that regulates transport in and out of the
nucleus across the nuclear envelope, the central part of the cell that guards
our genome. Preliminary studies demonstrate that advances in computation can
allow us to understand how these machines function at a molecular level with
such great efficiency and speed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. These
results have impacts on several important levels. First, understanding the basic
operation of the pores that guard the nucleus is an essential goal of cell
biology. Which genes are turned on and off often depends upon which molecules
are allowed to enter through these pores that surround the nucleus. Second, we
need to fully understand how malfunctions of these pores can affect the normal
state and integrity of the cell. Third, practical application of the engineering
design principles used by cellular machines at a nanoscale can have tremendous
economic and technological potential when applied and scaled to other problems.
Nature has created nanomachines that vastly exceed in efficiency anything humans
have created. Understanding how these nanomachines work can provide insights
into our own technology. Fourth, this work makes science research accessible to
a much broader community. The investigators have been working in the New York
public school system for 35 years. Current involvement includes integrating high
school teachers and their students in the laboratory over the summer,
participating as a board member of the education committee of the New York
Academy of Sciences, running monthly meetings for New York regional science
teachers, as well as placing graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
middle and high schools in the New York area. Even though most high school
students do not have access to high-end experimental tools, work such as this
can be done on a home personal computer, thus making this science accessible to
a broad population, which might not otherwise have the chance to pursue
scientific research.