* 1121612
* Networks of Heterotrimeric G alpha Subunit Signaling to K+ Channels in Arabidopsis Guard Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Reka Albert, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,188,646.00

G proteins, which are composed of three smaller proteins named Galpha, Gbeta,
and Ggamma, are important and ubiquitous cellular proteins in animals, fungi,
and plants. Signaling pathways that are coupled to G proteins allow these
organisms to sense and respond appropriately to their environments. In plants, G
proteins help plant cells to sense both pathogenic bacteria and water stress.
One of the best understood cellular systems of G protein regulation in plants is
the stomatal guard cell. Guard cells are highly specialized cells found in the
outermost tissue layer (the epidermis) of the leaf. Pairs of guard cells
regulate the opening and closing of microscopic pores called stomata, through
which plants take up carbon dioxide from the air for photosynthesis but through
which they also lose water vapor to the atmosphere, leading potentially to
dehydration stress. The guard cells control the aperture of the stomata by
changing their shape and volume, processes that are in turn controlled by the
uptake of potassium and other solutes. Proteins (KAT1) in the guard cell
membrane mediate the uptake of potassium which drives this stomatal opening.
KAT1 protein activity is inhibited by the plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) and
by molecules produced by bacteria that cause plant disease. G proteins serve as
"middle-men" that relay the signals from ABA and bacteria to the KAT1 proteins,
but G proteins are only one component of the complex intracellular signaling
networks underlying these responses. This project will elucidate in detail the
networks of intracellular signaling proteins that relay signals (for example
from ABA) to G proteins and on to KAT1. An integral component of this research
is the development of new and broadly applicable computational tools for
understanding and predicting cellular signaling networks. &lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: This research has significance for plant biology (and more broadly for
society) because it will help develop crops with improved resistance to
infection and to environmental stress. The computational approaches developed by
this research will be broadly applicable to any cellular signaling network,
regardless of organism. This project will provide interdisciplinary training to
undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows at the interface
of cell and computational biology. Project personnel will work towards improving
the representation of minorities in science by participating in outreach and
mentoring activities at the annual SACNAS (Society for the Advancement of
Chicano/a and Native American Scientists) conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported jointly by the Networks and Regulation and Mathematical
Biology Programs.