* 1121346
* Patterning of Cellular Differentiation by Lateral Inhibition in a Filamentous Cyanobacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Sean Callahan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 295,363.00

The development of a pattern of differentiated cell types from a group of
equivalent cells is a fundamental phenomenon. Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 is a
filamentous cyanobacterium that can be induced to differentiate a pattern of
nitrogen-fixing heterocysts from a chain of undifferentiated vegetative cells.
Heterocysts occur, on average, at 10 cell intervals, are terminally
differentiated, and differ from vegetative cells morphologically, metabolically,
and genetically. They allow the spatial separation of the two incompatible
processes of photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation. Patterning of differentiation
appears to be dependent on the interactions between several proteins. The first,
HetR, is part of a regulatory circuit that shares the properties of biological
switches, which turn graded input signals into a binary output: when the switch
is "off",the cell remains undifferentiated, but when the switch is "turned on",
the differentiation process begins and eventually becomes irreversible and self-
sustaining. HetR acts to promote differentiation and is both necessary and
sufficient to induce differentiation. PatS is a protein that prevents
differentiation, apparently through interaction with HetR, and is responsible
for determining the de novo patterning of heterocysts on a filament. HetN
produces a signal involved in stabilization and maintenance of the pattern once
it has formed. The premise is that the relative positions of cells is conveyed
by concentration gradients of PatS and/or HetN extending from differentiating
source cells. This phenomenon of "lateral inhibition" is implicated in governing
the cellular differenitation and patterning in many developmental systems; but
this has been experimentally demonstrated in relatively few systems. There is
abundant preliminary evidence that HetN- and PatS-dependent signals move from
cell to cell in filaments of Anabaena to create the periodic pattern of
differentiated heterocysts and maintain it as the intervening heterocysts grow
and divide. Only a pentapeptide, RGSGR, of HetN is required for its function as
a patterning protein. This peptide is present also in PatS and is thought that
these peptides are actively involved in the the suppresion of cellular
differentiation. However, the functional form of HetN is unknown as is the route
of intercellular movement within filaments of both inhibitors. Thus, the two
specific aims of this project are to: 1. characterize the functional form of
HetN that diffuses from cell to cell to maintain heterocyst patterning, and 2.
determine the means of intercellular transfer of both HetN- and PatS-dependent
inhibitory signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is narrowly focused on the
genetics of heterocyst differentiation in cyanobacteria, but the broader
biological impact will be on the types of molecular mechanisms that control
specification of cells for differentiation in many organisms. In addition, the
project will promote teaching, training and learning by funding the research
training of graduate students and undergraduate students, by enhancing sections
of an undergraduate genetics laboratory course, by providing funded graduate
students with teaching opportunities and by allowing their participation at
national meetings. Mentoring of undergraduate students for research credit and
as part of the Minority access to Research Careers (MARC) program will help to
broaden participation of students of Pacific Islander descent in the biological
sciences. In addition, cyanobacteria are beginning to be exploited for
industrial purposes. It was hoped that existing genetically modified strains
that produce extra heterocysts would have increased biohydrogen production, a
byproduct of nitrogen fixation, by cyanobacteria. Unfortunately, these strains
do not fix extra nitrogen nor produce extra hydrogen compared to the wild type
strain because the extra heterocysts are clustered together for lack of bordered
by vegetative cells. To engineer a strain with reduced spacing between
individual heterocysts, one needs to understand how HetN and PatS determine the
periodic pattern of heterocysts, which is the purpose of the work described in
this proposal.