* 1121034
* Testing models for the origin of the deepest carbon-isotope anomaly in Earth history? The Wonoka Formation of South Australia
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Adam Maloof, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2014
* USD 179,256.00

Testing models for the origin of the deepest carbon-isotope anomaly in Earth
history -- The Wonoka Formation of South Australia&lt;br/&gt;Adam C. Maloof
&amp; Blair Schoene, Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1121034&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Over
the past two decades, carbon isotope chemostratigraphy has emerged as the most
important correlation tool for the Precambrian. The dominant paradigm amongst
chemostratigraphers is that delta13C in carbonate rocks (delta13Ccarb) reflects
the delta13C of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) in contemporaneous sea water.
If this assumption is true, then why do we observe negative delta13Ccarb
excursions lasting millions of years that dip well below the canonical value for
mantle carbon input to the ocean-atmosphere system (-6?)? Do these excursions in
fact represent diagenetic alteration away from DIC-derived values? Even if
diagenetic, are the excursions global in nature, making them still useful for
correlation? To explore these questions, we propose work on the deepest
delta13Ccarb excursion in Earth history -- the `Shuram' anomaly, recorded in
Ediacaran carbonate sediments on at least seven paleo-continents during the
early evolution of animals. We will combine detailed field mapping and sequence
stratigraphy with isotope chemostratigraphy and U-Pb geochronology of ash beds
to constrain the timing and duration of the Shuram anomaly. In particular,
isotope conglomerate tests will constrain the relative timing of delta13Ccarb
acquisition, canyon cutting, subaerial exposure, meteoric diagenesis, and burial
diagenesis. Our investigation of the unprecedented isotopic variability during
the Ediacaran will test whether delta13Ccarb is a record of the evolving global
carbon cycle and may be used as a correlation tool -- vitally important for
every Precambrian story (climatic, evolutionary, geochemical, tectonic) of
global change.