* 1121096
* The Development of Body Knowledge in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ramesh Bhatt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 432,751.00

Bodies are highly significant social stimuli. Like faces, they convey a
considerable amount of information about people, their emotions, and their
intentions. Yet, while a great deal of research has addressed the early
development of knowledge about faces, very little is known about the development
of knowledge about bodies. The research supported by the award will address this
issue by analyzing the nature of body knowledge development in infancy and the
mechanisms that drive this development. Studies will examine when infants of
different ages come to understand different aspects of bodies and faces, such as
the parts they are composed of and the manner in which the parts are arranged
and organized. This will be accomplished by analyzing how infants from 3 to 9
months of age react to systematic changes to body and face images, and by
documenting which aspects of bodies and faces infants scan. A prominent theory
suggests that body knowledge is minimal early in life, and proposes that body
knowledge development is driven by information gained from the infant's own
motor activities and from observing other people. The planned studies will test
key predictions of this model. They will also indicate how the development of
knowledge about bodies compares with the development of knowledge about faces.
Moreover, studies supported by this grant will examine whether the development
of body knowledge is driven by increasing tendency to focus on relevant
information about people in the infant's environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will contribute to the understanding of cognitive and social
development by establishing how knowledge about people develops early in life. A
fuller accounting of the typical development of body knowledge in infancy has
the potential to aid in early identification and treatment of individuals with
developmental disorders, particularly Autism Spectrum Disorder, which is
associated with deficits in social perception. In addition, a comprehensive
understanding of development of basic cognitive abilities, including infants'
knowledge of bodies and faces, is important for educating parents and caregivers
about development. Moreover, the studies supported by the grant will enable
several undergraduate and graduate students to receive training in psychological
research.