* 1121606
* A new class of whole cell models with bidirectional coupling of local (subcellular) and global (cellular) calcium responses
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Gregory Conradi Smith, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2016
* USD 350,000.00

A sophisticated simulation method is developed to investigate the interactions
between whole cell intracellular calcium dynamics and the building blocks of
calcium handling, spatially localized subcellular calcium elevations known as
"calcium puffs" and "sparks." Using techniques originally developed in
theoretical physical chemistry and statistical physics, equations are derived
and analyzed for the moments of the local calcium concentration associated with
the large number of calcium release sites in living cells. This extends the
classical "gating variable" approach to modeling the opening and closing of ion
channels - introduced by Nobel prize winners Hodgkin and Huxley - to account for
the short range of action of intracellular calcium and local coupling of
intracellular calcium channels. Traditional models of coupled local and global
calcium responses involve stochastic simulation methods that are computationally
intensive and often prohibit both mathematical analysis and large-scale
parameters studies. Conversely, moment-based whole cell models of intracellular
calcium responses are systems of ordinary differential equations that can be
studied using geometric and graphical approaches. Gregory Smith (William &amp;
Mary) and students develop, validate, and benchmark this mathematical modeling
framework and, subsequently, deploy it in the laboratories of Eric Sobie (Mount
Sinai) and Sandor Gyorke (Ohio State) to interpret live cell calcium imaging
experiments that probe how beat-to-beat calcium cycling in heart muscle cells
changes in response to drugs, mutations, and disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;User-
friendly software is produced to assist other laboratories in their development
of more realistic and predictive models of calcium responses in cardiac, smooth,
and striated muscle, neurons, and non-excitable cells. Graduate students
involved in this project experience high-quality interdisciplinary scientific
training at the interface of applied mathematics and cell physiology. The
project also expands and supports Smith's activities as Director of the William
&amp; Mary Biomathematics Initiative, e.g., curriculum development in biological
modeling, coordination of an interdisciplinary faculty-student journal club,
mentoring of undergraduate research students, and authorship of an undergraduate
text introducing neuroscience majors to nonlinear dynamics in the context of
electrophysiology (with Christopher Del Negro).