* 1121273
* Responses to Selective Breeding for High Voluntary Activity in House Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Theodore Garland, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2015
* USD 501,572.00

Locomotion is a key element of the lives of all animals, including human beings.
Locomotor abilities (performance capacities) set limits within which normal
behaviors must be accomplished, including finding food, avoiding predators, and
seeking mates. Locomotor activity can be costly in terms of energy and so it can
be a major component of the overall daily energy budget of an animal, with
important implications for the regulation of body weight. Much of the locomotor
activity that animals exhibit may be considered voluntary, yet biologists and
psychologists do not understand how and why voluntary exercise varies so widely
among species of animals in the wild or among individual humans. Prior NSF
support was used to develop a novel mouse model for the study of voluntary
exercise. More than 55 generations of selective breeding for high voluntary
wheel running have produced 4 replicate High-Runner (HR) lines that run 3-fold
farther per day than 4 non-selected control (C) lines. A striking result is a
plateau in running performance since about generation 16, that is, a limit to
selection despite continuing to select for high voluntary wheel running.
&lt;br/&gt;This project stems from the remarkable finding that a high-fat diet
(HFD) increases daily wheel-running distances of HR mice up to 75%, with little
effect on C mice. Three hypotheses about the mechanisms that cause this increase
in individual performance of mice at the selection limit will be tested: 1) HFD
increases endurance ability of HR mice by altering components of their unique
physiology; 2) HFD increases motivation for wheel running via interaction with
their altered brain reward system; 3) HFD increases thermal tolerance and/or
alters the thermo-regulatory set point of HR mice. Following these studies, the
nutritional environment will be altered for half of the lines (2 HR and 2 C) by
administering HFD from weaning through wheel testing, while the standard
selection protocol is applied. This aspect of the study will provide a direct
test of whether feeding a high-fat diet will make it possible to increase
running performance beyond what has been observed, a cross-generational
evolutionary change that will break the selection limit. &lt;br/&gt;Results will
lead to comprehensive understanding of voluntary activity levels and will have
biomedical relevance for fat dynamics and obesity, the motivational basis of
voluntary exercise, and the regulation of activity levels. Animals, tissues, and
data will be made available to other researchers for projects not covered in
this proposal. Research will emphasize training of graduate and undergraduate
students, including women and under-represented groups, and will involve
collaborations with at least 6 other faculty and 3 other universities. Working
with a local middle-school teacher, digital research photographs of skeletal
elements will be used to develop a middle-school science lesson plan designed to
illustrate methods of scientific inquiry in conjunction with fundamental
evolutionary principles through inquiry-based learning.