* 1121281
* Assimilation and the U.S. Host Society
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Tomas Jimenez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 12/31/2014
* USD 146,438.00

SES-1121281&lt;br/&gt;Tomas Jimenez&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assimilation and
the U.S. Host Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do host-society individuals -
those who are US-born of US-born parents - participate in a relational process
of assimilation which involves immigrants? For the last century, assimilation
research has regarded the host society as shaping the assimilation of immigrants
and their descendents. Recent theoretical innovations recognize that the
variegated nature of U.S. society along ethnoracial and class lines may mean
that immigrants and their children experience a segmented form of assimilation.
Research based on classical assimilation theory and its newer variants do not
account for how host-society individuals are themselves assimilating in a
context shaped by immigration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
focuses on host-society individuals and examines how ethnoracial and class
context shapes their experiences. It aims to make sense of a relational and
potentially mutually influencing assimilation process. The study employs in-
depth interviews with host-society individuals and observations in three areas
in the southern part San Francisco Bay Area, CA ("Silicon Valley"): East Palo
Alto, Cupertino, and Berryessa (a subsection of San José). Each area has a
different ethnoracial and class profile, capturing the segmented nature of the
contexts in which assimilation unfolds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study flips
the assimilation equation by examining how the outcomes normally associated with
immigrant assimilation apply to host-society individuals. It examines their
ethnoracial identity perceptions of ethnoracial boundaries, everyday practices,
the ethnoracial composition of their social networks and their conceptions of
American national identity vis-à-vis immigration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sample of roughly 180 in-depth interview respondents (60 in each locale) will be
divided into three age cohorts in order to assess how assimilation among host-
society individuals unfolds across cohorts. The project also includes interviews
with key informants in each locale and observational data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to transform the social-
scientific understanding of assimilation by providing a fuller account of how
both immigrants "guest" and native-born "hosts" participate in
assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project's
broader impacts are related to immigration policy (including addressing how
immigration may or may not be changing U.S. society). The project will
contribute to greater public understanding of the influence of immigration on
the United States.