* 1121305
* Multiscale Context for Change in Alpine Tundra
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Dale Zimmerman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2015
* USD 219,998.00

Alpine tundra is threatened by climate change because the low-temperature
climates where it exists may be reduced globally. This study will provide a
context for the response of alpine tundra in western North America to climate
change by investigating the community structure of alpine tundra at multiple
spatial scales. The focus is on the spatial extent of processes relevant to
alpine tundra diversity. This study examines the conjecture that the mix of
plant species growing together (or secondarily species diversity) differs along
fine spatial scale gradients in soil characteristics. Soil gradients are nested
within broader geographic-scale gradients determined by topography such as slope
shape and position and these environments are further nested within regional
gradients in climate variables (radiation, temperature, and precipitation). For
example, the amount of water from precipitation at a site is modified by how the
terrain alters the redistribution of snow, and the snowmelt available to plants
is affected by soil texture. New data on the abundance of species on alpine
tundra sites will be collected and used to derive biodiversity (dependent)
variables. Site conditions (independent variables) of soil and surficial
conditions will be examined at fine scale; topographic measures, which are more
general conditions given that they are at larger extents than the plants, will
be examined at a middle scale, and climate variables from established weather
stations will be examined at coarse scale based on extrapolations developed for
mountain topography. In order to explore possible relationships, three
analytical methods will be applied for species composition: Mantel regression
with pairwise dissimilarities of vegetation and environmental difference;
multiscale ordination using canonical correspondence analysis; and multilevel
regression with community composition dependent variables statistically derived
by additional ordinations. For community diversity, multilevel regression will
be used with species richness as the dependent variable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our understanding of
biodiversity and community biogeography by testing hierarchical relations across
spatial scales. Multilevel models will be developed to address the kind of
hierarchical controls that affect plant diversity and community structure across
greater range of scales than done in prior ecological research. This research
will provide new insight into potential ecological responses to climate change,
which is a large-scale phenomenon, because it will take into account the spatial
heterogeneity that exists at the finest scale. The results will inform National
Park Service resource managers about possible future change in alpine tundra
biodiversity, an important visual and aesthetic resource. More broadly, this
study will improve interpretation and contribute to the findings of a global
alpine monitoring network.