* 1121325
* U.S.-Nepal Workshop: Adapting to a Changing Mountain World- Water as Resource and Threat in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya and Andes Mountains, Kathmandu, September 2011.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Daene McKinney, The Mountain Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2012
* USD 70,000.00

1121325 Byers This U.S.-Nepal award supports the workshop Adapting to a Changing
Mountain World: Water as Resource and Threat in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya (HKH)
and Andes Mountains, Kathmandu, September 2011. The workshop focuses on glacial
recession and new lake formation resulting from changing mountain climate and
the subsequent impact on water resources and local communities in the HKH and
Andes mountains. Organized by Drs. Alton Byers, The Mountain Institute and Daene
McKinney, University of Texas at Austin, the two-phased field expedition and
Kathmandu-based workshop will bring together researchers, graduate students,
practitioners, policy makers and local decision makers from the U.S., Nepal, and
Peru to advance understanding of climate change in mountain regions and the
impacts on water resources. It will also promote dialogue among
interdisciplinary participants - geographers, hydrologists, civil and
environmental engineers, glaciologists on vulnerability and adaptation options,
and new field-based international collaborative research projects that address
research priorities and facilitate glacial lake hazard reduction.

This workshop will make important contributions to fundamental knowledge about
climate change in mountain regions, glacier retreat, lake formation, water
supply and societal impacts through scientific collaboration and the exchange of
technical and social perspectives among Andean, HKH, and North American
researchers and practitioners. The South-South format will provide a venue for
Peruvian glaciologists, now recognized as a world leader in tropical glacier
research and glacial lake engineering, to share their knowledge beyond Peruvian
borders with environmental engineers in other mountain regions. For the US PhD
students, all of whom are conducting dissertation research on topics related to
adaptation to climate change in high mountain regions, the workshop will
stimulate further development of their research, provide an opportunity to make
significant contributions to proposal development at the workshop, and
facilitate an expanded network of professional contacts and mentoring
relationships. Also, new interdisciplinary research and field projects of
potential interest to NSF, USAID, and participating countries, is an important
expected outcome.

Adapting to a Changing Mountain World is a direct result of the NSF-USAID funded
workshop in Peru, July 2009, where all participants strongly recommended that a
second workshop be held in the HKH region in 2011 based on the principles of
Andean-Himalayan collaboration and exchange. This will directly facilitate the
exchange of technical and social experience in mitigating the impacts of new
glacial lakes and how people in both regions are adapting to water related
challenges. Key funding partners are: NSF, USAID, DOS, and the International
Center for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD).