* 1121693
* The Molecular Mechanisms of the Mre11/Rad50 DNA Repair Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Scott Nelson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 823,811.00

Intellectual Merit: The goal of this project is to achieve a mechanistic
understanding of the Mre11/Rad50 (MR) DNA repair complex, which is involved in
the processing of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) within eukaryotes, archaea,
and some bacteriophage. DSBs are among the most deleterious forms of DNA damage
and their improper repair may cause gross chromosomal rearrangements, leading to
cellular dysfunction or death. The dual activities of the MR complex (ATP
hydrolysis and nuclease) are required for the repair of DSBs that have been
chemically modified by toxins or proteins. This research project will focus on
defining, in quantitative terms, the kinetics, thermodynamics, and
conformational dynamics of the MR complex. The objectives of this research
project are to: 1) Define the functional role and mechanism of ATP binding and
hydrolysis by Rad50; 2) Determine the mechanism behind the metal-dependent
change in MR complex nuclease activity and to discover the possible roles of
additional proteins in DSB resection; 3) Characterize the conformational changes
in Mre11 and determine the role of Mre11 dimerization. The completion of this
project is expected to increase understanding of DSB repair and, more generally,
how organisms maintain their genomic integrity through multiple generations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project involves collaborations with
both genetic and structural biology laboratories and will therefore expose and
educate undergraduate and graduate students to the synergy that results from the
combination of biochemical, biophysical, and genetic research. The project will
provide high quality training opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students. In addition to the multi-year training of students in the
PI's home department, the PI participates in the Women in Science and
Engineering internship program and will become a mentor for the George
Washington Carver internship program. The goal of these programs are to increase
the diversity of talented individuals choosing science as a career. The PI is
also developing a course that places science journalism students in a research
laboratory where they will attend group meetings, interview members of the
laboratory, and observe daily activities. The objective is for the journalism
students to appreciate the manner and pace at which experimental findings are
obtained. The laboratory members who are being interviewed and observed will
also benefit by learning to explain their research to non-experts. In addition,
the PI is developing a course that combines enzyme theory, practical enzyme
characterization, and modern data fitting/model discrimination analysis.
Throughout the course the PI will use examples from his own research, and when
possible, the students that generated the data under discussion will present the
experiments to their peers. This type of peer-to-peer teaching has been found to
be a very effective learning tool for both the peer-teachers and peer-
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by
the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.