* 1121602
* Molecular Basis of Positional Signaling in Arabidopsis Root Epidermal Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* John Schiefelbein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 08/31/2015
* USD 629,653.00

The development of living things is dependent upon communication between
different cells and tissues, to ensure that the formation of different parts of
the organism occurs in an orderly and coordinated manner. A current challenge in
the field of developmental biology is to define the specific signaling molecules
that are used for this communication and to understand how they function. In
this project, a newly discovered group of signaling molecules, known as germin-
like proteins (GLPs), will be analyzed for their role in the formation and
patterning of cells and tissues of plants. This work will take advantage of the
Arabidopsis root as a simple and effective model organ for analyzing the
molecular and genetic control of development by specific molecules. The GLPs
will be tested for their involvement in the development of different cells and
tissues, and for their interaction with specific receptor molecules. The results
from this project are expected to provide new insights into the ways that cells
and tissues communicate during development. Furthermore, this project has been
designed to provide a rich interdisciplinary training experience for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, and it will
establish a summer research program at the University of Michigan for students
from Long Island University. In the long term, this project is expected to
enable the rational design of plant structures to enhance plant productivity and
growth under a variety of environmental conditions.