* 1121006
* Characterization of Hemolymph Melanization in Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Kevin Clark, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2016
* USD 230,000.00

Understanding how animals and plants defend themselves from infection is
critically important to basic biology, agriculture, and medicine. Central to
defense against infection is the immune system. In insects and other arthropods,
a key component of the immune system is a pathway called the phenoloxidase
cascade, which consists of a complex network of proteins that includes the
enzyme phenoloxidase. Phenoloxidase in turn catalyzes the formation of toxic
immune defense molecules and a type of pigment called melanin. Many studies make
clear that the phenoloxidase cascade is extremely important in immune defense
but how this biochemical pathway is regulated is only partially understood. This
proposal addresses the question of what factors must interact with phenoloxidase
to produce an enzyme that can convert the starting substrate for this reaction
into melanin? To address this question, we will conduct a series of detailed
biochemical studies that will identify the proteins that interact with
phenoloxidase, and functional studies that will identify the components required
to produce a functional enzyme complex. The molecules produced by phenoloxidase
are critical to many biological processes in addition to immunity. These include
wounding responses in plants, pigmentation of animals, and the onset of diseases
like Parkinson's and melanotic cancers. Results of this study will thus
contribute information of importance that extends beyond enhancing our
understanding of immunity. The proposed research also provides an ideal platform
for promoting scientific training and education. The project will provide
independent research opportunities for postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate
trainees in immunology and biochemistry. Results from the study will also be
used to enhance classroom instruction at the high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels.