* 1121771
* Mechanism of Spindle Pole Body Duplication and Separation in Yeast Meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Hong-Guo Yu, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2016
* USD 673,450.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The yeast centrosome, also called the spindle pole
body, organizes microtubules required for a variety of cellular processes that
include cell division. During meiosis, the centrosome is duplicated when
chromosomes replicate. Duplicated centrosomes separate to form a bipolar spindle
required for homolog separation during the first division of meiosis.
Centrosomes duplicate again in the absence of chromosome replication to
establish two spindles for sister chromatid separation in the second meiotic
division. Coordination of centrosome duplication and separation with the two
chromosome segregation cycles in meiosis is fundamental to maintain genome
integrity in eukaryotes. The goal of this project is to determine the molecular
mechanism by which the Aurora kinase Ipl1 and the Polo-like kinase Cdc5 act
antagonistically to regulate centrosome duplication and separation. Using
creative yeast genetics in combination with live-cell microscopy and biochemical
methods, the temporal and spatial requirements of Ipl1 and Cdc5 in centrosome
duplication will be determined. In addition, their phosphorylated substrates
will be identified by a novel phosphoproteome approach and characterized for
their biochemical activities in regulation of centrosome dynamics. These studies
will provide a mechanistic view of protein phosphorylation mediated by Ipl1 and
Cdc5 in yeast centrosome duplication and have general implications for
understanding the mechanism of centrosome dynamics in
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will train
graduate and undergraduate students in genetics and cell biology, and will also
provide unique opportunities for underrepresented and minority students to
design and conduct goal-oriented experiments in their classroom. Students
enrolled in the Experimental Biology course, which the PI teaches once a year,
will tag centrosome components with the green fluorescent protein and screen for
genetic abnormalities of the centrosome in yeast. This research will provide
molecular insights into the regulation of centrosome duplication and contribute
to society by educating those who will be part of our future work force as
scholars and scientists.