* 1121952
* Using Natural Variation to Probe the Evolution, Mechanisms and Function of Imprinting in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mary Gehring, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2015
* USD 970,000.00

Intellectual merit: The genes that an organism inherits from its mother and
father are usually expressed at similar levels. However, some genes exhibit the
phenomenon of imprinted expression, in which the maternally and paternally
inherited gene copies, or alleles, are not expressed equally. Imprinting is
considered epigenetic because the expression level of maternally and paternally
inherited alleles is not determined by the DNA sequence. Imprinting is critical
for normal development in flowering plants and mammals. In plants, imprinting
primarily occurs in endosperm, the embryo-nourishing tissue found within seeds.
Differential expression of maternally and paternally inherited alleles of a gene
in the endosperm is often correlated with differential cytosine DNA methylation,
a chemical modification to the DNA that serves as a key epigenetic mark. The
methylation differences frequently occur at sequences that resemble transposable
elements, invasive pieces of DNA that can move throughout the genome and are
usually methylated. These results have led to the hypothesis that imprinted gene
expression arises as a byproduct of epigenetic control of transposable elements.
Because the presence, genomic location, and epigenetic modification of
transposable elements are variable within and between closely related species,
this research will test the hypothesis that many instances of imprinting could
be specific to alleles from certain genetic backgrounds. Using high-throughput
genome-wide approaches to take advantage of natural genetic and epigenetic
variation, imprinted expression and DNA methylation will be assessed in three
plant species with distinct modes of reproduction and genome structure,
Arabidopsis thaliana, Arabidopsis lyrata, and Zea mays, to test specific
hypothesis about the mechanism, evolution, and function of imprinting in plants.
There has been relatively little effort directed at understanding the degree of
conservation or variability of imprinting within and between species. Examples
of conserved imprinting between distantly related plant species like Arabidopsis
and maize might reflect instances in which the process of imprinting has been
repeatedly adopted at a particular gene to regulate endosperm development. This
research is likely to have substantial outcomes in further determining the
functional consequences of imprinting and in understanding how the control of
transposable elements can lead to important developmental regulatory processes.
In addition, the project will provide a better understanding of the differences
in maternal and paternal contributions to offspring in plant species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project provides interdisciplinary
education and training opportunities for high school students, undergraduates, a
graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow. The research will require the
integration of classical genetics, molecular biology, genomics, and
bioinformatics. This provides a valuable opportunity for biologists to become
skilled in bioinformatics analysis and computer scientists to become conversant
in biology. These skills are increasingly necessary as new technologies drive
biology to become more quantitative. Undergraduate students from primarily
undergraduate minority-serving institutions who do not have access to top-notch
research facilities will work on the project for three summers under the
guidance of the postdoctoral fellow. This experience will provide critical
research experience for the undergraduates and important training in mentoring
for the postdoctoral fellow. Additionally, high school students will take
advantage of tools created as part of this research to learn about the plant
life cycle and mechanisms of inheritance.