* 1121626
* Comparative genome-scale analyses of submergence and anaerobic germination mechanisms in rice and maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Julia Bailey-Serres, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 699,999.00

Flooding events significantly damage agricultural production in the US and
elsewhere. The development of crop cultivars that can survive short-term
flooding can help stabilize and increase food production. The recent recognition
of rice varieties tolerant to short-term flooding has led to the identification
of the submergence tolerance regulator gene called SUB1A. The precise genetic
characterization of SUB1A has allowed breeders to develop new high-yielding rice
varieties with submergence tolerance that are now grown in flood-prone fields of
South and Southeast Asia. This project will continue the molecular
characterization of SUB1A and seek new submergence regulators that act earlier
in development. Rice plants that can survive flooding during seed germination
can reduce labor cost and herbicide use. The effectiveness of combining SUB1A
with the recently identified ANAEROBIC GERMINATION 1 (AG1) gene will be explored
in rice. Additionally, the characterization of molecular responses to flooding
will be extended to corn, a vital grain crop that is flooding sensitive. These
analyses will examine genetic variation in anaerobic germination and submergence
tolerance in maize as well as profile and manipulate molecular responses to
these stresses. The results will provide a greater understanding of sensing,
signaling and response mechanisms to flooding during seed germination and
vegetative growth in rice and maize. The research will be carried out at a
Hispanic Serving institution. Postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
researchers will receive cross-disciplinary training in physiology, molecular
biology, analytical chemistry and systems biology in a multicultural laboratory
and institute environment. The development and dissemination of a science-
learning module will allow 8th graders, many from underrepresented groups, at
Title I schools to participate in hands-on science experiments demonstrating the
significance of plant biology research on food security and sustainable
agriculture. The knowledge obtained from this project will favorably impact
food, feed and fuel production in the US and elsewhere.