* 1121287
* Role of the Plant Kinesin FRA1 in Constructing the Cell Wall
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Ram Dixit, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2015
* USD 634,293.00

Intellectual Merit.Plant cells are encased in a cellulose-rich wall that
regulates cell growth and provides mechanical support to the plant body. The
deposition of cell wall material happens in an orderly manner, which is critical
for the assembly and function of the cell wall. The cortical microtubule
cytoskeleton located beneath the plasma membrane is important to this process
and is thought to act as a scaffold for the directional deposition of cell wall
material. How the cortical microtubule cytoskeleton serves this function is not
clear. This project focuses on the Arabidopsis motor protein FRA1 and will test
the hypothesis that FRA1 guides the movement of components of the cell wall
biosynthetic machinery along cortical microtubules, thus resulting in orderly
cell wall deposition. This hypothesis will be tested by: 1) characterizing the
movement of the FRA1 protein in living cells; 2) determining whether the protein
complexes that synthesize cellulose track with FRA1; and 3) identifying
FRA1-interacting proteins to define additional cargoes of the FRA1 motor
protein. These studies will significantly advance our understanding of cell wall
formation and will lead to the identification of novel proteins/cargoes that are
part of the wall biosynthetic machinery.

Broader Impacts. 1) This project will involve training of undergraduate and
graduate students as well as mentoring of a postdoctoral scholar. 2) Work from
this project will be incorporated into an undergraduate course that is designed
to introduce students to research based on imaging sciences. The goals are to
get undergraduates excited about science and to motivate them to consider a
career in science. 3) Work from this project will be incorporated into the
Future Trek: Science Careers Explorations program in collaboration with the
Academy of Science of St. Louis. The Future Trek program is a K-12 initiative
with an emphasis on under-represented populations. Specifically, the colorful
images and movies generated in this project will be used to engage groups of
middle-school students and teachers in age-appropriate presentations to explore
topics in plant biology. These presentations are accompanied by discussions
about career options in Biology and the academic preparation that is necessary
to pursue these careers. In addition, students and postdocs in the lab will lead
a field trip of the lab and other departmental research facilities for middle-
school/high-school students as part of the Science Mentor Project. The goal is
to expose middle-school/high-school students to an active research environment
and to offer mentoring opportunities to graduate students and postdocs. 4) As
cell wall structure greatly impacts the conversion of plant biomass into
biofuels, this work might provide new ideas for engineering plants for more
efficient biofuel production.