* 1121916
* AI-2 Chemotaxis and Biofilm Formation
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2017
* Gregory Reinhart, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 11/30/2017
* USD 645,811.00

Intellectual merit. The research is directed at determining the role of chemical
communication among bacteria in biofilm formation. A small molecule known as
autoinducer 2 (AI-2) is produced and secreted by diverse species of bacteria.
High levels of AI-2 accumulate when cells exist at high density, as they do in
the mixed-species aggregates known as biofilms. Biofilms frequently coat the
surfaces of both natural and man-made surfaces, and cells living within them are
protected from many chemical, physical, and biological agents that threaten
free-living bacteria. We find that AI-2 is a potent chemoattractant for E. coli
and have identified two proteins that serve as the receptor for AI-2. The
project has two aims. (1) To determine the mechanism by which the AI-2 binding
protein LsrB interacts with the transmembrane signal-transducer protein Tsr to
initiate a chemotaxis response. (2) To determine whether AI-2 attracts free-
swimming E. coli cells to biofilms and helps them to adapt themselves
metabolically to biofilm life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The
research will be pursued in part by undergraduate and graduate students, who
will receive training in molecular biology, bacterial physiology, and
microfluidic nanotechnology. The research will be closely integrated with course
work. The research is highly interdisciplinary. The investigators include a
molecular microbiologist, a chemical engineer, a physical biochemist, and a
synthetic organic chemist. This provides an excellent opportunity for training
students. In addition, the research addresses an important environmental
problem. Biofilms foul surfaces and serve as reservoirs for harmful bacteria in
a variety of habitats. Knowledge about the chemical signals bacteria use to
coordinate their activities to form and maintain unwanted biofilms can be
applied to combat them.