* 1121301
* The Role Of Gene Duplication in the Floral Symmetry in Dipsacales
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Dianella Howarth, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 10/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

The nearly endless diversity of floral shape, color, and size, has captivated
humans throughout history. How gene changes affect these traits is a compelling
question in biology. Close observation of diverse flowers uncovers significant
constraint on how they form. Approximately 70% of flowering plant species
falling into a group that fundamentally have five parts (e.g., five petals) and
strict patterns of how these parts are oriented. The greatest distinction is
between flowers that are radially symmetrical, with all the petals equidistant
from each other, and flowers that are bilaterally symmetrical with a single
plane of symmetry that divides the flower in half from top to bottom. This
project uses Dipsacales (honeysuckle and its relatives) to examine the genetic
basis of evolutionary shifts in flower symmetry. Diversification in the
Dipsacales shows multiple shifts between radially symmetrical groups and
different forms of bilateral symmetry. The shifts to bilateral symmetry
correlate with duplications in certain genes, suggesting that multiple copies of
these genes are needed to form a more complex bilaterally symmetrical flower.
This project will build on previous evolutionary examinations of these "floral
symmetry genes" to determine how shifts in where and when these genes operate
affect shifts in floral symmetry among related groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all scientists had an inspirational teacher or
parent who exposed them to science, highlighting the need to reach as many
students as possible with active science education. St. John's University,
situated in the most diverse county in the country, with a student body
dominated by under-represented groups, provides investigators the opportunity to
expose students from all levels and backgrounds to science. The project will
provide research opportunities for diverse undergraduates as well as high school
students from Forest Hills High School. These students will learn modern
molecular biology techniques through hands on experience and close mentoring.