* 1121898
* Memory of a Drought:  Training Arabidopsis Plants to Withstand Dehydration Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2016
* Michael Fromm, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2016
* USD 763,929.00

Intellectual Merit: Sensing environmental changes and initiating an adequate
response is critical for a plant's survival. Previous exposure to a stress can
make a plant more resistant to future exposures by producing faster and/or
stronger reactions to the stress. Altered responses imply that plants exercise a
form of "memory" from a previous stress suggesting that plants could be
"trained" to withstand future stresses. However, the mechanisms involved in
plant stress memory are unknown leaving a fundamental biological question
unanswered. The goals of this project are to examine whether repetitive
dehydration stress causes altered responses indicative of plant's "stress
memory" and to reveal factors involved in the mechanism. The specific aims are:
1) To analyze the plant's transcriptional and physiological responses to
multiple dehydration stress treatments with the purpose of identifying the
subset of trainable genes; 2) To identify genes demonstrating epigenetic memory
by identifying trainable genes with persistently high levels of epigenetic
marks; 3) To examine the roles of the ATX1 chromatin modifying protein and the
hormone Abscisic Acid (ABA) in dehydration stress memory and training. Results
from this study may broadly impact research on other types of plant stresses. A
long term practical goal is to enhance the ability to generate crops that can
better withstand recurring patterns of drought spells. This should be a fruitful
area for future research both in terms of new science and in terms of applied
value. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed activities will
positively impact human resource development through the direct training of
scientists at the undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate level. Schools in
rural Nebraska supply classes and laboratories with enthusiastic and motivated
undergraduate students. The project will emphasize recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups and encourage them to consider a career in biology. To
further integrate research with education, undergraduate students will be
engaged in small individual bioinformatics research projects, and week-long
summer workshops will be organized for students from small liberal arts
colleges. Also, the project will continue to be involved with University
outreach programs for science teachers from the Lincoln high schools with the
goal of acquainting them with cutting-edge genome/epigenome analyses and
technologies.