* 1121023
* Molecular mechanisms for maintaining genome stability at replication forks
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Alexandra Sobeck, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2015
* USD 530,117.00

Intellectual Merit: Chromosomes are duplicated during the S-phase of the cell
cycle by the process of DNA replication. Once replication is initiated, two
replication forks emerge from the origin of replication and progress in opposite
directions along the DNA. When a moving replication fork encounters a DNA lesion
on the template DNA strand, it can stall and subsequently collapse into a DNA
double stranded break, which represents one of the most deleterious and
mutagenic types of DNA damage for a cell. To stabilize, repair and restart
replication at the damaged forks, a complex of DNA repair and replication
proteins is recruited to stalled replication forks in order, thus protecting
cells from genomic instability during the replication stage. Among these crucial
proteins are a group referred to as the Fanconi anemia proteins (so-named
because they were first discovered as being mutated in cases of Fanconi anemia),
which play essential, yet poorly characterized, roles in maintaining replication
fork integrity during every S-phase of the cell cycle. To explore how these
proteins work, this research project will build on observations that DNA damage
during S-phase triggers dissociation of a FANCD2-FANCI heterodimer into the
monomeric subunits, which in turn are recruited separately to stalled
replication forks where they fulfill different roles in fork repair and restart
during S-phase. Research will test the question of whether FANCD2 and FANCI
function separately to recruit distinct DNA repair protein complexes to sites of
stalled replication forks as part of a process to restart replication. The
results from this study will provide novel insights into the molecular
mechanisms that ensure faithful and complete replication in the face of road-
blocking DNA lesions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research
is ideally suited for training future scientists, including two undergraduate
research assistants, and two postdoctoral research associates. Lab scientists
will acquire a broad set of experimental skills in the areas of molecular and
cellular biology and biochemistry. Undergraduate assistants will be individually
mentored and assigned integral roles in the research project. Encouraged to
think creatively and independently, undergraduates will be involved in every
step of developing important strategies and reagents as current and future
research directions are being explored. To optimally prepare students and
postdocs for future roles as scientists and lab leaders, several additional
mechanisms are in place: All lab staff participate in, and present at, weekly
joint lab meetings that bring together several other faculty and students.
Undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows are encouraged to present their
research at national and international meetings in form of poster and oral
presentations. Moreover, postdoctoral associates and undergraduate students have
frequent opportunities to network with visiting scholars and are encouraged to
initiate research collaborations to nurture their multidisciplinary research
skills and experience. Results from this research project will be utilized in a
new course, co-initiated by the PI on current and highly relevant topics of
genomic stability for undergraduate and graduate students, that places strong
emphasis on understanding experimental approaches, analyzing primary literature,
designing future research goals and developing individual and group presentation
skills. Lastly, scientific results of the project will be discussed and
disseminated via publications and international meetings and contacts.