* 1121288
* UW CEMRI on Structured Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 18,000,001.00

The University of Wisconsin (UW) - Madison CEMRI is founded on a network of
national and international collaborations that will simultaneously tackle global
challenges in materials research and engineering, bring new international
perspectives to the materials educational environment, benefit regional Midwest
and national institutions, and form regional alliances that will transcend
individual research areas and vastly advance the climate for materials research
and education throughout the Upper Midwest. The CEMRI unites a wide array of
researchers all focused on the central theme of "Structured Interfaces."

The proposed CEMRI is organized into three interdisciplinary research groups
(IRGs) and an interdisciplinary education group (IEG). Their activities are
summarized as follows:

IRG 1: New Semiconductors from an Unstable World explores the creation of new
multi-element compounds and semiconductor materials by gaining a fundamental
understanding of the effects of strain, dimension, and flexibility on their
phase behavior, stability, defect nucleation and properties.

IRG 2: Molecular and Electronic Dynamics at Organic-Inorganic Interfaces
develops and applies a fundamental understanding of charge transport near and
across interfaces between organic and inorganic materials. It does so through
state-of-the-art probes of electronic transport and structural dynamics, theory,
device fabrication and the development of new interfaces.

IRG 3: Functional Liquid Crystalline Assemblies, Materials and Interfaces
designs, synthesizes and processes new classes of functional liquid crystalline
materials (LCs), composites and interfaces. It does so through strategies that
fuse the design of multifunctional polymers and mesogens with studies of
confinement and dynamic ordering of molecular assemblies at interfaces of soft
anisotropic materials.

The CEMRI has been conceived in a manner that enables each IRG and the IEG to
function in a self-sufficient manner. With a combination of UW and several non-
UW participants, each IRG represents a small network embedded in the regional
and international hub defined by the CEMRI. However, a common interest in the
fundamental physics and chemistry of interfaces and their application in
devices, including their preparation, characterization and theoretical
description, provides a natural connection between the IRGs.

The UW CEMRI also includes an Interdisciplinary Education Group (IEG) that plays
an integral role in the center's mission. Amongst a variety of products, the IEG
produces instructional aids that bring the excitement of cutting-edge research
to diverse audiences. Kits produced by the UW CEMRI are based on the center's
research, and serve to illustrate the importance of materials science and
engineering and its role in solving grand challenges facing society in the 21st
century. The CEMRI also distributes content on its IEG website, which it makes
available to the public at no cost. The CEMRI's Research Experiences for
Undergraduates and Research Experiences for Teachers programs help ensure that
diverse groups of technically able students are attracted to careers in
materials science and engineering.

The CEMRI also supports and operates state-of-the-art materials characterization
facilities that serve as a focal point for materials research throughout the
Upper Midwest region. The center is a participant in the Materials Facilities
Research Network (MFRN), whose goal is to expand access to world-class
instrumentation to users throughout the nation.

* a NSF Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)