* 1121960
* Collaborative Research: Nutritional physiology of life history allocation trade-offs
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Spencer Behmer, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2016
* USD 328,516.00

Life history traits such as longevity, dispersal and total reproductive output
are key organismal adaptations. Many life history traits are negatively coupled
with each other because nutrients allocated towards one trait (e.g. egg
production) are not available for another trait (e.g. production of lipid fuel
for dispersal). The magnitude of trade-offs can be strongly influenced by the
amount and quality of nutrients available to an organism, but currently little
is known about how nutrient inputs affect life history trade-offs. Here this
issue is investigated using a wing-polymorphic cricket, Gryllus firmus. This
cricket exists as one of two genetically-specified forms, one adapted for flight
(dispersal) at the expense of egg production, the other adapted to maximize
reproduction at the expense of dispersal (it lacks flight muscle). Using a range
of well-defined diets that differ in their protein-carbohydrate composition (and
total caloric content), a comparison will be made that reveals how these two
contrasting phenotypes differentially extract, interconvert, and eliminate
protein and carbohydrate demanded by their specific life history. Specifically,
this study will measure consumption and assimilation of protein and
carbohydrates into body tissues, document how these two nutrients are allocated
to flight and reproduction organs, and use radiotracer and enzymological studies
of biochemical pathways to study interconversion and metabolic elimination of
these two nutrients. An important focus will be identifying the physiological
mechanisms that allow a particular phenotype to acquire/produce the biomolecules
it needs (for its life history) in a constantly shifting nutritional
environment. Results will be applicable to a wide range of organisms, including
life history traits (e.g. longevity) in humans. This project also has a
significant instructional component, including the training of a postdoctoral
associate, research opportunities for undergraduate students, and the
development of workshops for secondary school educators which provides novel
approaches to teaching basic principles of evolution.