* 1121942
* Folding of Dihydrofolate Reductase and the Response Regulators
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* C Robert Matthews, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 706,861.00

The goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that the interplay between
chain connectivity and hydrophobic clusters of branched aliphatic side chains in
two members of the very common Rossmann-fold family of proteins, CheY and
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), dictates their folding free energy surfaces.
Available evidence on both proteins suggests that locally-connected clusters of
isoleucine, leucine and valine side chains rapidly collapse via subdomains that
can enhance or impede subsequent folding reactions leading to the native
conformation. A battery of spectroscopic methods, at equilibrium and interfaced
to ultra-rapid mixing systems, will probe the size, shape and pair-wise
distances in the chemically-denatured state and in partially-folded states that
appear in the microsecond time range after dilution to native-favoring
conditions for CheY, complementing previous findings on DHFR. Chemical shift
index and paramagnetic relaxation enhancement NMR measurements will probe for
nonrandom structure in the chemically denatured state. Complementary pulse-
quench hydrogen exchange experiments on CheY will probe the formation of
secondary structure at the peptide and the site-specific level in the early
intermediates. Mutational analysis will test the role of local and nonlocal ILV
clusters in driving these early folding reactions, and permutations of the
sequences will test the role of the connectivity of the polypeptide chain in
driving the formation of these clusters and the N- and C-terminal subdomains.
Appropriate permuted variants of CheY will be subjected to single molecule
pulling experiments to study the effect of subdomain connectivity and the ILV
cluster integrity on the cooperativity of the unfolding reaction and reveal the
stabilization of partially-folded states. The experimental data will be used to
validate course-grained MD simulations of the folding reactions of CheY and
DHFR, and high-resolution simulations on CheY. It is anticipated that the
combined application of experimental and computational methods on the same
target will substantially enhance the value of both approaches and expedite the
solution of the protein folding problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The protein
folding problem remains as one of the outstanding challenges in molecular
biophysics, and its solution would have a major impact on biology and the
biotechnology industry. To expedite a solution to the folding problem, a
collaborative network of investigators has been established to generate a
comprehensive experimental data set on a single protein target that will
validate companion coarse-grained and high-resolution MD simulations of its
folding reaction. This collaborative approach will serve as a paradigm for the
solution of other complex problems in biology. A micro-channel mixing system has
been developed over the course of this work that allows access to microsecond
folding reactions and that can be interfaced to a variety of spectroscopic
methods. This technology has been shared with colleagues at other institutions,
and its dissemination in the open literature has enabled others to study the
early folding events in their target systems. Pursuit of these research
objectives will also provide training opportunities for high school students,
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, and the scientific
advances are being incorporated into a graduate molecular biophysics course.