* 1121770
* Structure-Function Relationships in Metalloenzymes with Multiple Redox-active Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Marius Schmidt, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 07/31/2013
* USD 400,265.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Research will be undertaken on three metal-
containing proteins that allow particular bacteria to interconvert ammonia and
nitrite. Without these proteins, such an interconversion would be too slow for
bacterial survival. This project involves the development and application of
time-resolved X-ray crystallography and Laue crystallography methods in an
effort to obtain structural information on three multi-heme respiratory enzymes;
cytochrome c nitrile reductase, octaheme tetrahtionate reductase and
hydroxylamine oxidoreductase, enzymes which have broadly similar architectures.
The goal of the project is to elucidate the mechanism of the multi-electron
interconversion of ammonium and nitrite. The investigative techniques are
relatively new and have enormous untapped potential, the development of which is
an important complementary aim of the project. During data collection in
conventional crystallography the entire crystal is exposed to X-rays for several
hours. However, exposing a protein to X-rays often results in changes on the
time scale of the conventional experiment. This is especially true for metal-
containing proteins such as the ones of interest in this project. As a result,
the structure one obtains is often not that of the original molecule, reflecting
instead the average of the original structure and those of the protein after
modification by the X-rays. By contrast, a Laue pattern is obtained in 100
picoseconds, too short a time for radiation damage to appear. As a consequence,
the Laue method is ideally suited to the investigation of proteins that are
susceptible to X-ray damage. The Laue method can also be used to make a "movie"
of molecular changes during a reaction, by piecing together exposures taken at
varying times after reaction initiation (time resolved
crystallography).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;Three graduate
students per year will work on this project. The project's highly
interdisciplinary nature provides the students with a wide breadth of skills
that will make them highly competitive when they go on to independent careers
after graduation. The project will sponsor an average of three undergraduate
researchers per year, in addition to two high school students and two high
school teachers who will perform summer research. The graduate students
supported on this project also provide direct supervision for many of the
undergraduates as well as one high school student and teacher.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also provides insight into the growing
environmental problem of nitrogen cycle imbalance. Ammonia (a major component of
fertilizer) and nitrite are two examples of "reactive nitrogen"; that is,
nitrogen usable by many living organisms, as opposed to "elemental nitrogen"
which makes up 89% of the air we breathe, but is directly usable by only a few
bacteria. Over the last 50 years the balance between reactive and elemental
nitrogen has shifted significantly towards the former, as more fertilizer was
generated to produce food and (recently) biofuels. This shift in balance is
having many unintended negative consequences, which will soon have to be
mitigated. A better understanding of ammonia-nitrite interconversion may lead to
the more efficient use of ammonia fertilizer, and thus help redress the
imbalance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is receiving co-funding from the
Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry Division