* 1121428
* Collaborative Research:  The diving physiology of Chelonians:  A comparative study of three turtle species
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Paul Ponganis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 268,970.00

This project investigates the diving physiology of turtles in order to assess
the ability of these reptiles to adapt to increased threats of climate change
and pollution, and to understand the high mortality from by-catch of marine
turtles during fisheries activities. Turtles differ from other divers such as
marine mammals in that they primarily store oxygen in their lungs and, in
addition, have a three-chambered heart, in which a single ventricle selectively
shunts blood primarily to either the lungs or the body. Turtles also survive
long dormant periods, during which the blood is devoid of oxygen and filled with
high concentrations of lactic acid. With this tolerance for lack of oxygen, it
is unclear why there is such high mortality of marine turtles during short
periods of net entanglement.&lt;br/&gt;Self-contained physiological data loggers
will be applied to one species of freshwater turtle and two species of marine
turtles in order to document heart rate, blood oxygen depletion, and blood
lactate concentrations during a variety of conditions including undisturbed
spontaneous dives and net entanglement. Because of the dependency on lung
oxygen, it is hypothesized that a) heart rate will not decrease during dives, b)
the rate of blood oxygen depletion will correlate with heart rate during dives,
c) that the magnitude and degree of cardiac shunting will vary under different
diving conditions, and d), in contrast to most dives, high lactate levels will
occur during net entanglement due to struggling. &lt;br/&gt;This project
features collaboration of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, the University of
California Irvine and the University of Tokyo (marine turtle studies). Broader
impacts of the project include training of the post-doctoral fellow, graduate
students, and undergraduates, outreach programs to high school students in the
United States, teaching of a class in diving physiology at the University of
Tokyo, and the development of a blood lactate sensor/recorder that can be
applied to other diving and exercise physiology studies in the future.