* 1121375
* Dissecting the Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Intimate Relationship between Cellulose Microfibrils and Cortical Microtubules
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2017
* Ying Gu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 11/30/2017
* USD 638,214.00

Intellectual Merit. Cellulose, an organic compound found in all plants, is the
most abundant biological material on earth. Cellulose constitutes the major raw
material that is used to produce paperboard, paper, lumber, and textiles. It is
also one of the main sources of biomass for the production of renewable biofuels
in the near future. Despite overwhelming interest, little is known about how
plant cells make cellulose. Cellulose is synthesized by cellulose synthase
complexes. Cellulose synthase complexes had long been proposed to interact with
cortical microtubules, fibrous structural components within cells, before recent
live cell imaging showing that cellulose synthase complexes move on trajectories
that parallel the underlying cortical microtubules. Yet a molecular link between
microtubules and cellulose synthase complexes is missing. The principle
investigator recently identified the first interacting protein of cellulose
synthase complexes, named CSI1, which is an excellent candidate for the missing
link. The project is aimed to characterize CSI1 with respect to its interactions
with cellulose synthase complexes and microtubules. Researchers will use a
battery of genetic and biochemical assays and also high-end microscopy to study
the connection between cellulose synthase complexes and microtubules, and
determine how these connections developed inside the plant cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The development. of alternatives to
fossil fuels as an energy source is an urgent global priority. Lignocellulosic
biomass in the form of plant materials (for example, grasses and woody species)
offers the opportunity of a renewable, relatively greenhouse-gas-neutral source
of sugars that can be converted to ethanol and other liquid fuels. Considering
cellulosic biomass are expected to become one of the main sources of biomass for
the production of renewable biofuels, understanding the mechanism by which plant
cells make cellulose may be of great interest for energy producing agents. The
basic knowledge gained from understanding how plants make cellulose will be
applied to modify bioenergy crops with regard to traits related to the
composition and overall content of biomass. The project will also offer great
training opportunities to young scientists including undergraduate, graduate
students, and postdocs. This project will allow principal investigator to
participate in outreach programs offered by Eberly College of Science at Penn
State University, the summer workshop for K-12 teachers and/or students, and
High-School Science Project aimed to improve the scientific knowledge of the
general group or a specific student group outside of a school setting.