* 1121252
* Next-Generation Materials for Plasmonics and Spintronics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Anil Virkar, University of Utah
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 12,250,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the University of Utah's Center of Excellence
for Materials Research and Innovation (Utah CEMRI*) on Next Generation Materials
for Plasmonics and Organic Spintronics is to foster interdisciplinary basic
research on new materials, develop the underlying theoretical and experimental
science, train the next generation of scientists, create curiosity and
excitement in Science, Math, and Engineering among the nation's youth, transmit
the knowledge to the broadest possible segments of our society, and lay the
foundation of the next generation science and technology that will revolutionize
society. This will be accomplished through a number of research, educational and
outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Utah CEMRI includes two
interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs), namely Plasmonic Metamaterials from
the Terahertz to the Ultraviolet (IRG 1), and Organic Spintronics (IRG 2). IRG 1
will focus on understanding and exploiting the properties of surface plasmon
polaritons in artificially structured materials (metamaterials) across a broad
range of the electromagnetic spectrum. The goals of IRG 1 include creatingnew
optical tools, materials and device architectures in the THz spectral range,
demonstrating the applicability of magneto-plasmons to improve spin injection
into organic semiconductors and developing capabilities for plasmon-enhanced UV
resonant optical spectroscopies. IRG 2 will focus on understanding and
manipulating spin excitations in several different spin-related organic devices,
including organic spin-valves, spin-organic light emitting diodes, and spin-
enhanced organic photovoltaics for solar energy harvesting. Using fundamental
electrical, optical and magnetic studies, the primary goal of this group is to
enhance basic understanding of spin interactions in organic materials, including
hyperfine, spin-orbit and exchange. These studies will be used to develop spin-
based organic light emitting diodes, which have applications in magnetic memory
and displays, and low-cost organic photovoltaic cells with enhanced conversion
efficiency for solar energy. Seed projects will be funded through a competitive
peer review process with a goal of leading the Center into emerging
transformative research areas and forming the basis of a new future IRG. All
research projects will be regularly reviewed on a competitive basis to maintain
high levels of scientific excellence, collaboration and productivity. In order
to expand the scope of research and broaden the research perspectives of
graduate students and post-docs, Utah CEMRI members will actively engage in
substantive collaborations with universities, industry and national labs in the
US and abroad. The results of research will be published in high quality, high
impact refereed journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important role of the Utah
CEMRI is to broaden participation in the research endeavor. This involves
actively working to increase the diversity among students, post-docs and faculty
members, with increased participation from members of under-represented groups.
The Utah CEMRI will implement educational and outreach activities designed to
impact K-12 students, teachers (RET), undergraduate students (REU),
underrepresented groups, and broad segments of society through active
participation of all center members. These activities include an annual Science
Olympiad, Discover Engineering program for high school students, Partner School
Program for K-12 students, Hi-GEAR (Girls Engineering Abilities Realized) summer
camp for female high school students, ACCESS program to encourage women to
pursue Science, and REU and RET programs. All major diversity, education, and
outreach programs will be regularly assessed to ensure their efficacy and
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*An NSF Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC)