* 1121893
* Collaborative Research:  SPK1-ROP Signaling at the ER surface: Implications for ERES Assembly and Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Daniel Szymanski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 08/31/2018
* USD 917,565.00

Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activities The architecture and growth
properties of plants are fundamentally important to modern food and renewable
energy production systems. However, a lack of knowledge about the protein
machineries and cellular mechanisms of growth makes it nearly impossible to
engineer crop plants for optimal growth and composition. In plants, the leaf
epidermis is a mechanosensitive sheet that dictates the growth properties and
architecture of the organ. The long-range goal of this research is to understand
how protein complexes and cellular polymers coordinate epidermal growth. Direct
knowledge about the cellular mechanisms of information flow and growth will
drive future crop improvement strategies. The goal for this project is to
determine how an evolutionarily conserved signaling protein termed SPIKE1
coordinates the production, delivery, and assembly of raw materials during
growth. The Szymanski and Stahelin laboratories will test their central
hypothesis that SPIKE1 membrane-binding and small GTPase activation at specific
domains of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) coordinates cargo export and growth.
They will pursue three research objectives. Objective #1 is to determine how
SPK1-dependent small GTPase activation and its localization to subdomains of the
ER relate to vesicle trafficking and cell morphogenesis. Their working
hypothesis is that SPK1 GEF activity promotes ER exit site assembly and
efficient protein recycling between the ER and the Golgi. Objective #2 is to
discover the cellular mechanisms by which SPK1 is restricted to a punctate
distribution on the surface of the ER. Their working hypothesis is that SPK1
binding to phosphatidylserine is sensitive to membrane fluidity and mediates ER
localization in living cells. Objective #3 is to learn if conserved Golgi-
localized protein complexes are intermediaries in a SPIKE1 cell shape control
pathway. Our working hypothesis is that SPIKE1 promotes small GTPase activation
of Golgi-localized protein complexes that regulate cargo trafficking. Their
preliminary data indicate that SPIKE1 signals promote the formation of, and
arise from specialized domains of the ER. These ER exit sites are commonly known
as the entry point for anterograde protein trafficking in the secretory pathway.
This research is expected to define a new importance for an ER domain that
includes small GTPase signaling and the integration of intracellular growth
control systems. Given the conserved nature of SPIKE-like proteins and their
signaling targets, this research is likely to have a broad impact on the cell
morphogenesis field.

Broader Impacts Our research explores challenging new areas of plant cell
biology and aims to provide the knowledge base that will enable the engineering
of improved crops. The project is interdisciplinary and closely integrates
research and learning activities. For example, post-doctoral fellows and
graduate students at Purdue and Notre Dame will develop and supervise
undergraduate research projects. Undergraduate researchers will learn scientific
writing and will present their work at both local and national scientific
meetings. Team learning and problem solving are central to the research plan.
The research projects include cross-disciplinary research between the Stahelin
and Szymanski labs. Research discoveries will be discussed in bi-monthly face-
to-face meetings that are held in concert with the Chicago cytoskeleton
meetings. The graduate students and post-docs will receive broad training that
includes proper data management, effective oral presentations, and scientific
writing. The research activities from this project will be published in high
profile journals, incorporated into the a graduate plant cell biology course,
featured in web-based news releases, and will be featured in a new web resource
on SPIKE-like signaling proteins. As done in the past, new mutant strains will
be donated to the ABRC stock center. The project will also generate vectors and
strains associated with organelle-specific phospholipid modification that will
be broadly used by the plant cell biology community.