* 1121778
* Mechanistic Investigations of Ketosteroid Isomerase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Daniel Herschlag, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,409,272.00

Enzymes are the macromolecules within cells that accelerate the specific
chemical transformations needed for life. Much of biochemistry research in the
mid-20th century focused on identifying the individual reactions that are found
in biology and how these reactions come together to make metabolic pathways. As
these reactions and pathways were discovered, focus shifted to the specific
enzymes responsible for each reaction. Much of this work involved necessary
basic characterization, and studies by many investigators were able to describe
enzyme-catalyzed reactions in terms of chemical transformations that involve
enzyme-bound cofactors (which are often vitamins or derived from vitamins) and
specific amino acid side chains to facilitate certain types of chemical
transformations. The majority of work in enzymology in the second half of the
20th century focused on determining these chemical pathways for the various
transformations catalyzed by enzymes. This phase of research in biochemistry and
enzymology has been highly successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second fundamental
question is: What are the mechanisms that enzymes use to achieve their enormous
rate enhancements and exquisite specificities? Speculations and models about the
origin of the catalytic power of enzymes accompanied the above studies, but did
not advance to attain the near-closure that the chemical mechanisms have.
Important generalizations have been made, such as the use of binding energy from
interactions within enzyme active sites to facilitate catalysis, thereby linking
specificity and catalysis. Nevertheless, there are multiple, competing
descriptions of enzymatic catalysis. One measure of the degree of closure in an
academic area is the descriptions of that area in textbooks. For the mechanisms
of enzyme specificity and rate enhancements, the treatments vary greatly from
text to text and often provide present anecdotal information about particular
enzymes or the names of models without clear description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
goal of this project is to provide in-depth and fundamental understanding of how
enzymes achieve their rate enhancements. This field is ripe for advances because
of the powerful tools that have been developed over the past decades. The
project will utilize traditional approaches but also combine them with
additional chemical, physical, and computational tools. Such a broad-based
approach will be required to attain an integrated understanding of enzyme
energetics and physical properties and this in turn will require intense focus
on a system that is amenable to such an assault. Prior research has shown that
the enzyme ketosteroid isomerase (KSI) is ideal; it is highly tractable and
amenable to plethora of approaches. Two modes of catalysis that are used by KSI
and common to many enzymes will be explored: general acid/base catalysis (GABC)
and transition state complemetarity (via a so-called oxyanion
hole).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important component of this project is
introducing high school students to careers in science to increase the
broadening participation of underrepresented groups. A workshop will be
initiated for high school students that will include interactions and
discussions with graduate students. These workshops are intended to inform
students with a clear interest in science how to train for a scientific career.
The students will receive advice and mentorship through this program to
cultivate the students interest in science. The project will continue to promote
the training of students at all levels through experimental research and
curriculum development.