* 1121689
* RUI: Adaptive integration of bilateral inputs to rat somatosensory cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Michael Wiest, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2016
* USD 511,775.00

How do sensory signals in different parts of the brain get combined to form a
single unified perception that we experience? Despite amassing a wealth of
detail in the past century about the cellular components of the brain, this
fundamental question as to how their activities are coordinated or integrated,
remains largely unanswered. The experiments proposed here would begin to uncover
how neurons in the rat's touch sensory system combine signals from long whiskers
on the two sides of its face when it judges the width of a tunnel opening in the
dark. The approach is to record the electrical activity of sensory neurons while
trained rats report whether they sense a wide or a narrow opening with their
facial whiskers. Selectively turning off neurons on one side of the brain or the
other (using a drug) will quantify how much the signals from the two sides of
the face are being mixed in different task conditions. Thus these experiments
will begin to explain the remarkable ability of neurons to change the mix of
sensory inputs in order to adapt and optimize their processing for changing
circumstances. Using the rat as a model system makes it feasible to probe
fundamental cellular mechanisms by which assemblies of neurons communicate.
Principles of flexible neural communication gleaned from the rat model will
likely shed light on analogous neural organization in evolutionarily higher
organisms including humans. At the same time, the next generation of
undergraduate women will be trained in quantitative analysis and cutting-edge
behavioral neurophysiology techniques.