* 1121973
* RUI: Coordinated modulation of a multi-layered neuromuscular system
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Patsy Dickinson, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2015
* USD 516,370.00

Although behavior is controlled by the nervous system, neuronal output is
filtered through the neuromuscular system and is altered by feedback pathways.
All components of such systems can be altered (modulated) by hormones or
neurotransmitters. However, because these components interact in complex ways,
the behavioral effects of modulating individual components are difficult to
predict. The goal of this project is to extend our understanding of the control
and modulation of the multi-component neuromuscular systems that underlie
rhythmic behaviors, particularly the ways in which the multiple components that
make up complete rhythmic neuromuscular systems are modulated to produce
adaptive behaviors. The project will use physiological recordings in a simple
model system (the crustacean heart) to examine modulation at all levels,
including electrical activity in the central nervous system, movements generated
by the muscles, and the effects of the known feedback systems. The approach will
be comparative, examining the effects of two structurally related molecules that
have similar effects on the whole system, and the effects of a third molecule,
also structurally related to the first two, whose effects on the neuromuscular
system as a whole differ substantially from the first two. The general
principles uncovered should advance our understanding of both the extent to
which different components of a system, particularly feedback systems, are
modulated, and the ways in which such modulatory effects are able to interact to
produce a predicted final output or behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition,
because this work will be conducted at an undergraduate college, it will
contribute to the preparation, retention and interest of undergraduates in
science. Students, who will contribute both intellectually and in hands-on work,
will include both underrepresented minorities and women, as has been the case in
the PI's lab in the past.