* 1121714
* RUI: Evolution of Phosphate Starvation Response in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Dennis Wykoff, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 457,586.00

Intellectual merit. This project investigates how the phosphate signal
transduction (PHO) pathway changes over evolutionary time in the Ascomycota
lineage, with the goal of understanding how evolutionary transitions in this
pathway alter growth in different niches. Using the yeasts Candida glabrata and
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, these studies focus on the regulation of
transcription, elucidation of the ancestral eukaryotic PHO pathway, and how
phosphate starvation in all eukaryotes is sensed. Studies with C. glabrata will
determine the binding specificity of the transcription factor Pho4.
Pho4-regulated promoters in C. glabrata do not contain canonical CACGTG
sequences and must utilize different sequences relative to Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. The hypothesis that CgPho4 has multiple specificities for PHO
promoters will be tested with in vivo (expression from promoter fragments) and
in vitro (mobility shift) approaches. This project will capitalize on previous
studies demonstrating the neofunctionalization of a C. glabrata acid phosphatase
protein, Pmu2. Domains of Pmu2 will be combined with ancestral Pmu1 domains and
phosphatase kinetics will be measured. The changes in protein sequence allowing
for neofunctionalization will be identified and should be applicable to
understanding how new functions evolve more generally. Studies with S. pombe
will focus on the identification of Pho7 as a likely transcription factor
mediating the phosphate starvation response in S. pombe. The hypothesis that
Pho7 binds PHO promoters will be tested utilizing in vivo and in vitro
approaches. Finally, the PHO pathway from Chlamydomonas (a green algae) and S.
pombe will be genetically reconstituted in S. cerevisiae, allowing for the
determination of whether common metabolites in all eukaryotes signal phosphate
starvation. Phosphate starvation impacts important cell biological responses and
altering the uptake of phosphate for bioremediation or altering the
pathogenicity of bacteria and fungi would benefit society. The proposed work
will advance our knowledge of transcription factor specificity, the process of
neofunctionalization, the possible conservation of metabolic signals of
phosphate starvation in all eukaryotes, and a deeper understanding of the
evolutionary transitions required in pathways for speciation.

Broader impacts. These studies are accessible to relatively new scientists such
as undergraduate students and Master's level students. The experiments are
parsed into small projects suitable for undergraduates, such as protein
purification, enzymatic assays, and plasmid construction. Students will gain
valuable experience working with genetics, strain construction, molecular
biological techniques, sterile techniques, and biochemistry. Ownership of a task
within the framework of a larger project is valuable for students' self-
confidence and encourages future self-reliance. This work will support numerous
undergraduate and Master's students at Villanova University who will go on to
perform scientific research. Students from disadvantaged backgrounds are
actively recruited and encouraged to stay in science by positive research
experiences and strong mentorship.