* 1121369
* RUI: The role of Rhesus proteins in Agnathan fishes as a mechanism of ammonia excretion
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Susan Edwards, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 355,654.00

Ammonia is a nitrogenous waste product that results from the breakdown of
proteins, if allowed to accumulate it is highly toxic and therefore many aquatic
organisms have developed mechanisms to rid their bodies of ammonia as soon as it
is produced. Recently a family of membrane proteins, the Rhesus (Rh)
glycoproteins has been shown to have the ability to transport ammonia in higher
vertebrates. The Rh glycoproteins have been identified in a wide range of
organisms and this suggests they have a long evolutionary history. Many key
physiological processes are based on the functions of the membrane proteins that
are the focus of this proposal. Since those proteins may have evolved in a
unique way in the basal vertebrates, relative to higher vertebrates, this
project has the potential to answer fundamental questions on the evolution of
different modes of ammonia transport in vertebrates. In addition, the unique
ability of the basal vertebrates (the jawless fishes: hagfishes and lampreys) to
tolerate a wide range of internal and environmental ammonia concentrations, will
enable us to answer fundamental questions regarding the control of ammonia
transport and the plasticity of membrane proteins involved. In addition, we
would like to develop a clearer insight into the factors explaining why
hagfishes and lampreys have persisted for over 500 million years as the only
surviving members of the basal vertebrate class Agnatha. The objectives for this
proposal are to (i) Understand the mechanism(s) of ammonia excretion by hagfish
and sea lamprey; (ii) Quantify the contribution that Rh glycoproteins make to
overall ammonia excretion in both hagfishes and lampreys; (iii) Ascertain how
life stage alters ammonia excretion in the lampreys; (iv) Determine how
mechanisms of ammonia excretion are influenced by the fresh water to sea water
transition in lampreys. The educational outcomes of this project include
involvement of many undergraduate and graduate students in this research. The
students will gain experience in in vivo physiology, molecular biology, protein
biochemistry and histological techniques. Students will be engaged in team-based
partnerships through which they will gain key interpersonal, organizational
skills and an international perspective on their research.