* 1121309
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Sectarian Gift: Piety, Clientalism, and Changing Practices of Giving in Lebanon
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Jenna Rice, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 17,250.00

Stanford University doctoral student Jenna Rice, with direction from Dr. Sylvia
J. Yanagisako, will undertake research on the relationship between globalization
and local practices of charitable giving. Over the past three decades, there has
been a significant worldwide growth of philanthropic foundations, which are
shaped by global economic and political processes. But at the local level,
giving is also affected by particulars of social structure, community identity,
and understandings of civic responsibility. This research will examine the
interface between the locally germane prescriptive pressure people may feel to
give for religious and political reasons, and international discourses of
charity, philanthropy, and international finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be carried out in Sidon, Lebanon. Lebanon is an appropriate site
for this research because sectarian charitable foundations have become
increasingly responsible for the provisioning of basic social services. This
expansion of politically and religiously motivated sectarian charities will be
compared to long-standard neighborhood practices of giving. Research methods
will include archival research; intensive observation of a sample of households,
stratified by members' age and generation; semi-structured interviews; and media
and discourse analysis of the representation and treatment of poverty and
charity in popular media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important
because it contributes to social science theory of the relationship between
international political and economic forces and local sectarian processes of
resource pooling and reallocation through charitable giving. Funding this
research also supports the education of a social scientist.