* 1121133
* Workshop:  Magnesium Alloys Science and Technology - Fundamental Research Issues; Arlington, Virginia; May 19-20, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Sean Agnew, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 01/31/2012
* USD 74,449.00

This grant provides funding for a 2-day workshop that will bring together a
diverse group of scientists and engineers to identify the outstanding
fundamental science issues which inhibit broader application of Mg alloys in
structural (including biomedical) applications. A renaissance in Mg application
and R&amp;D was initiated by the automotive industry, with the primary driver
being vehicle mass reduction for improved vehicle efficiency and performance.
Interest has expanded into the consumer goods sectors with a large number of
manufacturers selecting die cast or thixomolded Mg alloys for the cases of
handheld tools and portable electronic goods. Now, the aerospace, defense, and
biomedical sectors are all developing interest in developing strategies to
exploit the lightest structural metal in the periodic table of
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide a forum for
approximately 50 researchers from academia, government laboratories, and
industry to develop a strategic vision for future research to enable society to
benefit from more widespread use of high performance Mg alloys. Approximately 10
invited speakers will present lectures to set the tone for the smaller group
discussions. The lecturers will describe recent advances made possible by the
application of the most advanced experimental techniques and computational
methods. Break-out sessions will address three strategic areas: alloy design
&amp; computational modeling, manufacturing &amp; processing, and performance
&amp; durability. Fellowships will be issued to a small number of exceptional
graduate students, who are interested in academic or research-intensive careers.
Finally, an executive summary and comprehensive report will be prepared for the
sponsor to document the outcomes of the workshop. The report will also be
disseminated via a web site made accessible to workshop participants and others
with whom the author and sponsor choose to share it.