* 1121107
* Triangle Center for Excellence for Materials Research and Innovation:  Programmable Assembly of Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Carol Hall, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 13,930,000.00

The Triangle Center of Excellence for Materials Research and Innovation (CEMRI)*
will be a national resource for materials science and engineering research and
education in the Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill (Triangle) area of North Carolina, a
thriving technological and economic hub with a high concentration of materials
innovation activity in both academia and industry. The Triangle CEMRI will focus
on the study and development of soft matter components to be used in
programmable assembly and functional and hybrid materials that result from the
assembly of these components. It will synergistically leverage existing and
complementary strengths of Duke, NC State, UNC-Chapel Hill and North Carolina
Central University, a top-ranked public HBCU. The Triangle CEMRI will have a
significant impact in soft matter materials science through generation of (i)
new fundamental insights and theoretical understanding, (ii) new design
principles, (iii) new applications and uses for colloidal and macromolecular
materials and their higher order assemblies, and (iv) an integrated education
and outreach program. Understanding, harnessing and exploiting the dynamic
processes related to the aggregation of multicomponent particulate and
macromolecular assemblies represent significant current frontiers in materials
research. Two interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs) comprised of leading
researchers in materials theory, simulation, synthesis, processing and
applications will surmount these frontiers. A Seed-funding program will also be
instituted to allow the extension of the Triangle CEMRI's scope to new areas of
soft matter research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IRG1: Multicomponent Colloidal
Assembly by Comprehensive Interaction Design. The goal of IRG1 is to develop a
fundamental understanding of self-assembly of bulk materials from multi-
component suspensions of very small particles (colloids). The team will focus on
elucidating the fundamental rules that govern programmed colloidal assembly for
materials fabrication by design. Ultimately, this work will have ramifications
for the production of hybrid photonic and phononic crystals, anisotropic
conducting films, self-healing materials, "smart" gels, metamaterials, and other
advanced engineering materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IRG2: Genetically Encoded
Polymer Syntax for Programmable Self-Assembly. The overall goal of IRG2 is to
establish the rules for the design of "syntactomers" whose phase behaviors
facilitate programming of their self-assembly into supramolecular structures.
Syntactomers are macromolecules that consist of a collection of "letters"
(monomers that can either be amino acids, nucleotides or synthetic components)
are arranged within "words" (repeat units), which are in turn arranged by
following a syntax - defined as the arrangement of words - into "phrases"
(macromolecules). A new paradigm for macromolecular design will lead to new
materials to be used as drug delivery vehicles, actuators, nanofibers,
switchable membranes, functional connectors, and scaffolds for mineralization,
tissue implants or 3-D cell culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Triangle CEMRI
will coordinate establishment and access to specialized materials research
facilities across the Research Triangle. Its researchers will have access to a
global network of research resources, including several national laboratories
and laboratories in Europe and Asia. Innovation and technology transfer will be
enhanced by the Triangle CEMRI activities aimed at facilitating and catalyzing
interactions with both large and small industrial and non-profit
commercialization and innovation partners. A comprehensive integration of
training, educational and outreach activities will take advantage of the high
level of scholarship in materials research and related areas in the Research
Triangle area. The overarching goal of the Triangle CEMRI in education,
training, and outreach is to infuse materials science, engineering and
technology education with a new relevance, excitement and value to audiences
ranging from G5-12 students, undergraduate students, graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, to the public sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* an NSF
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)