* 1121915
* EAGER:  Accurate Aerosol Sampling and Size Distribution Measurements Inside and Outside Cloud Systems During ICE-T
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Suresh Dhaniyala, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/29/2012
* USD 81,138.00

The project will accurately characterize aerosol particles from aircrafts using
a new and improved aerosol-cloud sampler and integrating it with a newly
developed fast mobility spectrometer and a scanning cloud condensation nuclei
(CCN) instrument during the ICE-T (Ice in Clouds Experiment-Tropical) field
campaign. The specific objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;1) Accurate sampling of aerosol
particles outside and inside clouds considering the possible presence of
drizzle, ice, and precipitation using the Clarkson Interstitial Inlet
(CII).&lt;br/&gt;2) Determine the size distribution of particles smaller than
300 nm in less than 20 seconds using the new fast aerosol mobility spectrometer
developed at Clarkson.&lt;br/&gt;3) Determine the size-classified CCN fraction
of the sampled aerosol using a combination of a fast DMA system and a fast CCN
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the need to improve our understanding of ice nucleation process in the
atmosphere. Size distribution measurements of aerosol particles inside and
outside of cloud systems will provide critical information about the particle
size fractions that are participating in cloud formation. In addition, the
mixing nature of the particles will be determined from size-classified CCN
measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this study
includes:&lt;br/&gt;1) The development and performance validation of a new
interstitial aerosol sampler that will provide a critical ability to sample and
analyze non-activated aerosol particles in cloud systems.&lt;br/&gt;2)
Measurements of particle size distributions and size-classified CCN in warm and
mixed-phase clouds, resulting in obtaining important data to test existing
aerosol-cloud parameterizations and improving our understanding of formation of
ice nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This work will
result in (i) the development of a new aerosol-cloud sampler that can be used
for aerosol-cloud system characterization from a wide-range of aircraft
platforms, and (ii) validating the performance of a fast sizing particle
instrument that will provide near real-time size-resolved measurements of
atmospheric aerosol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a part of this project, two
graduate students will be involved. Both graduate students will gain exposure to
aircraft-based measurements and in analysis of scientific data. Also, by
participating in a field campaign, the students will get an opportunity to
interact with established atmospheric scientists, furthering their development
as independent researchers.