* 1121111
* Implementing Guided Inquiry in Diverse Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Mirka Koro, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2015
* USD 456,592.00

This proposal is implementing, testing and disseminating new classroom materials
for the Introduction to Materials course within the engineering curriculum.
These new materials use an active learning, team-based approach based on a
pedagogical method from chemistry, called Process Oriented Guided Inquiry
Learning (POGIL). Rather than sitting in traditional lectures, students work in
teams to complete worksheets that guide them through the process of learning.
Students are actively engaged in processing information and have the opportunity
to use and develop important skills such as teamwork, communication, and
critical thinking. The POGIL worksheets for materials science, developed in a
prior NSF grant (DUE-0633073), contain the following components: 1) a model or
data set that illustrates a particular concept; 2) guided inquiry questions that
guide the students to process the model or data and lead them to an
understanding of the concept; and 3) exercises and problems that allow them to
practice using the concept. These worksheets are being used at four institutions
that represent different contexts for their implementation: a large public
research university; a medium-sized public Master's degree granting
comprehensive university; an HBCU; and a private liberal arts university.
Multiple cycles of implementation occur at each site, and the faculty
participants work within a community of users through annual project meetings,
participation in regional POGIL meetings, and interaction through an electronic
discussion board. The effects of POGIL relative to traditional instruction and
the different implementation contexts are determined using both formative and
summative assessments. These assessment activities include evaluation of
learning and implementation goals set by the students and faculty, focus group
discussions of implementation, and quantitative assessment of student learning,
student perceptions of learning, and community building among the faculty
members. The intellectual merit of this project focuses on the implementation
and evaluation of this new set of research-based classroom activities for both
faculty implementation and student performance. The broader impacts that result
from this project include the dissemination of these broadly tested materials
for use at other institutions and on the initial development of an extensive
community of users.