* 1121582
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Formation of Armed Self-Defense Groups in Civil Wars
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Daniel Blocq, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 15,013.00

Many insurgents engage in acts of violence against civilians in rural areas
during civil war. In the absence of protection from the state, some villages
within those areas organize armed groups to defend themselves against such
violence. This project investigates the formation of these armed self-defense
groups.

The formation of armed self-defense groups is under-studied and yet it is also
significant and not uncommon phenomenon in civil war. Examples of conflicts in
which armed self-defense groups have emerged include the civil wars in Algeria,
Kenya, Peru, Sierra Leone and Sudan. Recent analyses have documented the
prevalence of insurgent violence against rural villages. These studies have
concentrated on explaining such violence but have neglected variation in
civilian response.

This project conducts an in-depth comparative analysis of four rural villages,
located close to one another, in southwest Sudan. The ethnic composition and
level of insurgent threat was similar across the four villages during the early
years of the civil war in south Sudan (1983-2005). Yet only two communities
created armed self-defense groups. The project combines in-depth interviews,
formal models, and network analysis to identify the process--events, actions and
decisions--underlying the formation and non-formation of armed self-defense
groups.

Armed self-defense groups can have two important effects on the evolution of
civil wars. First, armed self-defense groups hinder insurgent action. Insurgents
often need civilian support--forced or voluntary--for food, new recruits and
intelligence. Armed self-defense groups usually form an obstacle to such
support. Second, armed self-defense groups often come to play an important role
in the state's counterinsurgency campaign. In the absence of weapons and
military know-how, communities under threat typically resort to the state or to
local army commanders to receive the material support and training that are
necessary to build and sustain their armed self-defense groups. The state
predictably demands some level of control in exchange for its support. As these
exchanges continue, armed self-defense groups become co-opted by the state,
developing into government sponsored militias that conduct offensive operations
against the insurgents for the state.

This project has implications for general policy debates around disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of former combatants, and for more
specific policy debates around the future of south Sudan. There is a trend in
debates over DDR towards the development of programs that are sensitive to local
power dynamics. This project's identification of reasons and conditions
underlying the initial armament of civilians fits within this trend and could
inform DDR efforts. As for the future of south Sudan, many policy makers are
concerned about the resurrection of government sponsored militias in the south.
This project?s capacity to shed light on the origin of those militias should
facilitate the production of policy responses to resurrection threats.