* 1121025
* Frazzled and Abelson Tyrosine Kinase Interact to Regulate Midline Guidance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Mark VanBerkum, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2017
* USD 508,310.00

The brain consists of billions of neurons, and it is the connections between
neurons that provide most brain-specific functions. To form these connections, a
neuron extends an axon along a selected pathway following a series of molecular
cues present in the developing embryo. Molecules on the surface of the axon
called ?receptors? detect these cues and transfer this environmental information
to molecules inside of the cell, which in turn regulate the cytoskeleton used to
steer the axon as it navigates to its target cell to make a neuronal connection.
This investigator will use the fruit fly (Drosophila) as a model organism to
study how one receptor molecular (Frazzled) interacts with the Abelson tyrosine
kinase inside of a neuron and steers axons across the midline to make
connections on the opposite side of the brain. Biochemical techniques are being
used to define exactly how Frazzled and Abelson interact with each other. To
understand how Abelson regulates the cytoskeletal machinery, each domain of
Abelson will be tested for its ability to change the shape of cells in culture
and to help guide axons in a developing embryo. All DNA, cell, and fly reagents
generated in the study will be made available to the scientific community.
Similarly, a database containing all the binding and functional information
generated in this study will be linked to Flybase [http://flybase.org/], a major
repository of Drosophila research. This study will impact our understanding of a
universal problem in brain biology by establishing how bilateral connections are
formed in the developing nervous system. The work will also increase our
understanding of how Abelson, and related proteins, regulate the machinery
underlying the movement of other cell types, including immune cells fighting an
infection and cancer metastasis. Finally, the investigator has a strong record
of undergraduate and graduate training at an institute with a high percentage of
minority and first generation college students.