* 1121150
* Mechanisms Regulating Synaptonemal Complex Disassembly in C. elegans Meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Sarit Smolikove, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2015
* USD 460,841.00

Smolikove ABSTRACT MCB-1121150 &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;Meiosis
is a fundamental biological process required for sexual reproduction, and is a
major contributor to genetic variability. A crucial step in meiosis is the
segregation of maternal and paternal (homologous) chromosomes during the first
meiotic division. The accurate execution of this step requires the exchange of
genetic information between homologous chromosomes leading to crossover
formation. The synaptonemal complex (SC) is a key structure, placed in the
center of events unfolding in meiosis. The SC is assembled between each pair of
homologous chromosomes to ensure the formation of all obligatory crossover
events, after which the SC is disassembled in a regulated fashion. In the
absence of the SC, chromosomes missegregate in the first meiotic division, often
leading to embryonic lethality. The understanding of SC assembly has greatly
advanced in the past years, but little progress has been made in understanding
the mechanisms of SC disassembly. Dr.Smolikove's research is aimed at
elucidating the mechanisms of SC disassembly. To do so, she takes advantage of
the numerous genetic, cytological, and molecular tools available in the model
organism Caenorhabditis elegans. She has identified a gene which is specifically
required for SC disassembly but which does not participate in early meiotic
events such as crossover formation or SC assembly. Through molecular and
cytological characterization of two alleles of the mutated gene, along with
depletion of its mRNA via RNAi, she dissects the molecular pathways required for
SC disassembly. Furthermore, performing genetic screens using her mutants, she
is helping to reveal the pathway regulating SC disassembly. Over all, this
research will lead to a better understanding of SC disassembly and its role in
proper meiotic chromosome segregation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide research opportunities for
undergraduates and graduate students from the University of Iowa and from local
colleges, along with Ph.D. thesis projects for graduate students. The project
will contribute to graduate course material and curriculum development,
including a genetics lab course that features experiments using C. elegans and
focusing on meiosis, It will serve as an opportunity to introduce basic genetic
concepts in an appropriate model organism with a powerful genetic system.
Students will be trained in cutting-edge research techniques.