* 1121245
* Epigenetic Control of DNA Replication in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Steven Jacobsen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2015
* USD 705,000.00

Intellectual merit: The faithful replication of DNA is the basis of inheritance
in all organisms. DNA replication is a carefully regulated process, but it is
still incompletely understood. For example, little is known about the
relationship between DNA replication, and processes such as the chemical
modification of histone proteins that package the DNA in the cell. Many
different modifications of histones are known, but their function is unclear.
The long-term objective of this project is to understand the relationship
between DNA replication and such histone modifications in the genome of the
model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. This will be approached through detailed
exploration of a recently observed link between DNA replication and a particular
histone modification whose function is to prevent gene expression within certain
regions of the Arabidopsis thaliana genome. Two proteins named ATXR5 and ATXR6
(ATXR5/6) act redundantly to maintain repression of gene expression of genes
located within repetitive elements in the Arabidopsis genome. It has been
recently discovered that in atxr5/6 mutants, such silenced regions of the genome
replicate more than once per cell cycle in a form of aberrant DNA replication
termed "re-replication". Re-replicating regions of the genome have been mapped
using next-generation sequencing approaches, and found to closely correspond to
regions that are characterized by histone modifications associated with
repression of gene expression. This research project aims to use the genetic and
genomic resources for Arabidopsis to investigate the interplay between the
fundamental biological processes of histone modifications and DNA replication.
Novel genome sequencing techniques will be used to explore the ways in which DNA
replication and repair pathways interact with local chromatin environments.
Furthermore, multiple biochemical and genetics approaches will be used to expand
the understanding of ATXR5 and ATXR6 pathway mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will generate a significant
number of genomic datasets, which provides a unique opportunity to involve
undergraduate students in state-of-the-art genomic techniques and data analysis.
Initially, three undergraduates will be involved in the research. Each will be
extensively trained in standard molecular biology techniques required for the
project. In addition, these students will be trained in data analysis
techniques, from the initial processing and mapping of high throughput
sequencing reads to downstream higher-level analysis. This will facilitate the
training of a new class of students with skills that lie at the interface of
molecular biology and computational biology. A goal will be to expand such cross
disciplinary training to a larger pool of UCLA undergraduate students as part of
the new Biomedical Research minor program which is being spearheaded by the
Principal Investigator's department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology,
together with the MIMG department. A course will be developed that will be
taught through the new interdepartmental instructional laboratory curriculum, in
which larger groups of students can use real world data sets from this project
to learn computational biology techniques and apply them to hypothesis testing.
An understanding of the relationship between histone modifications and DNA
replication will have a broad impact not only on plant research, but also on DNA
replication research in other eukaryotes. In addition, the data from this
project will be widely disseminated through public browsers and web sites, and
will be of wide utility to a broad set of plant biologists interested in
development, stress responses, gene expression, and plant genomics.