* 1121262
* CEMRI: Multifunctional Nanoscale Material Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Mark Hersam, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2018
* USD 16,465,474.00

The theme of the Northwestern University CEMRI* is Multifunctional Nanoscale
Materials Structures. The main emphasis of the Center is to train visionary and
globally competitive U.S. materials researchers to significantly impact the U.S.
economy and solve global challenges, to innovate in an atmosphere of cooperation
and healthy competition among national and international partners in both public
and private sectors, and to integrate efforts in research, education,
knowledge/technology transfer and networking. The Center manages and maintains
shared experimental facilities accessed by both Northwestern and external
researchers, fosters interactions with National Labs (especially with nearby
Argonne National Lab), other universities, industry (including both MRSEC-
initiated start-up companies and large corporations) as well as other
institutions (including The Art Institute of Chicago), and develops innovative
educational programs including the science-themed performances hosted by the
MRSEC-sponsored Educational Transdisciplinary Outreach Program in the Arts
(ETOPiA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of the center consist of
understanding the fundamental principles and behaviors of complex nanomaterials
systems, transferring results into the development of new functional devices and
systems leading to new technologies and industries, and initiating close
cooperation among national and international partners to improve research
capabilities and infrastructure. Researchers are organized into
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs) investigating: "Controlling Fluxes of
Charge and Energy at Hybrid Interfaces", "Fundamentals of Amorphous Oxide
Semiconductors" and "Plasmonically-Encoded Materials for Amplified Sensing and
Information Manipulation", as well as seed programs. The research strategy is to
investigate novel phenomena through the interactions of charges, photons,
plasmons and excitons in nanostructured materials, including discrete and
collective effects in model materials using theory, simulation, modeling and
detailed measurements. An understanding of the underlying science will provide a
basis for the design of new and extended classes of functional nanostructures
for potential applications in sensing and communication, energy and
environmental uses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals of the Center
are to develop and disseminate instructional materials for pre-college Science,
Technology, Engineering, Mathematics (STEM) classrooms based on Center research,
to offer opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to develop skills
in innovation and entrepreneurship, to work with international partners and
programs to equip U.S. students with global leadership capabilities and a global
research perspective, and to provide national leadership in vertically-
integrated STEM learning and teaching from middle-school to graduate school in
order to improve quality and reduce the cost of education. The Center has a long
history of developing Materials World Modules for implementation into STEM
classrooms and providing summer research training for teachers and
undergraduates in Research Experience for Teachers (RET) and Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) programs. Partnerships with the International Materials
Institute at Northwestern and with industrial partners are providing new
opportunities to develop international programs and opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students to participate in innovation and
entrepreneurship-based research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*a NSF
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)