* 1121513
* Collaborative Research:   Causes and Mechanisms of Cell Death in Freshwater Phytoplankton
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* John Berges, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2016
* USD 417,668.00

In most organisms, including humans, estimating rates of mortality and the
causes of death is critical to understanding their ecology. Unfortunately, for
phytoplankton (the microscopic photosynthetic organisms at the base of food
chains in lakes and oceans) we do not know why and how they die. This lack of
knowledge is a problem because phytoplankton death may be a critical factor in
understanding harmful algal blooms, and responses to pollution or changing
climate. The investigators will adapt cell biology techniques commonly used in
medicine (including microscopy and flow cytometry - a specialized technique for
rapidly measuring living cells), to study death in phytoplankton in the
laboratory and in freshwater ponds and lakes. They will determine the key
environmental factors (e.g. temperature, light or availability of nutrients)
that trigger death in phytoplankton, and when and how phytoplankton die in
nature. This information will be used to develop a mathematical model of how
individual phytoplankton cells grow, divide and die, depending on environmental
conditions. The techniques and the model will improve the ability to monitor
aquatic ecosystems to detect environmental threats, predict the effects of
environmental change and inform management decisions. The research will promote
training of undergraduates, integrating them into interdisciplinary research
experiences through programs in biology and mathematics at University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) and environmental science and engineering at
Northeastern University (NEU). Participation of under-represented groups will be
facilitated through UWM?s McNair scholars program and NEU's Opportunities for
Undergraduate Research on the Charles River program. A portable flow cytometer
will enhance infrastructure for research and education, and enrich undergraduate
limnology classes at UWM by introducing a new technology. Broad dissemination of
results and improvement of public understanding of science will be facilitated
through a series of public seminars, and continuing development of web-based
educational materials.