* 1121465
* Nodulin Intrinsic Proteins at the Plant-microbe Symbiotic Interface: Multifunctional Roles in Metabolite and Water Transport in Nitrogen Fixation and Stress Responses
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2017
* Daniel Roberts, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 05/31/2017
* USD 703,489.00

The focus of this project is on Nodulin-like Instrinsic Proteins (NIPs) involved
in symbiotic nitrogen fixation in legumes. This process represents a major
pathway for conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into reduced ammonia, which is a
biologically usable form of nitrogen. The symbiosis is established by the
infection of legume roots by rhizobia soil bacteria, resulting in the formation
of the nitrogen-fixing organ, the root nodule. Rhizobia bacteria are enclosed
within a specialized plant organellar compartment, the symbiosome. The
symbiosome membrane mediates the exchange of metabolites between the bacterial
symbiont and plant host, and is critical for a successful symbiosis. NIPs belong
to an ancient family of channel proteins that mediate the flow of water and
metabolites across cellular membranes. Nodulin 26 (Nod26) is a NIP that
constitutes the major protein component of the symbiosome membrane and has two
important roles in nitrogen-fixing symbioses. First, as a rapid transporter of
ammonia, Nod26 is proposed to facilitate the release of this fixation end
product from the symbiosome. Further, Nod26 forms interaction complexes with
glutamine synthetase which is a critical nitrogen assimilation enzyme. This
interaction is postulated to prevent accumulation of toxic levels of ammonia gas
by allowing its rapid incorporation into the nontoxic amino acid glutamine. In a
secondary role, Nod26 facilitates the bulk movement of water across the
symbiosome membrane and is proposed to be part of an osmoregulatory network that
controls the diffusion of oxygen gas within nodule tissues. This provides a
finely tuned regulation of nitrogen fixation rates in response to metabolic need
and environmental stresses. The aim of this project is to investigate the
multifunctional symbiotic role of Nod26 in soybean and a model legume, Medicago
truncatula. The specific objectives are: 1. To define the structural basis for
water vs. ammonia transport of Nod26 and its interaction with glutamine
synthetase; 2. Investigate mechanisms that regulate Nod26 selectivity for water
and ammonia, and its overall transport behavior in response to environmental
cues (e.g., soil drought and water logging) that affect nodule gas diffusion and
fixation rates; and 3. Address the impact of Nod26 on the establishment and
maintenance of the rhizobia-legume symbiosis by using the molecular genetics
tools available in Medicago. This project should contribute fundamental insights
into the molecular basis of symbiotic nitrogen fixation in legume/rhizobia
associations as well as its regulation. In addition, since Nod 26 is the
structural archetype of the NIP transporter family, the project will shed light
on the molecular basis for differences in transport selectivity and biological
functions of NIPs in other plant membrane systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
significance and importance &lt;br/&gt;This project will serve as a training
vehicle for multiple graduate students and undergraduate student research
scholars, as well as a postdoctoral associate, in fundamental aspects of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. In addition, this project will provide
support and promote the following STEM initiatives at the University of
Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK): 1. The P.I's involvement as scientific director of
the Tennessee Junior Science and Humanities Symposium (TJSHS), which is a state-
wide program designed to foster basic science research by high school students.
The TJSHS is held annually and involves a three day symposium during which the
very best high school students from throughout the state of Tennessee are
convened and are given an opportunity to present their research. 2. Involvement
in the Pre-collegiate Scholars Program designed to provide high school science
scholars from East Tennessee with multi-semester research experiences at UTK and
the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 3. Participation of female graduate students
in the P.I.'s laboratory as role models and mentors for a STEM outreach project
at UTK ('Gadget Girls Adventures in STEM') which targets middle school girls and
is designed to stimulate their participation in the sciences.