* 1121711
* Maternal determinants of neural fate
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2015
* Sally Moody, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 11/30/2015
* USD 620,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Early in development, when embryos are composed of a simple
ball of cells, some cells (animal blastomeres) receive information from the
fertilized egg that will later direct them to form the nervous system. Very
little is known about which molecules in the fertilized egg cause these cells to
be more inclined than their neighbors to form neural tissue, a process which is
called neural fate bias. The goals of this research project are to: 1) identify
which molecules in animal blastomeres bias their descendant cells to form neural
tissue; and 2) elucidate the molecular mechanism(s) by which these molecules act
to accomplish neural fate bias. The project will utilize a novel system to
culture animal blastomeres and assay their ability to produce neural tissue when
exposed to molecules predicted to be involved in neural fate bias. The research
will also test whether blastomeres that do not normally make neural tissue can
be induced to do so by the molecules responsible for neural fate bias.
Additional experiments will test whether these molecules instruct cells to
express a neural fate by altering how embryonic cells respond to signaling
within the embryo. Together, these experiments will enable discovery of novel
molecules and novel mechanisms by which embryonic cells are instructed by the
fertilized egg to form the nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project will provide opportunities for scientific education and training at
several levels. The experimental approaches will be taught to high school and
undergraduate students, providing an outstanding learning experience for
students interested in exploring a career in science. Under-represented high
school students will be recruited from the Washington, DC public "School Without
Walls" high school. Graduate level students will be trained in molecular
biology, embryology, genomics, and bioinformatic approaches, providing an
integrative, cutting edge research experience. Information collected in this
project will be presented at local, regional, national and international
meetings, including meetings specific for undergraduates, e.g., "Posters on the
Hill" program. This will disseminate the research findings and will train
students in public communication. This project will raise the scientific
literacy of the general public, because members of the research team will
organize hands-on presentations at local elementary and middle schools, and make
presentations at upcoming Science and Engineering Festivals (SciFests), the next
to be held in Washington, DC in April 2012.