* 1121361
* Dynamics of Sleep-Wake Regulation
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Cecilia Diniz Behn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2014
* USD 299,998.00

Recent experimental results have identified brainstem and hypothalamic neuronal
populations whose neurotransmitter-mediated interactions are proposed to compose
a regulatory network for the control of sleep and wake transitions. While there
is wide support for the contribution and interactions of specific wake-promoting
and sleep-promoting neuronal populations in this network, by contrast, there has
been much debate about the network components involved in the regulation of
rapid-eye movement (REM) sleep. This project analyzes how the structure of
competing proposed sleep-wake regulatory networks determines sleep-wake behavior
and dynamics of behavioral state transitions. The researchers have developed a
novel firing rate model formalism explicitly including neurotransmitter dynamics
that is uniquely suited to model dynamics of the sleep-wake regulatory network.
Using a reduction of this formalism, models of the current competing proposed
structures for the subnetwork governing REM sleep generation are analyzed to
determine intrinsic dynamics dictated by the network structure, and the
dependence of those dynamics on subnetwork components. Additionally, state
transition dynamics in competing proposed network structures for regulation of
wake and sleep states are investigated. Maintaining the reduced model formalism,
the focus is on determining the mechanisms by which the competing network
structures generate key features of human sleep patterning that will be
characterized from experimental sleep recordings. Dynamics of competing model
networks, using the full model formalism including stochastic components, are
fit to the fine temporal architecture of sleep-wake patterning recorded in
multiple species, including rodent, feline, and human, with focus on
investigating common dynamic features of sleep-wake patterning and variability
in sleep-wake regulatory mechanisms across species. The researchers collaborate
with three leading experimental sleep scientists who provide sleep recordings
and consultation on the proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In mammals,
states of waking and sleep are actively controlled by populations of neurons
located in the brainstem and hypothalamus. Currently, in experimental sleep
science, the interactions of these populations, mediated by primary
neurotransmitters, are believed to form a regulatory network for the control of
sleep and wake transitions. While there is wide support for the contribution and
interactions of specific wake-promoting and sleep-promoting neuronal populations
in this network, by contrast, there has been much debate about the network
components involved in the regulation of rapid-eye movement (REM) sleep.
Experimental investigation of the sleep-wake regulatory is limited by the fact
that the outcome measurement, namely sleep-wake patterning, only exists in the
intact animal. The experimental techniques available to probe the neuronal
regulatory mechanisms are limited to those that can be conducted in vivo without
disrupting sleep, or post-mortem studies that can identify anatomy of synaptic
projections between populations but not their time-varying interactions that
underlie sleep-wake transitions. This project uses mathematical modeling as an
investigative tool to bridge the gaps left by these limitations in experimental
studies. The modeling studies address the physiologically compelling and
currently debated question of the structure of the mammalian sleep-wake
regulatory network. Numerous experimental groups have proposed schematics of
network structures and provided hypothetical descriptions of how network
interactions drive behavioral state transitions. However, static conceptual
models lack the ability to replicate time dynamics of transitions between sleep-
wake states or to determine dynamic interactions inherent to network structure.
Construction and analysis of mathematical models of these proposed networks
identifies the dynamic interactions of constituent populations and
neurotransmitters, and provides quantitative understanding of how network
dynamics generate the fine temporal architecture of sleep-wake patterning. Model
solutions are compared to experimental recordings of rodent, feline and human
sleep to determine mechanisms contributing to the differences in sleep-wake
patterning observed in these multiple species. Results of the modeling studies
identify limitations of each of the proposed network structures in accounting
for various characteristics of sleep-wake regulation and will generate
predictions suggesting how experimental approaches can refine our knowledge of
the physiological network structure.