* 1121994
* Mapping Cellular Mechanisms of Auxin Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Gabriele Monshausen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2015
* USD 530,214.00

Intellectual merit. The plant hormone auxin plays a vital role in virtually
every aspect of plant biology, from the organization of the plant embryo and the
development of root and shoot system architecture to the control of growth in
response to environmental cues. All of these processes depend on the formation
of auxin gradients through local accumulation of auxin in plant cells and
tissues. Increased auxin levels then activate different cellular responses in
different cell types to coordinate plant growth. To understand how such local
accumulation is achieved and which mechanisms determine the cellular specificity
of auxin responses is the goal of this research program. It has recently been
discovered that auxin elevation in root cells rapidly triggers an increase in
cytosolic Ca2+ levels that can be visualized using live cell imaging approaches.
Based on this discovery, this project will develop imaging assays to generate
high-resolution maps of dynamic auxin signaling processes at the level of
individual cells in real time. Such maps can provide quantitative empirical data
delineating auxin transport routes, which can be used to strengthen and test
current computational models of auxin-regulated plant development. This project
further aims to develop genetic tools to control cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels and
thereby to manipulate auxin signaling in a non-invasive, temporally and
spatially controlled manner. This will help to define how Ca2+ contributes to
the cellular specificity of auxin
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The project will
provide training opportunities in modern molecular and cell biology techniques
for one postdoctoral researcher and one graduate student. In addition, high
school students participating in the Upward Bound Math and Science Summer
Research Experience at Penn State will contribute to the project through an
independent research project. In this project, the students will become
acquainted with the basics of fluorescence microcopy and will generate
transgenic Arabidopsis lines that will serve as useful tools for the plant
scientific community.