* 1121194
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Political Competition and Refugee Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Robert Keohane, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Countries receiving refugees have responded to them in a variety of ways. Some
host countries have adopted more generous refugee policies than others, and
single countries have shifted between generous and restrictive responses over
time. The central research question for this project is: What explains these
differences in states' refugee policies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
argues that a given state's choice of refugee policies cannot be adequately
explained by examining its internal security concerns, economic climate, or
public attitudes. Instead, this study will demonstrate that international and
domestic political competition lead countries to adopt a distinct set of
policies for each group of refugees they receive. On the one hand, states use
refugees to reassure international allies and exert pressure on rivals. At the
same time, governments have political incentives to favor refugee groups who
share their predominant ethnic identity. Treating countries as though each had a
single blanket refugee policy masks important disparities in treatment between
refugee groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two methods will be used to address the
research question and investigate the theory described above: statistical
analysis and case studies. First statistical analysis will explore general
patterns in countries' decisons to admit refugees onto their territory. Second,
three case studies will be conducted. Egypt, Kenya, and Turkey share some of the
same refugee groups, but each country has a different ethnic composition and a
different history of relations with its neighbors. The case study approach
allows us to examine the policymaking process in richer detail and incorporate a
broader spectrum of refugee policies into the analysis. The statistical and case
study components complement each other, and in combination provide greater
confidence in our findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the intellectual merits
of the project, it will have two main broader impacts. First, a new dataset on
refugee flows will be made public. Second, results may inform the activities of
the UN Refugee Agency as as well as relevant local and international NGOs.