* 1122886
* DIP:  Collaborative Research:  Social Robots as Mechanisms for Language Instruction, Interaction, and Evaluation in Pre-School Children
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Cynthia Breazeal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2016
* USD 623,993.00

This project is leveraging emerging technologies in social robotics with recent
findings from social, developmental, and cognitive psychology to design,
implement, and evaluate a new generation of robots that is capable of
interacting with and instructing young learners (ages 3 through 6) in a truly
social way. The robot incorporates signals that the mind implicitly uses to
ascertain another's intentions, motivations, and affiliations (e.g., motor
mimicry and synchrony, affective cues, gaze direction), making it capable of
serving as a true embodiment of a human instructor. The robotic platform can be
controlled remotely, through a direct and proximate connection or a remote,
Internet-based operator interface. As such, the system can be placed in several
different environments, ranging from a child's home to medical areas where
issues of mobility or immunosuppression make it difficult for direct interaction
with instructors. Research is aimed at better understanding children's concepts
of robot mind and of robots as agents, uncovering mental operations behind
learning new words, and adding to what is known about the added value (if any)
of non-verbal utterances to understanding, communication, and collaboration.

Emerging research has identified the acquisition of early language and
vocabulary skills primary predictors of later academic success. Impoverished
vocabulary upon entering kindergarten strongly predicts poor subsequent academic
performance. Accordingly, the use of technologies designed to build vocabulary
during the preschool years is key to facilitating many types of learning.
Interactions with a robotic language partner are expected to have particularly
important ramifications for children with compromised opportunities to interact
regularly with attentive, nurturing caregivers willing and able to foster their
vital socio-intellectual developmental needs. In addition, the rationales,
artifacts, and cyber platforms and infrastructure created for this project could
lend themselves to a broad range of design extensions, such as providing
opportunities for children who are learning English as a second language to
participate in English-language-based social activities, outreach to rural areas
where children have infrequent access to social activities, supporting children
of deaf parents, and assessing/assisting children with pragmatic language
impairments.