* 1122699
* Residence and First Passage Time Functionals in Heterogeneous Ecological Dispersion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Edward Waymire, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2014
* USD 249,956.00

Residence and First Passage Time Functionals in Heterogeneous Ecological
Dispersion Multiscale problems continue to motivate important mathematical
modeling and research. This proposal aims to develop and analyze models relevant
to several examples from biology, ecology, oceanography and epidemiology, that
involve interfacial effects defined by discontinuities in values of coefficients
in the models. These phenomena occur on highly heterogeneous domains in which
sharp or abrupt discontinuities in certain physical, chemical, or biological
properties of the landscape occur in the coefficients of the basic equations.
The Pis will analyze functionals of the associated processes, both for
fragmented or patchy domains and for discrete graphical structures, to quantify
the effects that smaller scale interfacial discontinuities have on macro scale
variables, such as resident and occupation time functionals. In the first part
of the proposal, the PIs will develop stochastic approaches to the advection-
dispersion-reaction equations with discontinuous coefficients that model
different biological processes. Unlike more classical physical models where the
micro-scale interface conditions can be determined by macro-scale conservation
laws, data on biological responses to interfacial boundaries can be quite
different. The determination of the appropriate models requires the development
of new micro-scale methods of analysis involving local time and the Ito-Tanaka
stochastic calculus to uncover the appropriate macro-scale equations governing
population densities and characteristic functionals of dispersion. In the second
part of the proposal the Pis will develop numerical methods, Monte-Carlo
stochastic particle schemes, and new methods of statistical parameter estimation
for advection-dispersion equations involving discontinuous coefficients with
special interface geometries relevant to key biological field
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural physical processes, as well as certain
anthropogenic activities, result in fragmented habitats to which species
(animal, plants and bacteria) adapt or modify their behavior. Changes in the
habitat configuration and/or its conditions, present new challenges and pose
important broad new questions to scientists, policy makers and resource managers
concerned with natural resources. Several contemporary problems in the
biological and environmental sciences and engineering where such effects are
reported to occur include: Bio-remediation of contaminated sediments in
heterogeneous landscapes; Spread of infectious disease over fragmented habitats
causing shifts in community structures possibly leading to invasion by exotic
species; Species dispersal and sustainability in a heterogeneous environment
affecting persistence of endangered species; Spatial localization of oceanic
chlorophyll blooms impacting the fisheries industry. The specific mathematical
issues common to these examples involve appropriate modeling of interfacial
processes,&lt;br/&gt;i.e., mathematical discontinuities in the coefficients of
the model equations, that affect the large scale behavior of species movement.
The mathematical framework to be developed in this research is particularly
aimed at assessing and quantifying interfacial effects on the large scale caused
by these abrupt small -scale changes. This research will provide a mathematical
framework and tools to support field and laboratory efforts to quantify and
resolve fundamental questions about species dispersal through a combination of
numerical and statistical algorithms, together with a theoretical mathematical
analysis involving tools from deterministic and stochastic calculus.