* 1122757
* Collaborative Research: POGIL Math - Guided Inquiry Materials for Gatekeeper Courses in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Catherine Beneteau, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2016
* USD 54,051.00

This collaborative project is applying the approach of Process Oriented Guided
Inquiry Learning (POGIL), which has been successful in chemistry, to
undergraduate pre-calculus and first semester calculus courses. The team's work
is guided by three main goals: i) to create new POGIL learning materials for
pre-calculus and calculus where reform will have a large and visible impact; ii)
to develop faculty expertise within the mathematics community to implement these
new materials by presenting math-specific POGIL workshops at national
mathematics meetings and POGIL summer workshops; and iii) to conduct in depth
research on undergraduate mathematics education by implementing a case study
design to examine learning in POGIL MATH classroom contexts. Several factors
contribute to the strong intellectual merit of this project. First, the PI team
brings together combined expertise in (1) authoring high quality POGIL chemistry
activities; (2) curricular innovations in mathematics; (3) mathematics education
research; and (4) evaluation. Second, the POGIL Project's National Office is
lending support in training and dissemination. Moreover, because POGIL is a
nationally tested and proven pedagogical strategy based on research on how
students learn, classroom materials generated as part of the proposed project
are expected to generate results in mathematics similar to those in chemistry:
a) improved student learning; b) decreased attrition (especially among
underrepresented minority students); c) improved attitudes toward mathematics;
and d) increased faculty adoptions. The project is exercising its broader impact
in several ways. First, the case study design of the project's research
component is informing the mathematics community about how POGIL activities can
challenge student misconceptions in calculus as identified in the mathematics
education literature, as well as how classroom context affects implementation of
POGIL activities. Second, the materials developed in this project are being
classroom tested in diverse settings, both by the authors and by beta-testers,
hence increasing the potential transportability of these POGIL mathematics
activities to any faculty member's classroom. In addition, several of the
institutions directly involved in the development of the POGIL calculus
materials have large percentages of underrepresented students taking calculus,
and thus any curricular change is in the position to have a significant impact
on retention of minority students and women. Finally, the variety of
institutions both in the collaborative and among the pilot test sites are
expanding the network of POGIL experts, spanning a variety of post-secondary
institutions, regions throughout the U.S., and disciplines, thus having a
potentially transformative effect on mathematics instruction in the
undergraduate STEM education community.