* 1122647
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Political Economy of China's Trade Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Jean Oi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

In September 2008, China filed a claim to the Dispute Settlement Body of the
World Trade Organization (WTO), requesting consultations on four of the six
products on which the United States had imposed definitive anti-dumping and
countervailing duties. Why did Beijing complain about the treatment of its
exports in steel pipes, tires and plastic woven sacks, but not magnets and
sodium nitrate? Similarly, in bilateral negotiations with the US during its
entry into the WTO, China secured far more favorable tariff schedules for some
products than others, sometimes even within the same industry. Why did China
offer more protection for certain industries and sectors but not
others?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these questions by focusing
on the domestic politics of China's foreign economic policies in the reform era.
The overarching question is: given the weakness of formal institutions and the
lack of electoral accountability in authoritarian states such as China, how do
societal interests and preferences affect trade policy outcomes? A general
framework of interest group politics is developed in which the political
survival of authoritarian leaders depends on maintaining a winning coalition
from a "selectorate" (a set of people with a say in the selection of leaders and
a prospect of belonging to leaders' winning coalition) that is composed of
members whose interests diverge and compete against each other due to the
distributional effects of trade policies. The extent to which societal interests
can successfully influence policy outcomes thus depends on their access to and
interaction with these members of the selectorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
theory is examined using a multi-method approach combining case studies and
quantitative analysis. The project examines firm and industry influence on
import tariff, nontariff barriers and outcome of antidumping cases in China. In
prior field work, the researcher uncovered various channels and mechanisms
through which Chinese domestic groups lobby for their preferred policy and
identified a number of factors associated with the effectiveness of their
lobbying efforts. In particular, such factors as state ownership and ties to the
local economy increased the strength of societal demands for protection and
hence the likelihood and degree of trade policy concessions granted by the
government. The current project involves collecting and using original data on
over 450 Chinese industries from 1999 to 2009 and on antidumping cases initiated
by China from 1997-2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes several
contributions to scientific understanding. With few exceptions, extant studies
of China's foreign economic policies are generally divorced from broader
theories of economic policies derived from open and democratic societies. That
gap reflects a relative lack of understanding of authoritarian regimes more
generally. This research helps fill the gap by proposing a theoretical framework
that links the study of authoritarian trade policy- making to more general
theories in scholarly work in international political economy and comparative
politics. Second, extant scholarship on China's foreign economic policies does
not employ the mixed methods approach used here. This project also fills that
gap at the same time that it creates a dataset with improved measures and data
at a much lower level of disaggregation. The richness of the data will allow
other scholars to engage in novel studies of China's political economy and
state-society relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also has broader
implications. On the one hand, as the US and other major trading partners of
China find it increasingly common to face both resistance and support from
domestic-level actors in their economic relations with Beijing, it becomes ever
more important to comprehend the processes by which these different Chinese
actors influence policy making. On the other hand, the pluralization of China's
foreign policy making may well extend beyond trade issues. Thus this project can
shed light on how China might engage in bilateral and multilateral relations on
issues in security, energy and environment.