* 1122532
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Water and Energy Bargaining in Post-Soviet Central Asia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Sarah Hummel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 11,949.00

This project seeks to explain variation in cooperation on issues of water and
energy policy among the five Central Asian states that attained independence
after the collapse of the Soviet Union: Kazakhstan, the Krygyz Republic,
Tajikistan, Turkemenistan, and Uzbekistan. These states share the Aral Sea
basin, which consists of two major rivers: the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya. The
downstream states, those located furthese from the source of these rivers,
depend on water for the irrigation of agricultural lands. This interdependence
is one of the many legacies left by the Soviet Union. Under the direction of the
Soviet administration, the upstream states released water from their reservoirs
for downstream irrigation in the summer, and, in return, received energy
supplies from their downstream neighbors during the winter. However, after
independence, the issue of water and energy policy coordination became a matter
of interstate bargaining rather than central planning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How
have the states of Central Asia coped with the need for policy coordination in
the post-independence time period and what can their experience tell us about
cooperation amoung developing states? The effort to maintain Soviet-era levels
of cooperation has been neither a complete success nor a complete failure. This
project explores the variation in several key aspects of cooperation over the
years since the collapse of the Soviet Union. In particular, it will focus on
the timing and length of negotiations, the agreed upon terms of bilateral
agreements and the ultimate compliance of signatories with these agreements in
the area of water and engergy policy during the past 20 years. It will examine
the impact of domestic politics on how states conduct negotiations and make
decisions regarding subsequent levels of compliance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project therefore addresses important questions about the relationship
between domestic and international politics in non-democracies. Although this
relationship has been examined fairly extensively in democracies, it remains
understudied in other types of government. It also raises the question of how we
should measure levels of cooperation - is it the occurrence of interstate
bargaining, the length of negotiations, the terms of ultimate agreement, or
subsequent compliance with that agreement that really defines international
cooperation? By looking at each aspect, the project takes a step beyond most
other literature on the topic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, to its
contribution to the fields of international and comparative politics, this
research will also draw attention to one of the most pressing issues facing a
relatively unknown region of the world. The perceived importance of this region
has increased in recent years due to its proximity to Afghanistan and its
consequent strategic value to the West, making the lack of scholarship even more
striking. On its completion, the research project will help fill this void and
also provide practical guidance to policy makers in Central Asia by identifying
factors that increase and decrease the likelihood of successful cooperation in
water and energy policy. These insights could be used in efforts to alleviate
the water and power shortages that have constrained economic development in the
area.