* 1122016
* The Impact of Sterol Biogenesis on Cellulose Synthesis in Higher Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Kathrin Schrick, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2016
* USD 903,192.00

Cellulose is the structural component of the plant cell wall and the most
abundant natural polymer on earth. It is produced by cellulose synthase, a large
multi-subunit complex that resides in the plasma membrane. Genetic studies using
the model Arabidopsis have led to the identification of proteins comprising the
cellulose synthase machinery as well as critical enzymes and cytoskeletal
proteins that interact with the core complex. A potential role for additional
factors such as membrane lipids or sterols is intriguing but has not yet been
adequately explored. Previous studies demonstrated that sterol composition is
crucial for cellulose synthase activity. Yet, the molecular mechanisms by which
sterols influence cellulose synthesis are not understood to date. In this
project two debated hypotheses to explain the connection between sterols and
cellulose synthesis will be tested. The first is that steryl glucosides, an
abundant class of sterol conjugates in plants, act as primers for synthesis by
transferring glucose residues to the growing chain of cellulose microfibrils.
Alternatively or in addition, sterols play a general role in cellulose
synthesis, as integral components of detergent-resistant plasma membrane
subdomains. Sterols may act to maintain the structure and integrity of
transmembrane proteins, such as the subunits that comprise cellulose synthase.
To determine which of these mechanisms occurs in the cell, the project will
employ an interdisciplinary approach using the primary cell wall as a model.
Genetics and chemical genetics, biochemistry and cell biology, in parallel with
systems biology approaches spanning genomics, lipidomics and proteomics will be
applied. Chemical inhibitors of enzymes in the sterol biosynthesis pathway and
mutants of Arabidopsis will be used as tools to dissect the membrane
requirements for cellulose synthase function. The ultimate goal of this project
is to elucidate the molecular link between sterols and cellulose synthesis in
building the cell wall. This research is expected to result in transformative
advances in understanding cellulose synthesis, and has strong potential to
uncover novel insights in the dynamic interplay between sterols and proteins in
the plasma membrane of plant cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research will have broader impacts through the multi-disciplinary education of a
postdoctoral scholar, graduate and undergraduate students. Underrepresented
groups will be recruited through programs for McNair Scholars, Summer
Undergraduate Research Opportunity, and Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation. K-12 outreach will be achieved by partnerships with local
teachers and programs for girls with interests in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics careers. Through an international collaboration with
a laboratory in Sweden, this project has broader impacts in training the next
generation of US scientists with a global perspective. The information gained
from this research will facilitate improvements in plant-derived products and
biomass-related applications in biotechnology. Deciphering how the membrane
environment influences cellulose synthase machinery may lead to knowledge
concerning the digestibility of cellulose and the amount of cellulose that is
produced in the cell wall, which are key considerations in engineering bioenergy
crops of the future.