* 1122228
* The direct effects of global warming on bird communities: the physiological ecology of die-offs during heat waves
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Blair Wolf, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 07/31/2015
* USD 660,985.00

Rapid warming of the Earth's surface and predictions of significant increases in
the frequency, intensity and duration of heat waves suggests the potential for
large impacts on animal communities. Although little studied, among the most
important direct effects of global warming on desert animals may be catastrophic
mortality associated with extreme heat waves. Although they have yet to impact
deserts of the southwestern United States, recent reports from Australia, India
and South Africa indicate that bird die-offs due to heat stress are occurring
with increasing frequency. This research seeks to link physiological and
behavioral mechanisms of heat tolerance in birds to changes in populations and
communities in response to global warming. This project will characterize
individual and species level variation in heat tolerance and how it is modified
by hydration status in birds across three continents in the field and
laboratory. By sampling species that differ in body size, ecology and
evolutionary history and diversity, this research will provide the information
needed to develop predictive models that estimate impacts of future climates on
bird species, and communities. Currently, there is only anecdotal information on
the natural history and physiological ecology of catastrophic die-offs and the
factors that potentially mitigate or exacerbate the effects on desert bird
communities. To understand this phenomenon and how desert bird communities
differ on a global scale, this study will examine the behavioral and
physiological responses to heat waves as a function of body size, diet, relative
reliance on free water resources and structure of bird communities on three
continents. Data will also be collected on the physiological status, behavior
and pathology of birds in Australia during mortality events, which will be
compared to laboratory findings to provide an integrated view of the natural
history of heat waves and their effects on bird communities. This proposal
represents an international approach to understanding the direct effects of
climate on bird communities. This collaboration will foster a better
understanding of the ongoing effects of climate change on a global scale and the
generalized findings will be applicable to all bird communities. The project
will provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to travel and
interact with researchers from Africa and Australia. The University of New
Mexico is a Hispanic serving institution and Hispanic and Native American
undergraduate students will be engaged in research through the NSF REU program.
This research will inform natural resource managers by providing risk
assessments for species and regions. Climate change is a global problem and
because bird communities are likely to be differentially impacted by factors
such as body size distributions, dietary guilds, and the availability of free
water resources, findings from this research will improve understanding of how
climate events will modify bird communities and thus the ecosystem services
(such as pollination and seed dispersal) that they provide. Research describing
the pathogenesis of heatstroke in birds will be of great interest to
veterinarians, comparative biologists and medical researchers, and has the
potential to provide biomarkers for identifying heatstroke in birds.