* 1122780
* EAGER: Enhanced Performance Membranes by Scalable High Throughput Modification
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Georges Belfort, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 101,972.00

This EAGER Grant application involves a radically different approach to membrane
synthesis and testing, applies new expertise (high throughput platform (HTP)
modification method with photo-induced graft polymerization (PGP) (HTP-PGP)
method with surface agitation and measurement of protein sieving), and engages
novel interdisciplinary perspectives (combines knowledge of polymer chemistry
and fluid mechanics). Few polymers have been used for membrane filtration
production over the past 35 years, because of effort, expense and time. A novel,
fast, efficient and reproducible high throughput platform (HTP) modification
method with photo-induced graft polymerization (PGP) (HTP-PGP method) that
allowed synthesis and selection of the most protein fouling-resistant polymer
from 66 functionalized surfaces for membrane separations has been developed.
However, this new HTP-PGP method is not easily scalable and needs to include
mixing and protein sieving to be really useful and predictable with high
confidence.

The fast, efficient and reproducible HTP-PGP method is a major contribution to
the high throughput synthesis, screening and selection for material science and
membrane technology. HTP-PGP selected previously reported protein-resistant
surface chemistries, discovered several new monomers and gave reproducible
results. However, for the HTP-PGP to be truly useful for fundamental studies and
scalable for industrial applications, it should also include cross-flow with
time-dependent tracking of permeation volume and solute (sieving) flux. In this
research, HTP-PGP will be transformed so that it can evaluate and select the
best polymers from many 100s of functionalized surfaces under scalable
conditions; and analyze the mechanism of grafting to gain understanding for
future design of surfaces for membrane separations. With previous results over
the past 17 years with membrane surface modification and the HTP-PGP method as a
springboard, the following two specific aims for the research with the 96
filter-well format are proposed: 1. To implement and model crossflow (mixing)
within each of the 96-wells. 2. To employ periodic measurements of volume and
solute flux with the same crossflow to test, screen and scale-up the best
performing graft polymerized membranes using single-protein filtration and 1
relevant biotechnology feed (E. coli broth).

The proposed study addresses a pressing need in the biotechnology, food,
beverage, drinking water purification, wastewater treatment and bio-fuel
industries for new low bio-fouling synthetic membranes. Like personalized
medicine, particularized membranes for different applications can improve
efficiency, and reduce costs and energy requirements. The work will promote
discovery by offering previously untested novel membrane materials that exhibit
low fouling, and will present a scalable HTP-PGP method for membrane
manufacturers and users. The research will advance mechanistic understanding by
elucidating the major requirements for a fouling resistant membrane. Results of
this research will benefit society by reducing energy consumption of biochemical
processes by lowering protein/peptide fouling of synthetic membranes during
bioprocessing (known to cause substantial drops in performance, sometimes
approaching 80%) and hence lowering operating pressures. The project will
promote training and learning by involving undergraduate science and engineering
majors through the Rensselaer Undergraduate Research Program and by involving
high school seniors through the Questar program. Female and minority students
will again be recruited to broaden participation of underrepresented groups,
exposing students to modern high throughput technology, combinatorial chemistry,
interfacial science, analytical chemistry and bioprocessing.