* 1122985
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Social Integration and Solidarity: Evidence from the Holocaust
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Robert Braun, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

This project investigates the disputed relationship between social integration
of ethnic minorities and solidarity based on a unique micro-level dataset on
Jewish victimization during the Holocaust in occupied Western Europe. Scholars
working in the tradition of ethnic competition theory and the threat hypothesis
argue that social integration reduces solidarity because it increases
competition over scarce resources. Others claim that social proximity reduces
rivalries between groups and enhances solidarity since it enables communication
and increases interdependence between groups. To understand the link between
social integration and solidarity, the investigator has developed a formal model
that builds on both approaches and offers a new perspective. The model
demonstrates that the relationship between intergroup integration and solidarity
is not monotonic, as most scholars assume, but curvilinear. Initial increases in
social integration result in lower levels of solidarity. Once groups move beyond
a certain threshold, however, increases in social integration are translated
into higher levels of solidarity. This suggests that theories grounded in ethnic
competition shed light on the first half of this integration-solidarity curve
and that the latter half can be understood in light of counterarguments to those
theories.

The Holocaust in the Netherlands provides a unique, albeit tragic, laboratory to
test this model. In some Dutch counties solidarity with Jews was higher and more
Jews were able to survive with the help of Gentiles than in others, where
solidarity was lower. The investigator will combine recently recovered archival
information on occupations, marriage partners and residencies of all Jews living
in occupied Holland with commemoration books and historical census data to
compile a dataset on Jewish victimization and social integration at the
municipality level, a geographical unit roughly comparable to a U.S. county.
This allows him to test contending theories on a fine-grained level and in an
important historical context.

This study has important intellectual and scholarly implications. First,
existing comparative research on genocide in general and on the Holocaust in
particular overlooks local dynamics of mass-killing, as it tends to treat
genocide as a homogenous phenomenon. This research seeks to explain local
differences in the intensity of genocide and in doing so zeros in on how local
dynamics and interactions shape mass killing. Second, most systematic studies of
the Holocaust are over-determined, in that there are more plausible explanations
than cases. Studying the Holocaust on a sub-national level provides scholars
with more cases that can be used to delineate between more and less plausible
explanations. Third and most important, this study provides a unique assessment
of competing theories on social integration, solidarity and conflict. These
competing theories are not only relevant for the investigation of genocide,
ethnic conflict and civil strife but also play prominent roles in the study of
interstate war, peace building, immigrant integration and the strength of civil
society as a whole. This project in particular is able to test systematically
the micro-dynamics of conflict and solidarity when it matters the most: at the
time the events themselves are unfolding.

This study also has important broader implications. The notion that cross-
boundary communication reduces stereotypes and engenders trust has informed a
wide array of policies aimed at conflict resolution and prevention, such as
peace schools in Israel, residential mixing of immigrants and natives in Western
Europe, and Muslim-Hindu dialogues in India. This project offers a novel
empirical examination of the claim that underlies this category of policies. The
project's theory and test can contribute to contemporary debates over conflict
resolution by suggesting that integration may not solve problems immediately,
but has important and positive long-term effects.