* 1122291
* Linear Conductance-Based Mechanisms Underlying Oscillations in Neuronal Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Amitabha Bose, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 471,007.00

The primary goal of this project is to provide a new understanding of the
neuronal properties that are critical for producing stable slow bursting
oscillations and to explore the consequences of their activation when neurons
expressing them are embedded in a network. Nonlinear regenerative inward
currents are thought to be important in producing slow oscillations and
bursting. This project uses a novel approach where the nonlinear inward current
is replaced with a linear current of negative conductance. This approach exposes
the multiple roles played by regenerative inward currents and simplifies the
investigation of the contribution of other ionic currents to oscillatory
activity. It also allows for a simpler mathematical analysis of the mechanisms
that generate neuronal oscillations. This methodology is used to investigate the
role of specific ionic currents in the generation and shaping of oscillations in
individual neurons, to examine how synaptic interactions between neurons
cooperate or compete with intrinsic properties to produce oscillations in
networks of heterogeneous neurons, and to determine if the mechanisms that give
rise to oscillations in isolated cells remain unchanged when the neuron is part
of a network. These aims are pursued using techniques of dynamical systems and
bifurcation theory in reduced mathematical models as well as simulations of
detailed biophysical models, and electrophysiological experiments on bursting
neurons of the crab pyloric network. These three methods are developed in
parallel allowing for continual exchange of findings between the theoretical and
experimental approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous behaviors ranging from
locomotion to cognitive tasks rely on oscillatory activity generated by networks
of neurons in the brain. Despite the predominance and indispensability of brain
oscillations, few theoretical tools are available for understanding how such
oscillations are generated or controlled. A novel approach is used that combines
biological experiments and mathematical analysis to break apart the complex
interactions present in network components into simple building blocks. This
allows core elements that are important in the generation of oscillations to be
extracted and will clarify the role of other existing components in sculpting
behavior using mathematical models. The models are tested through experiments
that connect real time computer-simulated neurons to small oscillatory networks
in the crab central nervous systems. This project provides a framework for
developing neural-based control systems with potential applications in robotics
and bio-inspired computing.