* 1122502
* International DDEP:  Planning for Resevoir Operation and Land-Use with Stakeholders of the Mekong Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Teresa Culver, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 03/31/2013
* USD 9,700.00

This award supports field work in Laos by Ph.D. candidate, Julia Reis, in her
study of the impact of the new Yali reservoir in Vietnam on the Mekong River in
Cambodia downstream of the dam. In particular, the PI and Ms. Reis are
developing methods to optimize reservoir operations to minimize negative impacts
on the environment and the livelihoods of people living in the region. The Land
Use Planning and Analysis System (LUPAS), an optimization model developed for
Southeast Asia, will be utilized to integrate the livelihoods of residents near
the Yali Reservoir into the planning process. Ultimately, the model will be used
to optimize the operation of a cascade of 3 reservoirs (the Yali, Theun-Hinbun
Expansion, and Lower Sesan 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Reis will join a large
on-going research project through the International Water Management Institute
(IWMI) of the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research (CGIAR).
During two two-month visits to the Vientiane, Laos, office of IWMI, Ms. Reis
will work with IWMI researchers as well as the National Agriculture and Forestry
Research Institute to tailor her reservoir optimization model and link it with
the LUPAS model. IWMI will also assist Ms. Reis in meeting with governmental
agencies to collect natural resources data to populate the reservoir model with
accurate data. Through collaborative meetings with stakeholder partners arranged
by IWMI and other organizations, Ms. Reis and other project partners will work
together to coordinate dam operation with local community and environmental
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project rests in the
integration of two complex systems in a simulation that can assist in optimizing
reservoir operations. The proposal addresses the need for both vertical and
horizontal integration of system descriptions. Horizontal integration brings
together the management of natural resources such as soil, water, forests, and
urban landscapes while the vertical integration focuses on how well engineers
and planners understand the regional political and social climate, and how
directly stakeholders can contribute to plans that can have great impact. With
better understanding of the interactions and effects in these complex systems,
i.e. a complete river basin, unintended but negative impacts on people and the
environment may be minimized. This can have great significance for the society
in the region. The project also contributes to the professional development of
Ms. Reis and of an undergraduate who will also travel to Laos.