* 1122296
* Collaborative Research: TUES: Vertical Integration of Concepts and Laboratory Experiences in Biometrics Across the Four Year Electrical and Computer Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Steven Chin, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2016
* USD 356,654.00

The project is a collaborative effort involving Rowan University, Bucknell
University, and Tennessee State University that is vertically integrating
conceptual knowledge and laboratory experiences in biometrics across the
curriculum. Vertical integration refers to a series of laboratory exercises in a
given topical area that start as well-structured experiments at the lower levels
and proceed to increasingly complex, open-ended design projects at upper levels
of the curriculum. The investigators intend to create a national model by
developing multi-year curricular material that allows course content in separate
classes to be naturally interconnected. The project is providing educational
experiences that are training future system designers prepared to deal with the
complexity, implementation, and performance evaluation of a variety of biometric
methods (face, speech, iris, signature, and fingerprint). Students are also
gaining a better knowledge of policy, ethical, and societal impact issues of
biometrics. The team is disseminating their material and results through web
postings on the project's websites and on the Connexions website
(http://cnx.org/), through technical and educational conferences and journal
articles, and through a faculty workshop. The project includes outreach to a
local community college and to K-12 school teachers. Both internal and external
evaluators are using pre- and post-survey data and the results of rubric-based
scores on student work with experimental and comparison groups to monitor
progress toward project goals. Broader impacts include the broad dissemination,
the community college and K-12 outreach, and the focus on the social aspects of
the technology.