* 1122726
* Modeling spatial population dynamics in branching river networks using quantum graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Kurt Anderson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The lack of an appropriate modeling framework for branching river networks has
been identified as a major hindrance to understanding the influences of spatial
structure and environmental variability on ecological dynamics. Of particular
need is a representation of the spatial domain of a river network in its
natural, continuous form. This project incorporates quantum graph theory as a
mathematical framework for modeling river networks. Developed for problems in
quantum mechanics, this theory pairs a metric graph with a differential
operator. Metric graph branches are identified with continuous intervals instead
of discrete nodes; functions and operators are defined along these intervals.
Thus, environmental variability can be interpreted as variation in system
parameters along branches in the network, and solutions to parabolic and
elliptic differential equations describing population dynamics that result from
spatial variability can be analyzed globally. While quantum graphs hold great
potential for modeling how branching network structure and environmental
variability influence ecological dynamics in rivers, key mathematical demands of
the ecological problem have not been adapted to this framework. This project
overcomes these obstacles by accomplishing two objectives: 1) Extending quantum
graphs to handle systems of reaction-diffusion-advection equations and their
associated integral kernels that typically arise in river population dynamic
models; and 2) developing transform methods for solutions on branching networks
to describe the response of river populations to environmental variability. This
extension of quantum graphs to ecological dynamics leads to theoretical advances
that may also impact a wide range of problems in science involving continuous
spatial networks, for example predator-prey dynamics, nerve-signal propagation,
and nutrient or drug delivery in body vessels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How is a
river like a tree? If you look at a river on a map and a tree, they look very
similar, with a large main stem branching into smaller branches. Ecologists
studying rivers have long understood the importance of a rivers tree-like
structure, yet tools are currently lacking that allow researchers to incorporate
this structure into models of important ecological processes. This hinders, for
example, the ability to predict where and how far a pollutant may travel in a
river, to investigate the potential impacts of dam placement or removal on
populations of endangered species, and to understand the complex effects of land
use and climate change in river floodplains. This project leads to the
development of a set of mathematical and computational tools for studying rivers
in their branching form. This is done by adapting a mathematical framework,
known as the theory of quantum graphs, to ecological problems. Quantum graphs
were developed and have been largely studied in the context of quantum physics.
However, this focus means that these techniques are not available "off the
shelf" for application to other fields of science. This project removes these
barriers to application, and expands the ability to represent the special
ecological patterns that arise from a rivers branching structure.