* 1122009
* CONFERENCE: Genetic Recombination &amp; Genome Rearrangements
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* John Petrini, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2012
* USD 9,600.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This FASEB conference will be held in Steamboat
Springs, Colorado, on July 24-29, 2011. The 2011 Conference on Genetic
Recombination and Chromosome Rearrangements will be the fourteenth in a series
of highly successful bi-annual conferences devoted to these topics. Genetic
recombination plays a key role in molding genome structure in all living
organisms and is required to maintain genome integrity. The global objective of
the conference is to bring together workers at the forefront of all aspects of
genetic recombination to present new results and to promote discussion between
researchers using different techniques and experimental systems. In the program
for the 2011 conference, every effort is being made to balance organismal
systems, homologous/specialized recombination, and mechanistic/biological
studies. The organizers have recruited eight leaders in the field to chair the
sessions; the session chairs, in consultation with the organizers, have invited
outstanding speakers representing diverse approaches and experimental systems.
This conference aims to join approximately 200 investigators studying many
diverse aspects of genetic recombination, in a range of biological systems and
with different experimental approaches. Presentations will introduce new and
unpublished work on timely questions in the field and will include discussion
from all participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Every
effort has been made to include female and junior investigators as invited
speakers; in addition, several slots will be allocated to talks selected from
abstracts with the expectation these will be given to junior investigators. Four
of eight session chairs are women and about 30% of speakers on the preliminary
program are women.