* 1122039
* Key role of the multifunctional translation elongation factor in virus replication
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Peter Nagy, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 12/31/2015
* USD 806,796.00

Intellectual Merit: Replication is the central step in the infectious cycles of
RNA viruses, which cause many devastating diseases in plants, animals and
humans. These viruses replicate inside the infected cells by co-opting an
unknown number of host proteins and reprogramming several cellular pathways. In
spite of the significance of host proteins in viral pathogenesis, our current
knowledge about host factors subverted for virus replication is incomplete. This
project is aimed at addressing the role of the multifunctional host-coded
translation elongation factor 1A (eEF1A), which is a permanent resident in the
viral replicase complex and plays a key role in Tomato bushy stunt virus (TBSV)
replication. The research will unravel the functions of eEF1A using innovative
approaches including yeast and plant assays developed for tombusviruses, as well
as the powerful cell-free TBSV replication assay in yeast extracts. This
research will likely lead to major new insights into virus replication and viral
pathogenesis and will have a considerable impact on our understanding of the
mechanism that transforms the host cells into "viral factories". Since eEF1A
likely affects replication of a large number of plant and animal viruses, major
progress with tombusviruses would be highly advantageous to study of other
viruses as well. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: High school and
undergraduate students will actively participate in the research. Students will
be exposed to highly innovative research, thus providing them an invaluable
learning experience. This research will promote interdisciplinary (plant
pathology, biochemistry, cell biology, genetics) learning. The research also
includes mentoring for postdoctoral researchers and preparing them for a
scientific career in academia or industry. Pioneering research on tombusvirus
replication will immensely help other scientists working with less tractable,
but devastating viral pathogens for which similar studies are currently not yet
feasible. Dissection of the role of eEF1A in viral pathogenesis and disease
development will facilitate future antiviral approaches and treatments to reduce
the effect of viral diseases in agriculture.