* 1122828
* Collaborative Research: LivePhoto Physics Interactive Video Vignettes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Robert Teese, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 09/30/2016
* USD 215,989.00

The LivePhoto Physics Group is creating and evaluating the use of a series of
"Interactive Video Vignettes" - short single-topic video expositions that
incorporate experimental measurement and analysis activities. These web-based
vignettes are being developed as exercises to supplement textbook reading and/or
serve as pre-lecture or pre-laboratory activities. Each vignette combines
narration, a real-world video segment, and video analysis tools to enable
students to master concepts while learning how to collect and analyze data. The
video analysis methods can range from simply viewing the spacing between lines
on a video frame to applying sophisticated data collection and analysis
techniques. By providing an interactive experience outside the classroom,
students are able to confront common conceptual difficulties and learn how
scientific knowledge is constructed through observation and experimentation.
Since Interactive Video Vignettes represent a new genre of learning materials,
this group is conducting research on the impact of vignette use on student
learning and attitudes. One focus is to identify efficient course management
techniques that motivate students to use vignettes productively with a minimum
of instructor time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive Video Vignettes are to
serve as a model for other STEM web developers as they create interactive
materials involving student use of real-world observations in many venues. These
include supplements to classroom work, laboratory experiences, on-line courses,
and hands-on science museum experiences. In addition, the project is developing
new methods for automated collection of data about how students interact with
web-based materials. Such data can assist other developers in automating and
streamlining their educational research techniques while engaged in formative
and summative research on how students can most profitably interact with web-
based materials. These techniques provide new tools for research on how
different student populations acquire the conceptual, mathematical, and
epistemological knowledge that is essential for understanding science.