* 1122616
* Development and Evaluation of StarCellBio: A Cell Biology Experiment Simulator for Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Graham Walker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

StarCellBiology employs a set of in silico cell biology experiment simulations
for use in generating realistic problems for undergraduate student lecture and
laboratory classes. The cell biology simulations will augment the biochemistry
(StarBiochem) and genetics (StarGenetics) materials already on the STAR web site
http://web.mit.edu/star/. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
materials and accompanying faculty guidelines are enriching science education by
supplying educational software and curricular materials that (i) provide for
inquiry-based learning experiences through interactive, realistic, computer-
generated simulations of experiments, (ii) expose students to examples of actual
data acquired from cutting-edge research, (iii) are useful across a range of
educational levels, (iv) are designed to accommodate instructor-determined
customization, (v) can be easily implemented in existing course curricula, and
(v) are freely and openly accessible worldwide via the internet. This
interactive, inquiry-based, virtual experiment simulator enables students to
engage in the experimental reasoning process by providing virtual opportunities
for them to determine what experiments are needed to answer particular
biological questions, design and perform those experiments, analyze the data
generated, perform follow-up experiments, and draw conclusions from their own
inquiries. It offers students the opportunity to interact with real visual cell
biology data in the course of their studies, as well as utilize microscopy image
and time-lapse movie data in demonstrations of key topics, including cell cycle,
intracellular localization and colocalization, trafficking, signaling, cell
motility, cell diversity, and tissue organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Following a design model successfully employed in the two sets of STAR
materials currently available, the specific components of each StarCellBio
experiment simulation are defined by the instructor through use of a modifiable
template that is freely available online, and a beta version of StarCellBio was
assessed for function and usability by faculty and students. The evaluation plan
utilizes research instruments well established in science education and includes
mixed-method approaches to (i) measure gains in student knowledge and
comprehension of cell and molecular biology concepts, (ii) probe development of
student ability to design, conduct, and reasonably interpret results of
biological experiments, (iii) measure changes in students' attitudes and
motivation towards pursuing further study in biology, and (iv) query overall
student response to the StarCellBio tool. Broad dissemination approaches include
online advertising campaigns and direct mailings to biology faculty at
universities nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education.