* 1122785
* Hormonal and Behavioral Responses to Social Threat
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* James McNulty, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Research in behavioral science is beginning to establish important connections
between human behavior, cognition, and biology. The way people think and what
they strive for is fundamentally grounded in complex physiological systems --
systems that have been designed through evolution to help people face everyday
challenges that are part of social living. Hormonal systems are designed to help
people respond adaptively to particular types of social events, including social
threats. Emerging research suggests that the release of particular hormones is
associated with a variety of motivated responses to social threat, from
unselfish helping behavior to aggression and antisocial behavior. The proposed
work will advance this general idea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major
type of social threat that humans regularly face is social exclusion. Exclusion
can take forms such as peer rejection, ostracism from a social or work group, or
romantic rejection. Regardless of where exclusion originates, research shows
that it evokes a range of motivated psychological and behavioral responses. Some
of those responses are highly favorable. For instance, sometimes rejected people
display increased interest in making friends and behave in kind and generous
ways, presumably to regain social acceptance. Other responses to social threat,
however, are highly destructive. Rejection can elicit aggression, a sense of
meaninglessness, depression, social withdrawal, and even
suicide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many studies have now investigated
psychological and behavioral responses to exclusion. Yet very little work has
sought to uncover the basic physiological mechanisms underlying those responses.
Understanding those physiological mechanisms is a critical part of identifying
the broader processes that lead people to behave constructively or destructively
in response to rejection. The proposed work will examine a variety of hormonal
responses to social exclusion because such responses provide a window into
people's immediate motivational states and tendencies to perform prosocial and
antisocial behaviors. Past research suggests that progesterone, cortisol, and
testosterone (hormones associated with social bonding, stress, and social
dominance, respectively) play a critical role in determining people's responses
to exclusion. The proposed experiments will examine the effect of exclusion on
hormones such as progesterone, cortisol, and testosterone. Studies will also
evaluate the extent to which the release of these hormones following rejection
promotes specific prosocial and antisocial behaviors including altruism,
affiliation, aggression, and social withdrawal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding when, why, and for whom positive and
negative social behavior occurs is a critical step toward encouraging or
modifying such behaviors. Consequently, this research program has implications
for improving societal outcomes within a range of personal, social, and
organizational contexts, from marriages to school and work settings. The
research will also foster deep connections between psychology, cognitive
science, and behavioral neuroscience -- research areas that heretofore have had
relatively little contact. Finally, the execution of this research will involve
the training of several graduate and undergraduate students, many of whom are
from groups that are presently underrepresented in science careers.