* 1122928
* PASI on Inverse Problems and PDE Control;Valparaiso/Santiago, Chile; January 16-27, 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Gunther Uhlmann, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

1122928&lt;br/&gt;Uhlmann &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced
Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department
of Energy (DOE), will take place in January 16-27, 2012 at three universities in
Chile: the Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María in Valparaiso, the
Pontificia Universidad Católica in Santiago, and the Center for Mathematical
Modeling of the Universidad de Chile, also in Santiago. Organized by Dr. Gunther
Uhlmann of the Department of Mathematics at the University of California-Irvine,
California, the institute will focus on leading edge techniques used in the
study of inverse coefficient problems and control problems for partial
differential equations (PDE). Inverse Problems and PDE control have significant
impacts on applied science and engineering including applications to
stabilization, identification and design of physical systems (e.g. quantum
control), image processing, mathematical finance, astronomy, geosciences,
medical imaging and non-destructive evaluation of materials, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will introduce students to many important
techniques in the above subjects. In addition to the exposure and mentoring of
young scientists to state-of-the-art methods in inverse problems and PDE
control, this PASI will foster international collaboration among researchers
from the US and different countries in the Americas. Further, cross-disciplinary
efforts will be encouraged between scientists and mathematicians both from the
U.S. and abroad. The results from the PASI will be disseminated through a
website where all the lectures will be available for downloading.