* 1122919
* PROPMAP: A Novel GPU-accelerated Structure-Property Relationship Mapping Algorithm Utilizing Volunteer Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Edward Lowe, Lowe                    Edward         W
* Fellowship Award
* Alan Sussman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 240,000.00

The Chemical Abstract Services (CAS) recently recorded the 53 millionth unique
chemical substance in the CAS registry with the 40 millionth being cataloged
only 9 months prior. With this explosive growth in chemical substances, the
question of what physical, chemical, and biological properties are possessed by
these substances arises. The existing data for fundamental physical/chemical
properties, such as dissociation energies, logP, enthalpies of formation,
refractive indexes, boiling points, and melting points define Structure Property
Relationships (SPR) and is accessible through SciFinder and Beilstein.
Similarly, fundamental biological properties such as binding constants to
enzymes are available through the ChEMBL and PubChem databases.

This research creates an innovative tool relying on volunteer computing for
predicting and mapping SPRs three-dimensionally using a novel computational
algorithm ?PROPMAP? for education and research. The novel architecture of
PROPMAP utilizes a Monte Carlo random walk structure generator and Quantitative
Structure Property Relationship (QSPR) models based on a graphics processing
unit (GPU) accelerated Support Vector Regression algorithm. PROPMAP
interactively maps user-selected physical, chemical, and biological properties
onto any input chemical structure of interest. Graphical representation fosters
understanding of SPRs in basic chemistry education and enables targeted property
modifications in research. This novel approach utilizes volunteer GPU computing
through the Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing (BOINC) to
overcome the otherwise prohibitive computational expense of training and cross
validating models for data sets in excess of one million substances. The impact
of PROPMAP on the scientific community is broadened by making the tool freely
available through a WWW interface for use as an educational and research tool
while also directly training institutions on its utility through workshops and
seminars.