* 1122499
* The Fort Ancient Regional Movement (FARM) Project
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Robert Cook, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 124,354.00

With National Science Foundation support, the FARM (Fort Ancient Regional
Movement) Project, under the direction of Dr. Robert Cook and a team of
colleagues, will gather key data for understanding the development of human
societies at interregional scales. This is a problem as relevant to our
multiethnic world today as in the archaeological past.

The project focuses on determining if, when, and how migration from neighboring
regions factored into local Fort Ancient developments in southwest Ohio, a long-
standing problem in the prehistory of the Midwest U.S. but with methodological
structure of general appeal to many world regions. The project contributes to
broader issues on frontiers and cross-boundary flows that have received
relatively little attention. Frontier zones at the edges of complex systems
(e.g., Mississippian, Mesoamerica, Mesopotamia) have often been relegated to the
status of passive receivers of culture from core areas. However, recently
archaeologists have become interested in such boundary dynamics. Unlike earlier
approaches, however, researchers are now addressing frontier zones as culturally
rich and socially dynamic places where social actors make key decisions about
long-distance interaction and new hybrid formations are often the result.

The theoretical focus recognizes that interregional population movements and
interactions are key contributors to the blurry nature of cultural boundaries.
The general anthropological significance of the project is to move interregional
studies forward by focusing on data relevant to these dimensions, providing key
information to then examine why such moves occurred. The key data to be gathered
pertain to the proveniencing of human remains. This will be accomplished by
temporally examining the strontium content of tooth enamel in a biological and
mortuary framework for a sample of individuals from eleven villages.

The project will have broader impacts in education, both in university settings
and for the general public. Undergraduate and graduate anthropology students
will benefit by being trained in lab analyses, resulting in undergraduate honors
and graduate level theses. Specific activities for artifact analyses will
include basic examination of pottery, projectile points, gorgets, and pipes,
including functional, stylistic, and temporal attributes as appropriate to the
project. Specific activities for human remains will be to assist in strontium
sampling. All student participants will also be mentored during a day-long
career workshop in partnership with the Dayton Society of Natural History. The
project will also have broader impacts in educating the general public about the
types of questions that are answerable with archaeological data, and
particularly the high research utility of extant museum collections. By
promulgating data about these collections, the project will illustrate the
importance of properly curated materials. Additionally, future research projects
on the Fort Ancient collections investigated in the present study will benefit
from having more solid chronological frames of reference.