* 1122163
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Exploring the degree of nativelikeness in bilingual acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,776.00

The dissertation project will explore the degree of native-likeness in bilingual
acquisition of a gradient multi-factor linguistic phenomenon that requires
implicit knowledge of complex stochastic patterns and poses many learnability
problems for the learners. It will investigate how monolingual and bilingual
learners acquire implicit knowledge of when to omit and when not to omit case in
Korean ('case ellipsis') and whether bilinguals can successfully acquire
sensitivity to multiple cues in a phenomenon that involves the interaction of
syntactic, semantic, and discourse principles. It will also compare second
language (L2) learners to heritage language (HL) learners to investigate how age
of acquisition and the type and amount of input contribute to developing native-
like competence. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By using a set of oral and written
elicited production experiments, the present project will test L2 adults, HL
adults, and Korean-speaking adults and children on their knowledge and usage of
case marking and case ellipsis. An oral picture description task and a written
forced choice task that cross the factors of focus, animacy, and definiteness
will be conducted to observe the speakers' patterns of case-marking in oral and
written conversations. The experiments will help compare the types of cues that
are more readily accessible than others and identify potential developmental
stages. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The present study will not only help increase our
understanding of the nature of bilingual acquisition and characteristics of
different types of bilinguals but will also contribute to the knowledge of the
differences between monolingual and bilingual acquisition in interfaces of
syntax and other linguistic domains. The results of this research will thus
address theoretically significant questions in acquisition theory and also help
identify L2 and HL learners' instructional needs. The results are expected to
shed light on qualitative differences in the underlying linguistic knowledge of
HL and L2 learners and help provide support for HL tracks in language
classrooms.