* 1122225
* Single Molecule Studies of Protein Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Susan Marqusee, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,188,118.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the protein-folding problem
using single molecule studies. Protein folding, the mechanism by which the amino
acid sequence directs the energy landscape of a protein (the structures,
energies, and rates of interconversion of all of the accessible conformations),
remains a major challenge for modern molecular biology. Without a better
understanding of how these features are encoded in a protein sequence, the
expanding sequence databases continue to conceal the answers to many important
questions. The project aims to develop methods for applying force or tension on
a single protein molecule using tools such as an optical trap or magnetic
tweezers and monitoring the conformation of the protein by following the
distance between specific sites in the protein. The results will yield
observables that can be used directly in theoretical studies of protein folding
and the design of the experiments will be carried out in an iterative
collaboration with theoreticians in the field. Mechanical stress plays a
ubiquitous role in protein function and biology, and therefore, in addition to
providing needed insight into the protein-folding problem this work will also
provide much needed information about the mechanical stability of
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its impact in protein folding and
macromolecular biophysics, the research in this project requires training at the
intersection of physics and biology: the work is a collaborative effort between
a physics and a biochemistry lab. The work is not just interdisciplinary; it is
actually interdependent, requiring state-of-the-art experiments in both physics
and molecular biology. The work requires a combination of students and
postdoctoral trainees with diverse backgrounds to work closely together. The
project also involves the help of undergraduates, particularly those with a
background in engineering and physics, giving them direct exposure to the
biological sciences. In sum, this work offers a unique educational experience
for the students and post-doctoral fellows involved in the project, and will
help to train a new generation of scientists fluent in both the biological and
quantitative sciences.