* 1122768
* Selection of the 3' end mRNA processing site by Cleavage Factor I
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Alex (Andrew) Bohm, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 07/31/2015
* USD 805,615.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Gene expression is the process of
synthesizing functional proteins using information stored in the nucleus as DNA
and transmitted to cellular sites of protein synthesis in the form of mRNA
molecules, produced by copying (transcribing) DNA. An essential step in gene
expression is the precise trimming of the 3'-ends of messenger RNA (mRNA)
molecules by 3'-end processing enzymes that recognize specific RNA sequences.
This process determines the length of each mRNA molecule and affects the
efficiency with which it is utilized as a template for protein synthesis.
Roughly half of human genes contain more than one potential site of 3'-end
processing and are subject to alternative processing. Selection of the
appropriate processing site is particularly important in the synthesis of
proteins involved in immune responses and in cell differentiation. This project
uses yeast as a model system to study the mechanism of 3'-end processing and
focuses on an evolutionarily conserved complex of five proteins called Cleavage
Factor I (CF I) that recognizes mRNA signal sequences which define the sites of
3'-end processing. The research will utilize single-particle electron
microscopy, coupled with RNA foot-printing and molecular modeling techniques to
construct models of the overall structure of CF I and elucidate how it
recognizes mRNA signal sequences and directs processing of the 3'-ends of mRNAs.
Yeast genetics, coupled with biochemical binding experiments, will be used to
verify and refine the resulting molecular models. This work is of fundamental
importance because mRNA 3'-end processing affects the expression of all proteins
in all eukaryotic cells. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will provide hands-on research
training for the graduate students in the Tufts Biochemistry program,
postdoctoral fellows and summer trainees, including undergraduates who will be
recruited through an NIH-sponsored program entitled "Building Diversity in the
Biomedical Sciences" and high school students who will come to the laboratory
through the Teachers and High School Students Program administered by the Tufts
Office of Minority Affairs. The funds will also permit Dr. Bohm to continue his
mentorship activities within the Tufts Biochemistry Program and within the Tufts
PREP program, a postbaccalaureate program that prepares students from
underrepresented groups for graduate school. In addition, the techniques used in
this work will be integrated into two courses Dr. Bohm currently teaches. The
first is a graduate course on molecular recognition. The second is a summer
workshop-style classroom/laboratory course designed to introduce participants in
the use of scattering methods to analyze macromolecular complexes in their own
research. Thus, this course is a particularly important mechanism for
disseminating the technical aspects of the research and helping others apply
these methods to other biological systems.