* 1122932
* Analysis of Recorded Ju/.hoan San Language Events as Political Action, 1990-Present
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Marguerite Biesele, Biesele, Marguerite A.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 130,546.00

Dr. Megan Biesele will undertake research on changes in political language among
the Ju/'hoan San of Namibia and Botswana who are the most extensively studied
nomadic hunting and gathering people in the world. The Nyae Nyae Tape Archive
(NNTA) is a unique record capturing the perceptions of the Ju/'hoan, a
"click"-speaking people, in their own words. Recorded between 1970 - 2010 and
now digitized, the NNTA is being transcribed and translated by the Ju/'hoan
Transcription Group trained since 2002 in Tsumkwe, Namibia. It contains
documentation of Ju/'hoan-language dialogue on land and leadership from 1988 to
the present, a period when apartheid South West Africa became independent
Namibia that will provide the baseline data with which new speech collected
through this project will be compared.

Linguistic analysis of content, framing, intonation, and syntax will show how
the Ju/'hoan through their people's organization, the Nyae Nyae Conservancy,
confront issues of the present, including environmental pressure from
neighboring pastoralists and the ongoing challenges of minority representation
in Namibia. The focus will be on how discourse about such topics has changed
overtime. Importantly, the NNTA recordings allow identification of recent
changes in the rhetorical and oratorical principles underlying Ju/'hoan
politics. In the planned research, thus, the old and new recordings illuminate
current Ju/'hoan history "from within". The Ju/'hoan now struggle to adapt to
state imperatives during the current unavoidable transition from egalitarian to
more hierarchical governance. These new realities are expressed in changing
modes of discourse of intense interest to anthropologists.

Beyond scholarly impacts, the project's archives will also help Ju/'hoan people
themselves better understand how their rhetoric has operated to effect change
and provide a unique longitudinal record of discourse changes among a nomadic
hunting and gathering population undergoing rapid and massive cultural
transformation.