* 1122876
* Environmental Variability and Disease Emergence: Spatial Patterns of Lyme Disease Emergence in Virginia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* James Campbell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 199,997.00

Disease emergence is an inherently geographical phenomenon, and factors at
multiple spatial scales, such as international trade and local land-use change,
interact to contribute to a disease's appearance in the human population for the
first time or its spread beyond the original range. In spite of great
advancements in the control of infectious diseases over the last several
decades, endemic zoonotic diseases like Lyme disease, the most common vector-
borne disease in the United States, continue to expand in range, and the
mechanisms underlying these emergence events are poorly understood. This
research project will examine the diffusion of Lyme disease as it emerges
southward along the East Coast, using Virginia as a case study because of the
state's location on the front line of human Lyme disease expansion. A key
objective for the investigators is to determine the role of variability in human
and physical environments on the disease's continued spread at multiple spatial
scales. Specific research goals are to quantify the spatial and temporal
emergence pattern of human Lyme disease in Virginia between 1998 and 2010 to
determine where human case clustering occurs; to characterize landscape-level
factors in the human and physical environments that are associated with human
cases; and to develop a predictive geographic model of human incidence to
identify areas of Virginia that are at highest risk for future Lyme disease
emergence. The interdisciplinary research team, combining expertise in
geography, forestry, statistics, and entomology, will use statistical analyses
to examine the diffusion of Lyme disease in Virginia over the past decade,
pinpointing case clusters. GIS analyses will link human and environmental
conditions with human cases from 1998 to 2010 and allow for an improved
understanding of environmental conditions associated with Lyme disease
emergence. Finally, combined statistical and geospatial tools will assist in the
development of a predictive map and model of human incidence that will allow
public health officials to target their use of sometimes scarce human and
financial resources in the prevention of future Lyme disease
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide new insights into the
ways in which variability in human and physical environments at multiple spatial
scales contribute to disease emergence. The bulk of research examining the
relationship between Lyme disease and environmental variability has focused on
endemic areas, neglecting study of the environmental influences at the edges of
the disease's range expansion. Understanding such relationships as the disease
emerges in non-endemic areas is crucially important to disease prevention and
control, and the results of this research will provide public health departments
with critical information to be used in communications with health clinics and
physicians' offices. Lyme disease has a significant public health burden in the
U.S., and an improved understanding of the disease's emergence pattern will
enhance diagnosis and reporting efforts, and ultimately decrease the number of
human cases. The project will improve scientific understanding of disease
emergence in general, and more specifically Lyme disease emergence, and the
approach and methods used in the research can be applied to the study of other
vector-borne diseases. The research will provide opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to gain research experience in an interdisciplinary
setting, and the Virginia Department of Health will disseminate the results to
the general public and physicians to improve public health.