* 1122176
* Genomic Consequences of Asexuality
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2019
* Jeffrey Boore, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2019
* USD 984,073.00

Intellectual Merit: Sexual reproduction is more costly than asexual
reproduction, yet nearly all organisms reproduce sexually at least some of the
time. Why is sexual reproduction so common despite its costs? Are there
significant evolutionary consequences of asexual reproduction? What are the
effects of sexual reproduction or its absence on the evolution of genes and
genomes? Despite decades of study, these and related questions remain
unanswered. Established genetic model systems such as fruit flies and yeast have
provided important insights into the genetic and genomic consequences of sex and
recombination. However, these systems are limited because they do not offer the
ability to make direct comparisons between sexual and asexual organisms--and
their genomes--from the same natural populations with similar genetic background
and environmental history. This project will use a different organism,
Potamopyrgus antipodarum, a New Zealand snail, which has both sexual and
independently-derived asexual lineages that make it ideally suited to address
fundamental evolutionary questions of how genes and genomes evolve in the
absence of sexual reproduction. This research will take advantage of the unique
strengths of P. antipodarum and extend them to the genomic level, generating
novel insights into the genetic consequences of sexual reproduction and its
absence. Analyzing sexual and asexual lineages will make it possible to catch
mutation accumulation and gene loss in the act. This research will also provide
key steps forward in developing P. antipodarum into a powerful model system for
many important biological questions, from host-parasite dynamics to
ecotoxicology. Since a key unique element of sexual reproduction is the rapid
generation of genetically diverse offspring, research outcomes will also
illuminate the extent to which the preservation of genetic diversity within
populations, species, and ecological communities is integral to the preservation
of biological diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
research will provide numerous opportunities for student training and career
development in evolutionary biology, molecular genetics, genomics, and
bioinformatics. Effort will be focused on the Biosciences Advantage and
SROP/McNair programs, which serve students from historically underrepresented
and underserved minority groups with interest in a research career.
Collaborations will be initiated with two high schools in inner-city Minneapolis
serving primarily underrepresented student groups. Science outreach efforts will
be directed towards support and expansion of the local Darwin Day civic group,
which is dedicated to organizing events aimed at increasing public scientific
awareness, comfort, and literacy, and their efforts to initiate a multi-pronged
media consortium.