* 1122666
* Modeling the Effectiveness of Interventions in Stopping the Spead of Vector-Borne Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* James Hyman, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2014
* USD 266,366.00

The goal of the project is to improve the mathematical models used to understand
the spread of vector-borne diseases such as the recent Rift Valley Fever (RVF)
epidemics in Africa, the dengue fever (DENV) outbreaks in South America (and
Florida), and the continued spread of West Nile virus (WNV) in the United
States. Because of the importance of the environment and weather on mosquito-
borne epidemics, existing models will be extended to be reactive to
environmental changes. For mosquito-borne diseases spread by viruses, there is
the possibility that an infected mother can transmit the virus to her eggs and
her offspring be born infected. Therefore, vertical transmission will also be
included in the modeling and a range of parameters will be identified to
determine when vertical transmission is important. These models are analyzed,
validated on field data, and undergo a full uncertainty quantification analysis.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Mathematical models based on the underlying transmission
mechanisms of the disease can help the public health community understand and
anticipate the spread of an epidemic and evaluate the potential effectiveness of
different approaches for bringing an epidemic under control. The goal is to
develop mathematical models to improve our understanding of the essential
relationships between the biological, environmental, and mitigation mechanisms
that influence the spread of vector-borne diseases. Such models can be used to
assess the relative impact of different mitigation efforts to control the spread
of an epidemic; saving time, resources, and lives.