* 1122553
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Level Response Diversity: Land Use, Livelihood Diversification and Resilience in northern Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* J. Terrence McCabe, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,550.00

Dr. Paul Leslie (Carolina Population Center, the University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill) and Dr. J. Terrence McCabe (University of Colorado) will undertake
research on how variation in household and community responses to environmental
changes and policy constraints affect the overall resilience of socio-ecological
systems, and the role of cultural institutions in those systems. Data to develop
models to explore these issues will be collected in Tanzania. Throughout much of
East Africa, traditionally nomadic and semi-nomadic herders have been adopting
agriculture and engaging in labor migration. The environmental and social
consequences of these changes are likely to be profound but remain poorly
understood. This project will clarify the causes of the changing land use and
livelihood patterns, and will explore how these changes affect the social-
ecological system, including the viability of households and communities and the
impacts on land cover and biodiversity. A particular focus will be response
diversity. Response diversity results from the fact that not all actors
(individuals, households, communities) respond the same way to changing
conditions; the variation in response may be more important than the typical or
average response in understanding the effects of decision making under changing
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is innovative in its integration of
empirical field-based research with agent-based modeling (ABM), a computer
simulation technique that is well-suited to studying complex systems in which
households and communities interact with one another and make decisions
influenced by changing conditions. Used together, these methods will reveal much
about how land use, livelihoods, family demography, population growth and other
factors respond to changes in the physical and political-economic environment,
especially unpredictable fluctuations and shocks that test overall system
resilience. Shocks can be climatic (e.g., severe droughts), biotic (e.g.,
livestock disease epidemics), and sociopolitical (e.g., loss of access to
pasture and other resources when conservation areas are established).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific significance of this research lies in its
contribution to understanding and theorizing the very complex effects of
response diversity on socio-ecological resilience. The research results will
have a direct bearing on conservation and development in East Africa and will
also help to understand changing socio-ecological systems elsewhere. The
researchers' findings also will suggest ways of mitigating the potentially
negative impacts of social and ecological change on human well-being while also
promoting effective conservation and development measures.