* 1122660
* Collaborative Research: Supporting and Advancing Geoscience Education at Two-year Colleges through Workshops and Web Resources
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Robert Blodgett, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2016
* USD 69,148.00

This collaborative project engages community college and other two-year college
(2YC) geoscience faculty members in a targeted professional development program
that shares successful strategies for teaching students with a range of
abilities, experiences, and goals, and for preparing 2YC students for the
geoscience workforce. Included in this project are: (1) two topical workshops,
one on effective strategies for teaching all students and the other on workforce
development through geoscience education at 2YCs; (2) an associated website of
2YC geoscience resources; (3) four types of dissemination workshops (national,
regional, local, and virtual); and (4) a leadership development program for 2YC
geoscience faculty members. The project develops effective models of
professional development for full-time and adjunct 2YC geoscience faculty
members, establishes networks of 2YC and 4YC faculty members and administrators
focused on 2YC education, and builds leadership within the 2YC geoscience
community. Furthermore, the project synthesizes resources to address challenges
in 2YC geoscience education. The topical and dissemination workshops enable 2YC
faculty members to discuss issues, challenges, and opportunities, to share
effective strategies and examples, to meet new colleagues, to prepare action
plans to improve curriculum and instruction, and to develop sustainable
professional communities.

Strong undergraduate geoscience education is dependent on effective programs at
2YCs. 2YCs play an increasingly important role in producing earth-science
literate citizens, developing a competent and creative geoscience workforce,
teaching science to pre-service K-12 teachers, and providing a foundation for
broadening participation in the geosciences. 2YC faculty members face
substantial challenges - limited resources for travel, isolation, and few
opportunities for geoscience professional development specific for their
setting. By engaging 2YC geoscience faculty members in professional development,
this project disseminates advances in STEM education to improve teaching,
supports students in geoscience technical training, and helps prepare geoscience
majors and pre-service teachers for college transfer. Online resources enable
dissemination beyond workshop participants and are an important resource for
both 2YC faculties and the broader geoscience community. Within the great
diversity of the 2YC students, this project helps broaden the participation of
underrepresented minorities in the geosciences by increasing their involvement
in 2YC programs and by preparing them for enrollment in four-year institutions
or for the geo-technical workforce.