* 1122029
* Sequence Specific Targeting of Nucleic Acids Using Intramolecular Complexes: Energetics, Kinetics and Hydration
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Luis Marky, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Crane
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,066,456.00

Intellectual Merit This research focuses on the thermodynamics of nucleic acid
intramolecular structures, especially, DNA structures that model the secondary
structures of RNA molecules. The broad and long term objectives of this project
are to understand the molecular forces controlling the overall stability of
complex intramolecular DNA structures; to quantify the energetics, kinetics, and
hydration contributions governing the association of these unusual
intramolecular structures with their complementary strands, including the role
of cations; and to determine the thermodynamics for their favorable interaction
with polycations for cellular delivery purposes. The hypothesis is: The presence
of unpaired base nucleotides in the loops of nucleic acid secondary structures
provides favorable free energy contributions in their reaction with
complementary strands and the slightly more hydrophobic surface of these
constrained loops contribute favorably towards the interaction with delivery
vectors, such as polycations. To test this hypothesis the following aims are
proposed: Aim 1: To characterize the melting behavior of stem-loop motifs
containing bulges or internal loops, pseudoknots and three-way junctions as a
function of sequence, stability of their end loops, and solution conditions. Aim
2: To elucidate and quantify the molecular forces governing the reaction of
intramolecular secondary DNA structures with their partially complementary
strands. Aim 3: To determine the kinetics of the bimolecular association
reactions of aim 2, includes reaction rates and associated activation energies
and activation entropies, and to correlate them with their thermodynamics. Aim
4: To elucidate the molecular forces influencing the stability and structure of
DNA-polycation complexes, and to quantify the thermodynamics governing their
formation; including the role of polycation composition, DNA secondary
structure, and solution conditions. The complete thermodynamic characterization
of these DNA complexes and their association reactions will provide a
fundamental understanding of the physical factors that determine their stability
as a function of its sequence and solution conditions. These factors are basic
to the rational design of gene-targeting reagents, and for their proper cellular
delivery, that can be used in therapeutic, diagnostic and biotechnological
applications. Another impact is the global role of water in the physical and
chemical properties of biological macromolecules, and their interaction behavior
towards one another. The correlation of energetics with hydration should improve
our picture of how hydration controls the stability, conformation and melting
behavior of unusual nucleic acid structures. In addition, the resulting
hydration data can be used in molecular modeling studies and in theoretical
calculations, providing an insight into global water that is not available by
NMR or X-ray crystallography techniques.

Broader Impacts The educational significance of this project involves the
mentoring of students at all levels underrepresented in the sciences by training
them in a wide variety of biophysical techniques. This training will improve
their understanding of the molecular forces, kinetics and hydration effects
controlling the structure and conformation of macromolecules, and their
interaction with other molecules. Furthermore, the research findings generated
by this group are routinely incorporated into lectures in Biophysical Chemistry,
Quantitative Pharmaceutical Analysis and Biochemistry.