* 1122154
* RUI: Probing the Free Energy Landscape of Protein Hydrophobic Cores by Solid-State NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Liliya Vugmeyster, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 201,369.00

During the last two decades it has become clear that the shapes and structures
of proteins are not static - these molecules "breathe" and their structures
fluctuate. These motions are not only interesting by themselves, but also
important for the many functions of proteins. This project focuses on the
hydrophobic core, which is the part of the protein that is hidden away from
water. To get a detailed picture of motions inside the core, selected hydrogen
atoms will be changed to deuterons, which have identical chemical properties but
different magnetic ones. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy will then be
used to follow the motions at the selected sites. The investigation will probe
the dependence of the motions on temperature and amount of water around the
protein molecule to reveal the characteristics of the potential energy. By
focusing on quantitative investigations of fluctuations in the core region of
proteins, this project will contribute toward elucidation of physical factors
that govern protein dynamics.

This project has the broader purpose of exposing undergraduate students at the
University of Alaska at Anchorage, which is a predominantly undergraduate
institution, to state-of-the-art instrumentation that is not available to them
in the Anchorage area. The interdisciplinary nature of the work, spanning
chemistry, biology, physics, mathematics, and computer science, allows for the
appreciation of multiple approaches to solving contemporary scientific problems,
as well as for the incorporation of students from various disciplines into the
project The University of Alaska has a large percentage of students from
underrepresented groups, such as Alaska Natives, and special effort will be made
to attract this group of students through an already established connection with
the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program.