* 1122046
* Molecular Determinants of Bacterial Corrinoid Specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michiko Taga, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 08/31/2015
* USD 574,573.00

Many important biological processes depend on corrinoid cofactors. Corrinoids
are a family of cobalt-containing molecules that include vitamin B12. Corrinoids
are utilized as enzymatic cofactors by animals, protists, and the majority of
prokaryotes but are produced only by a subset of prokaryotes. Thus, corrinoids
must be shared between corrinoid-producing and corrinoid-requiring organisms.
More than 12 corrinoids with structural variability in the lower axial ligand
have been observed. However, sequence-level understanding of specificity in
corrinoid biosynthesis remains largely unexplored. This project seeks to
identify the molecular factors that control the biosynthesis of structurally
diverse corrinoids by examining specificity in the attachment of lower ligands
to corrinoid precursors. Chemical analysis of corrinoids produced by five
representative bacteria will be performed. Specificity in a lower ligand
attachment enzyme will be examined both in vivo in a heterologous bacterial host
and in vitro with purified enzymes. Based on these experimental results,
bioinformatic predictions will be generated to identify amino acid residues that
control specificity for attachment of particular lower ligands. These
predictions will be tested by site-directed mutagenesis and further refined by
additional sequence analysis and experimental validation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental principles of specificity in corrinoid
biosynthesis elucidated by this work will provide insights into the source and
biological function of corrinoid structural variability. This research may form
the foundation of a more general understanding of how small molecules are
exchanged in microbial communities. Microbes in nearly all environments exist in
complex communities containing numerous metabolically and phylogenetically
diverse species. The complexity of organisms in microbial communities has made
it difficult to analyze molecular interactions that occur between community
members. Distinct combinations of structurally diverse corrinoids have been
detected in five different microbial communities thus far. Given that half of
sequenced bacteria are estimated to require corrinoids produced by other
organisms, and that corrinoid function is influenced by the structure of the
lower ligand, understanding specificity in lower ligand attachment will provide
important insights into the molecular interactions that occur in microbial
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide insights into biological processes that require corrinoids and will
contribute to the understanding of small molecule exchange in microbial
communities. Understanding and manipulating corrinoid-dependent metabolism has
diverse applications in bioremediation, bioenergy, and synthetic biology. This
project will provide research training to a postdoctoral scholar, graduate
student, and 2-3 undergraduate students. A major initiative to educate the
public about microbial diversity will be created that will launch a new exhibit
at UC Berkeley's annual open house, an event that draws approximately 35,000
visitors to the campus each year. A team of undergraduate and graduate students
will design an interactive microbiology activity station to showcase the
diversity of microbes in nature. The event will also include a "microbe art"
station aimed at educating children about microorganisms. An outreach program
will be created as an extension of this event in which undergraduate and
graduate student volunteers will bring interactive components of the event to
elementary school classes in surrounding communities. These educational
initiatives have the potential to increase public awareness of the impact of
microbial processes on the environment, to generate excitement about microbes
among younger students, and to provide opportunities to engage university
students in primary education.