* 1122362
* Application for Financial Support for the Conference  "The Molecular Life of Diatoms"
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Nils Kroger, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 04/30/2012
* USD 5,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1122362 PI: Kroger, Ni ORG: Georgia Tech

Title: Application for Financial Support for the Conference "The Molecular Life
of Diatoms"

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The conference is the first of its kind; it aims to
establish a regularly occurring information and interaction platform for
researchers that study the molecular foundations of diatom biology, ecology,
biotechnology, and nanotechnology. The conference is intended to serve multiple
purposes: (1) Exchange of information on current and emerging research progress
, (2) Establish and promote collaborations of existing research groups in the
field, (3) Provide a scientific forum for undergraduate and graduate students,
and for postdoctoral researchers to foster their research education and to
facilitate their transition into new research areas, (4) Attract interest of
research groups from other research fields in order to engage them as new
collaborators. The main topics of the conference span the full range of diatom
science: Genomes and Molecular Genetics, Cell Biology, Physiology and Ecology,
and Applications in Nano-, Bio- and Environmental Technology. The PI has
assembled a five-person organizing committee consisting of leading researchers
in the field and confirmed the participation of at least 12 invited speakers,
each of them outstanding player in the topic areas enumerated above. The
conference will provide a forum for exchange of information and ideas within
this diverse community.

BROADER IMPACTS: The conference provides a platform for a wide-ranging
discussion of all aspects of diatom biology and technology. To stimulate the
participation of undergraduate researchers, several travel fellowships will be
awarded to undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers. Special consideration will be given to members of these groups who
are female and/or belong to underrepresented minorities. Attendees from these
groups will also be offered an opportunity to make poster presentations. To
engage students at the high school to college transition the PI will take
advantage of his established collaboration (since Summer 2006) with Science
teacher Danielle Armstrong from the local Dekalb Early College Academy (DECA).
DECA has highly diverse student demographics (10% Hispanic, 80% African
American, 5% Caucasian, 5% other). Ms. Armstrong will select up to 20 students
from DECA to attend the conference talks and discussions on the second and third
days of the meeting.