* 1122303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A description of Anii, an underdocumented language of West Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* David Odden, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,170.00

This dissertation will describe and analyze undocumented aspects of the grammar
of Anii, a Kwa language with approximately 46,000 speakers, spoken along the
border of Togo and Benin, West Africa. Original data will be collected from
speakers of the Bassila dialect of Anii in order to answer outstanding
descriptive and theoretical questions that have arisen from very limited
previous research.

Anii is classified as a Kwa language, specifically a member of a small group of
languages called Ghana-Togo Mountain (GTM) languages, and has only one possible
close relative. Thus, the study of Anii will shed light on a very under-studied
branch of the Kwa family. Areas of focus for this project include a description
of the tonal system of Anii, investigation of sound patterns, especially
regarding vowels, a description of clausal syntax, and work on the semantics of
the Anii verbal system.

Since Anii is virtually undescribed, the data to be gathered will contribute to
empirical knowledge of the world's languages and allow for the testing of
theories that were developed using data from more well-known languages. In
addition, the project will support grassroots literacy efforts in the Anii
language to help many illiterate adults learn to read for the first time and
give many children easier access to education (through envisioned Anii to French
transition programs in local schools). An important step for these literacy
programs is developing an orthography that includes tone, and the tonal analysis
to be undertaken for this dissertation research is key to the success of this
endeavor. This project will also aid in the preservation of the Anii language
and culture and encourage the Anii people to have pride in their linguistic
heritage through collecting texts for the staff of a new Anii-language magazine.