* 1122977
* Redox Reactivity of Thioredoxin Disulfide Bonds
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Sean Elliott, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 778,752.00

Intellectual Merit.

While disulfide bonds are ubiquitous redox-active cofactors used in biology for
catalytic, structural and signaling roles, a molecular level understanding of
the principles that govern disulfide bond reactivity has proven elusive. In this
work, direct electrochemistry will be used as a primary tool to characterize the
influence of protein sequence and structure upon the redox properties of the
thioredoxin (Trx) superfamily of proteins. Trx proteins are found throughout all
the kingdoms of life: a paradigm of disulfide-based mechanisms for charge
transfer and redox-homeostasis. While Trx proteins engage in diverse functions,
and serve as modules that are a part of complex biological functions, there is a
knowledge-gap in our understanding of how Trx proteins are tuned to be
specifically reactive. Thus, this project will directly test models of how
disulfide bonds are used in Biology, a question critical to many areas of
biological chemistry, where the disulfide bond redox state is an essential trait
to determine reactivity, signaling, and protein folding. A central question
addressed in the project is, "How does Nature tune the redox chemistry of a
disulfide bond?" In this project, the PI will (1) Assess the natural range
reduction potentials found in Trx proteins, (2) Determine the influence of
sequence and structure on reduction potentials, and (3) Examine the stability of
disulfide-bond:iron-sulfur cluster complexes. The project involves the use of
protein electrochemistry due to the highly sensitive, rapid and quantitative
nature of the methodology. The results of the project will provide a new
detailed understanding of how thioredoxins are used in Nature's diversity to
maintain redox homeostasis.

Broader Impact

The most immediate impact will be upon the training of scientists at all levels
(undergraduates, graduate students, post-doctoral faculty fellows) to think
quantitatively and chemically in the field of redox biochemistry. However, due
to the pervasive and central role that disulfide bond redox chemistry, redox
homeostasis and oxidative stress play in the biological chemistry of all life,
the broader impacts of this work will touch deeply upon the interface of
chemistry and biology. Whether in plant biochemistry, bioenergy sciences or
microbial physiology - thioredoxins are a paradigm of understanding how
disulfide bonds are used to achieve chemical change in Life. Illuminating this
process in a fundamental way will translate into new appreciation of fundamental
biology. The research efforts of the PI are paired with education activities in
the classroom that brings contemporary biological chemistry to the freshman
chemistry audience, training of teacher-scholar postdoctoral fellows at Boston
University via the Postdoctoral Faculty Fellow Program, and serving as an
instructor in an upcoming graduate/postdoctoral training course in Bioinorganic
Chemistry (to be held at Penn State University in 2012), which will disseminate
the experimental methodologies of protein electrochemistry to a much broader
audience.