* 1122650
* Collaborative Research: Deep Insights Anytime, Anywhere (DIA2) - Central Resource for Characterizing the TUES Portfolio through Interactive Knowledge Mining and Visualizations
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Sheri Sheppard, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 399,998.00

LEAD INSTITUTION: Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATORS: Arizona
State University, Stanford University and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This TUES
Central Resource Project is designed to help those engaged in improving STEM
education to synthesize knowledge produced through NSF investments through a
web-based knowledge mining and interactive visualization platform. The Deep
Insights Anytime, Anywhere (DIA2) project allows users (e.g., current and
potential principle investigators, NSF/TUES program staff, and administrators at
academic institutions) to interactively mine, synthesize, and visualize data at
a scale that is not possible with currently available tools. DIA2 is based upon
a more narrowly scoped Interactive Knowledge Networks for Engineering Education
Research (iKNEER) prototype that targeted the engineering education research
community, expanding the functionality by an order of magnitude in scale;
integrating newer approaches in data mining and visualization into a fully
deployed system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three major goals: (1)
Empower the TUES community to leverage TUES investments by understanding the
knowledge hidden within its networks; (2) Develop and apply cutting-edge, large-
scale knowledge mining and visualization techniques for characterizing the
portfolio of TUES and predecessor programs; and (3) Leverage social media
optimization and integration to catalyze diffusion of TUES innovations, build a
community and sustain the project impact. DIA2 enables users to explore massive
amounts of data and make sense of it using a highly intuitive process. The
system development approach combines theories of user-centered design, large-
scale data mining, community formation, social network analysis, and interactive
visualization. The project's evaluation plan includes both formative and
summative approaches for documenting, testing, measuring, and sharing community
outcomes, internal team working, and system
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE&lt;br/&gt;DIA2 offers a
framework for understanding and characterizing the TUES program along with its
predecessor programs. It makes data available to a large community of TUES users
and allows them to analyze the portfolio to garner an understanding of how ideas
are adopted by others in the community. It allows current and future PIs, NSF
program officers and administrators at academic institutions to identify best
practices and explore synergistic projects in their environments. Since DIA2 is
a knowledge portal, it provides a unique opportunity to showcase work undertaken
at underserved and underprivileged institutions in new and novel ways. The
project team is employing a methodology that attempts to understand the needs of
these communities, in order to better address the DIA2 system design
requirements. Ultimately, DIA2 is focused on providing knowledge that will allow
the community to increase the impact of NSF STEM investments that improve
student learning.