* 1122624
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Values and Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Christopher DeSante, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

The aim of this project is to explain fundamental political attitudes as the
products of universal values. Anyone attuned to American politics know that the
political parties differ in many ways. In social psychology, differences among
groups have been explained by differences in fundamental values: basic
motivations that construct our world-views. Borrowing from this large
literature, this project takes standard measures of universal values developed
by Shalon Schwartz (1992) and shows how these values structure political
attitudes. While political scientists have long talked about core values,
previous research has operationalized concepts like "individualism" with policy-
laden questions. Using the values-based questions from the Schwartz Value
Inventory, policy is not mentioned, though the construct being measure (on face)
is the same.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 56 items that form the Schwartz inventory
measure two basic dimensions of human values taht have been verified across
multiple cultural and religious settings and have been tested in over 20
languages. In every case, researchers have found the same two motivating
dimensions for human values. If values truly motivate political attitudes, the
variance should be partially explained by universal values in understanding
measures as diverse as partisan identification, conservatism, authoritarianism,
and social dominance orientation. This study uses a national sample of
undergraduate students and their parents to test the intergenerational
transmission of these values, which would help address how partisanship is so
highly correlated with parents' partisanship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the basic
level this research can help us understand what really divides Americans across
partisan and ideological lines, indentifying differences in fundamental world-
views. The broader social value of such research is that understanding the
different ways Americans see problems can help all sides better understand each
other and move from antagonistic rhetoric to a consciousness of difference.