* 1122325
* Collaborative Research: LTREB RENEWAL - Long-term studies of flowering, fruiting and seedling recruitment in Neotropical forests: global change, climate variability and mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Jess Zimmerman, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 204,716.00

Flowering, seed production, and seedling establishment of tropical forest plants
vary tremendously in time and space, contributing to the rich diversity that
characterizes tropical forests. This long-term study quantifies this variation
in three Neotropical forests in Puerto Rico, Ecuador, and Panama that vary
dramatically in climate. Using identical methods at each site, flowering and
seed production will be monitored throughout the year and seedling establishment
measured annually within large permanent plots where all trees are mapped and
measured regularly. High resolution bar code phylogenies and complete
measurements of adult and seedling functional traits will add an evolutionary
perspective to the current ecological study. The resulting data will be used to
test hypotheses relating interannual variation to natural climate cycles or to
anthropogenic global change, and to evaluate the importance of spatio-temporal
variation in reproduction and establishment to tropical forest diversity.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding tropical plant regeneration is of
fundamental and applied importance; tropical forests account for approximately
60% of plant species diversity, 35% of plant productivity, and 25% of plant
carbon stores on land. The long-term, quantitative data on reproduction and
early regeneration from this study will enable identification of relationships
between plant reproduction and climate variation, and prediction of long-term
trends. Data and associated analyses are publicly accessible. At least 25
undergraduates and graduate students, including several Hispanics, will receive
training at the University of Puerto Rico and Southern Illinois University, and
the career progression of one post-doctoral associate from the University
California, Davis, will be facilitated.