* 1122522
* Motives for Backlash Against Gender and Racial Vanguards
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Laurie Rudman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 08/31/2015
* USD 349,997.00

When people violate unwritten rules about behavior that is considered
appropriate for their gender or their race, they are often subject to backlash
effects (social and economic penalties for behaving in unexpected or "atypical"
ways). For example, a Hispanic woman who behaves in a highly dominant or
assertive fashion might be shunned or punished in certain settings when the same
behavior would actually be rewarded for a White man. Backlash is an important
phenomenon worthy of scientific inquiry because it prevents people who violate
stereotypes from achieving their goals and aspirations. Backlash is also
problematic because it prevents such people from serving as visible, outstanding
role models (as people who have overcome cultural stereotypes). Importantly,
backlash is not engaged in arbitrarily; it must usually be justified. The
proposed research builds on recent advances in backlash theory, which suggest
that people justify backlash by charging atypical women and men with violating
stereotypic proscriptions (for women, prohibitions against dominance, and for
African Americans, prohibitions against intelligence). In other words, almost no
one criticizes a dominant woman for being "too powerful for a woman." Instead
they criticize her for being "extremely difficult," "overbearing," or
"domineering." Because these gender rules punish women for behaving in ways that
could increase women's economic and social status, these rules tend to maintain
and perpetuate lower cultural status among women. In addition, several
experiments will also investigate backlash against atypical African Americans,
as well as uniquely examine the intersection of gender and race (e.g., Are
African American women generally at greater risk for experiencing backlash than
are Black men, or does it depend on which stereotype people
violate?).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 11 experimental laboratory-based studies and
drawing from preliminary research, the PI will investigate the potential
psychological motives for gender and race backlash. The Status Incongruity
Hypothesis (SIH), developed by the PI, posits that people are discomfited by the
conflict between women's gender status (which is low) and their high-status
behavior (when they are agentic). Although people readily acknowledge their
competence, they use the dominance penalty to justify backlash against them. The
SIH presents a significant breakthrough in illuminating why women's progress has
stalled, or in some cases, reversed. It can similarly be used to explain the
experience of many ethnic minority persons. Instead of blaming stereotype
violation per se, it views status-violations as culpable. As a result, a key
motive for backlash concerns system-justification, a process whereby people
defend the status quo to preserve their need to believe the world is just and
fair. By understanding which factors play the largest role in backlash, how the
factors might sometimes operate together, and whether the factors operate
differently or in similar fashion for women and men, and for Blacks and Whites,
the investigator will begin to shed light on the exact psychological motives and
mechanisms behind backlash. Ultimately, this work will advance understanding
about what motivates backlash and at the same time facilitate the design of
effective interventions to attenuate its effects on women and minorities.