* 1122321
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Male-immature relationships in the mountain gorilla (Gorilla beringei beringei)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Joan Silk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 07/31/2012
* USD 14,427.00

The purpose of this project is to understand the proximate mechanisms, form, and
evolutionary function(s) of social relationships between adult male and immature
mountain gorillas (Gorilla beringei beringei). The project will address four
primary questions: 1) are male and immature gorillas capable of distinguishing
paternal kin from non-kin? 2) are such relationships hormonally mediated,
specifically through testosterone and prolactin? 3) how do male-immature
relationships change over time as immatures grow? and 4) is there evidence to
support alternative hypotheses about the function of these relationships?
Behavioral observations will be conducted on at least four groups of habituated
gorillas living in Parc des Volcans, Rwanda, and monitored by the Karisoke
Research Center. Adult males and immatures will be followed four days per week,
and all relevant behaviors recorded. Hormonal data will be collected using non-
invasive methods, specifically collection of urine samples from adult males and
collection of fecal samples from males, mothers, and immatures. Hormones will be
extracted from the samples in Rwanda before being shipped to the Lincoln Park
Zoo in Chicago, Illinois for analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of fathers
is variable across non-human primate species, but to date little research has
been conducted on non-monogamous species and great apes. Mountain gorillas are
an interesting study species because of their highly flexible social structure,
which includes both multi and single-male groups, and therefore bears
similarities to variability in human mating systems. This project will give us
insight into the origins of paternal behavior in different mating systems and
the implications it has for offspring, in both the short and long term. This
award will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.