* 1122534
* IOLAB: Using Technology to Transform Introductory Physics Labs
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Timothy Stelzer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,201.00

This project is developing, evaluating, and disseminating an innovative online
approach to interactive laboratory learning for introductory physics courses.
SmartLab allows students to measure things in the real world by facilitating
hands-on experiments anywhere - in their home, in their dorm, in their classroom
- guided and evaluated by the SmartLab learning software and online database. At
the heart of the SmartLab approach is a small and inexpensive wireless probe,
developed in collaboration with private industry, which has the ability to
rapidly perform accurate measurements of displacement, velocity, acceleration,
force, magnetic fields, and potential differences. These data are sent over a
wireless link to a PC running the SmartLab application which also communicates
with an online database to retrieve carefully designed lesson plans. The
software guides students through the lesson, recording and analyzing the data
they acquire, and provides real-time feedback on the student's performance of
the hands-on activities as well as the student's answers to questions embedded
in the lesson.

A primary focus of NSF support for this project is a physics education research
effort to practically optimize the SmartLab approach while studying the pros and
cons of differing methods of utilization. Researchers are determining how the
retention of key physics concepts is impacted by hands-on SmartLab activities,
as they are performed at nearly the same time as the conceptual introduction.
Such research plays a key role in building a sound pedagogical footing for this
new approach in universities, colleges and high schools.

SmartLab enables a complete hands-on laboratory experience for students to
perform at a time and place that maximizes the learning experience, whether this
is before a lecture, part of a weekly homework assignment, or during an existing
lab period. In addition to providing a powerful tool for traditional physics
courses, SmartLab has tremendous potential for courses which currently do not
offer a hands-on experience, such as those taken by students online, or courses
where budget or space constraints preclude a lab. The inherently scalable nature
of the SmartLab approach, combined with the fact that it can be adopted by
faculty members with a very modest investment in time and resources, means its
impact on American physics education may become significant on a short
timescale.