* 1122094
* Collaborative Research: Relating architecture, dynamics and temporal correlations in networks of spiking neurons
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Kresimir Josic, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 134,600.00

New recording methods allow researchers to probe the structure of neural
activity with unprecedented scope and detail. As a result there is an explosion
of interest in understanding the patterns of activity that emerge in entire
neuronal populations and relating these patterns to the function of the nervous
system. However, the overwhelming range of different sensory inputs that these
populations receive -- and the vast range of different responses that these
inputs evoke -- make it impossible to achieve this goal based on empirical
observations alone. This challenge is compounded due to the nonlinearity of
neuronal network dynamics, which makes it difficult to predict patterns of
activity by extrapolation from observations of simpler systems. Predictive
mathematical modeling and a deeper understanding of the dynamics of neuronal
circuits is therefore required. With previous NSF support, the investigators
developed numerical and analytic tools at the interface of statistics,
stochastic analysis and nonlinear dynamics, to understand the genesis and impact
of correlations in simple, but fundamental microcircuits. They build on these
results by extending the underlying mathematical theory to more complex and
realistic networks. Using this approach, the team of researchers examines how
collective activity is controlled by network architecture, cell dynamics, and
stimulus drive in a set of neural networks that typify structures across the
nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Answering these questions will open the
door to contemporary biological applications and will meet key theoretical
challenges posed by recent technological developments in experimental
neuroscience. The key innovation lies in the understanding the collective
dynamics of large neural networks that cannot be decomposed into their isolated
parts. Through continued interactions with a broad set of experimental
collaborators, these ideas are introduced and tested by a broad community of
neuroscientists. In the longer term, results on coding in the presence of
collective network dynamics will impact the design of neural prosthetics, which
code sensory signals via cortical, retinal, and thalamic implants.