* 1122594
* MIRT: Building Functional Nanoarchitectures in van der Waals Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* James Hone, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,120,000.00

This Materials Interdisciplinary Research Team (MIRT) proposal examines the
assembly and physical properties of new composite materials created by 'nano-
laminating' atomic sheets of different van der Waals (vdW) materials. These vdW
building blocks are materials in which the atomic bonds are strong in two
directions, but weak in the third. This gives them a layered structure, like a
stack of paper, and makes it easy to separate ('exfoliate') the layers. Common
vdW materials include graphite, which can be exfoliated to form single sheets
(graphene); many high-T superconductors; and layered chalcogenides such as MoS2.
Many of these systems already display interesting behavior due to the low
dimensionality of their electronic structure. The team pioneered a technique for
re-stacking dissimilar vdW materials in a controlled fashion ('nano-
lamination'). Using this technique, it is possible to create heterostructures
that are essentially designer materials, with control at the level of the
individual atomic layer. The aim of the MIRT is to create materials that provide
unique functionality that is of interest to fundamental science and engineering
applications.

The MIRT proposal includes a central synthesis effort that seeks to broaden the
set of materials under study from the first examples (graphene and hexagonal
boron nitride) to include layered chalcogenides, 2D oxides, topological
insulators, and low-dimensional organic systems. The synthesis effort combines
nano-lamination with single-crystal growth, molecular beam epitaxy, templated
materials growth, and intercalation. Fundamental issues to be addressed include
the nature of interfaces between dissimilar layers, how interlayer alignment
changes properties, and 'design rules' for growth on vdW surfaces. The MIRT
includes extensive characterization of the new materials by multiple techniques.
These techniques include structural characterization, electronic transport,
optical and Raman spectroscopy, scanned probe microscopy, and chemical methods.

Using the techniques and materials developed under the MIRT program, the team
seeks to address a number of fundamental issues regarding behavior of materials
in low dimensions. For instance, it will be possible to study the 3D-to-2D
evolution of correlated electronic behavior such as superconductivity and charge
density wave states as the host materials approach the limit of single atomic
sheets. Likewise, nano-lamination will allow materials such as topological
insulators and superconductors to be brought into proximity in order to probe
exotic phases predicted to exist at these interfaces.

The MIRT team seeks to broaden the impact of its activities through REU and RET
programs, as well as a school visitation program. In addition, a central goal of
the MIRT is to strengthen interaction between Columbia and CCNY through better
coordination of research and use of shared facilities, as well as joint student
advising and recruiting.