* 1122471
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Religious and Political Beliefs at the Individual Level and Across Generations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Kevin Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

How and why are political beliefs and religious beliefs linked together at the
individual level and even within families and across generations? Most
scholarship treats political and religious belief systems as independent
concepts and devotes little attention to the possibility that they may have
common origins. Yet existing research demonstrates that political and religious
socialization occurs in families, that political and religious traits are
partially heritable, and that political attitudes associated with religion are
more consistently transmitted from parent to child than are other attitudes. Why
do these patterns in the available evidence exist?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
answer its overarching question by proposing and testing a new theoretical model
that suggests that political and religious beliefs are grounded in a common
psychological construct reflecting dispositions towards social order. The
researcher aims to identify and measure these dispositions, assess their
influence over political and religious beliefs, and assess whether this
influence is innate, a product of socialization, or a combination of
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design used differs from existing
analyses of the origins and transmission of religious and political attitudes in
a number of ways. For example, almost all existing political socialization
studies focus on parents and children, whereas this project brings the analysis
back to a third generation and surveys grandparents, parents, and children.
Individuals do not enter marriage or parenthood with blank slates; they also
have experienced the transmission of certain belief sets and innate
dispositions. Understanding whether parents are serving as "value relays"
between generations may shed light on socialization processes as well as provide
evidence for heritability effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes
several broader contributions. Public opinion polls have shown in the US and in
many democracies that people from different religious traditions tend to vote
differently. What is unknown is how and why religious and political belief
systems overlap within individuals and are inter-generationally transmitted. In
addressing these unknowns, this project has the potential to shed light on the
origins of political attitudes and the stability of beliefs across generations.