* 1122697
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: CT-ISG: Overlay-Based User Unlocatability and Communication Anonymity in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2010,07/31/2011
* Yanchao Zhang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 07/31/2011
* USD 74,298.00

Mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) are finding growing applications in time-
critical and mission-critical scenarios such as disaster rescue?C public safety
and military operations. The purpose of this project is to investigate two very
important but mostly untouched MANET security issues: user unlocatability and
communication anonymity. Without solving them, mobile users can be easily
tracked or their communication patterns can be easily gathered for user
profiling, which would jeopardize the user privacy and make them vulnerable to
pinpoint attacks. In this project, a novel overlay-based approach OverUCA, an
anonymous network overlay composed of nodes that anonymously communicate with
one another atop the underlying MANET substrate, will be investigated to achieve
user unlocatability, source anonymity, destination anonymity, source-destination
unlinkability, and full compatibility with existing routing and MAC protocols.
The success of this research will have a tremendous impact on advancing the
deployments of MANETs in security-critical commercial, civilian, and military
applications. This research will provide a viable way to fight against pinpoint
attacks, advance the state-of-the-art in the wireless security research, and
spark new research activities in securing MANETs. Moreover, the results from
this research will be disseminated widely through high-quality conference and
journal publications and public talks. Furthermore, the research outcome will be
integrated into the educational curricula across two institutions. Finally, a
couple of minority (female) students will work for their Ph.D. degrees, and
hence this project will train the minority professionals for the national work
force.