* 1122738
* Engaging United States Scholars in International Geographic Research and Scientific Leadership: Support for Participation in International Geographical Union Events, 2012-2016
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2018
* Douglas Richardson, Association of American Geographers
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2018
* USD 218,020.00

The generation of new knowledge in today's highly globalized society requires
scientists and scholars, universities, R&amp;D business, and federal agencies to
promote international research collaborations as a way to enhance intellectual
capacity and increase competitiveness. The Association of American Geographers
(AAG) will continue to help geographers in t he United States develop
international collaboration through formal activities sponsored by the
International Geographic Union (IGU). This award will support 145 United States
geographic scholars (72 junior and 73 senior scholars) through partial-travel
support to attend IGU Congresses in 2012 and 2016 and three IGU regional
conferences in the intervening years. Thirty scholars will attend the IGU
Congress in Koln, Germany in 2012, 25 scholars will attend each of the regional
conferences in Kyoto, Japan (2013), Krakow, Poland (2014), Moscow, Russia
(2015), and 40 scholars will attend the 2016 IGU Congress in Beijing, China. The
support provided through this award will provide benefits to individual
researchers and the broader geographic community by stimulating scholarly
publications; by fostering collaborative, multinational research and improving
geographic education. The award also will contribute to human resource
development, including international scientific leadership and the broad
enrichment of geography and related fields in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread participation of U.S. geographers in these
International Geographical Union-sponsored conferences will strengthen U.S. ties
with international scholars. Early-career scholars are provided professional
development opportunities through participation in international events. In
follow-up surveys of individuals supported with previous support to IGU
conferences, 80 percent of the respondents stated that their teaching activities
were enhanced by their participation by their international experiences. Such
successes demonstrate that this travel-support program can help develop
collaborations that result in a technical knowledge base that can translate
research and development into useful applications for solving societal problems.
American scholars also are provided with unique opportunities for outreach,
positive engagement, and improved research programs through partnerships in the
regions where the conferences are help.