* 1122390
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Individual Ethical Reasoning and Team Ethical Climate: Understanding their Relationship in Undergraduate Design Teams
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Valorie Troesch, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 29,759.00

Engineers in today's global society are interacting with ever more of the
world's peoples and cultures which is introducing more social and ethical
complexity to the profession and raising the importance of practicing engineers
becoming capable ethical-decision makers and contributors to ethical team
climates. Engineering educators are responsible for helping students to develop
these skills in order to facilitate their transfer into practice. The ultimate
project goal is to develop students' ethical reasoning skills and equip them to
guide themselves through the complexities of today's global, team-based
engineering profession. A barrier is the difficulty of assessing skills
development in this area. In particular there is a paucity of assessment
measures for engineering students. Measures designed to assess general moral
development are not intended to address the peculiarities of handling ethical
situations in engineering. In addition, because most undergraduates learn to
apply ethical reasoning to engineering through design courses that are taught in
teams, knowledge of the interaction between individual ethical development and
the team climate, as well as individual and team factors, is vital to design
effective learning environments.

The goal of this project is to fill this gap through research by 1) developing
instruments which reliably and validly measure individual ethical reasoning and
team ethical climate, 2) tracking the growth of ethical reasoning in
undergraduate student design teams, and 3) investigating the relationship
between individual ethical reasoning and team ethical climate, including how
individual and group factors or characteristics affect change in students'
ethical reasoning and in team climate. The outcomes of the project will
ultimately provide faculty with tools to assess individual ethical development
and team climate as well as provide insights and lessons learned from design
experiences at four diverse institutions that will provide broad applicability
of the findings.

Intellectual Merit This project is filling a void in current assessment tools by
providing valid and reliable measures applicable for engineering-centered and
multidisciplinary design teams. The project is working to produce validated
assessment tools as well as analyses of individual students and teams across
four diverse programs. The intended outcomes of this project are validated
measures that are applicable to a broad range of institutions.

Broader Impacts The findings of this research have potential impacts across
engineering education and beyond. The results of this research will help
identify the specific types of experiences that best support development of
ethical reasoning and team ethical climate, allowing faculty and administrators
to strategically scale and optimize curriculum and programs to provide more
students with higher quality experiences.