* 1122461
* Mechanisms of marine invertebrate sperm chemotaxis:  from cellular signaling to flagellar swimming
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sarah Olson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,707.00

In order to fully understand how the sperm reaches the egg, we need to have an
understanding of how the sperm is able to modify its waveform in response to the
surrounding environment. Since sperm motility is an emergent property of a
complex system, we need to have multiscale models that account for chemical
signaling, mechanics, and hydrodynamics. For marine invertebrate sperm, a
chemoattractant is able to guide sperm to the egg by initiating a signaling
pathway that results in an increase in calcium. This increase in calcium
modifies the waveform, and ultimately the trajectory. This project will develop
a hierarchy of models that will be used to investigate the relevant biochemistry
of chemotaxis, how and where calcium is acting to modify the flagellar waveform,
and how this couples to trajectories that allow the sperm to reach the egg. A
model for the chemotactic signaling pathway will be developed and the Geometric
Clutch Hypothesis will be implemented to have an accurate model of how calcium
effects dynein arm activation (active force and torque generators in the axoneme
of the flagellum). Multiscale models will be developed to couple the relevant
biochemistry at the cellular level to trajectories and flagellar bending at the
macroscale. In order to accurately account for nonplanar bending of the
flagellum in a 3-dimensional fluid governed by the Stokes equations, we will
develop a new regularized formulation of the generalized immersed boundary
method. This method will provide a framework to numerically solve a coupled
system that includes an immersed structure in a viscous fluid, where the force
and torque that the sperm flagellum exerts on the fluid can depend on the
biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the development of integrative,
multiscale models, we will examine how chemotaxis and the resulting increase in
calcium concentration within the flagellum enables invertebrate sperm to reach
and fertilize the egg in a marine environment. The modeling framework that will
be developed will allow us to test different hypotheses about where calcium is
acting in the flagellum to understand how this couples to emergent waveforms and
trajectories of sperm. This research lies at the interface of mathematics and
biology, as it is necessary to account for the relevant biochemistry, mechanics,
and hydrodynamics to model sperm motility. Students involved in this research
project will receive interdisciplinary training and will gain experience in
model development based on the relevant biology and computational aspects of the
project. Although the main focus of this project is on studying aspects of
invertebrate sperm motility, the new numerical method that will be developed
will also be applicable to study aspects of motility in other microorganisms
such as Escherichia coli. The aim of this project is to develop mathematical
models to understand how sea urchin sperm reach and fertilize the egg in a
marine environment. This research will also shed light onto aspects of mammalian
sperm motility and will be relevant to diagnosing infertility and developing
contraceptives.