* 1122509
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Great Depression from a Firm-Level View
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Nicolas Ziebarth, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 12/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

The Great Depression was a watershed moment not only for the U.S. economy but
for economic policy and economics proper. Unsurprisingly then, the Depression
has been intensely studied; still, many questions remain. Part of the reason for
this is a lack of the "right" data. In particular, almost all studies have had
to rely on data aggregated to at least the industry or state-levels. This makes
it difficult to answer "micro'' questions about, for example, collusion under
the National Recovery Administration (NRA). It also makes it difficult to test
certain "macro" hypotheses about the Depression such as whether banking failures
led to the collapse of the economy or the reverse. This proposal aims to remedy
this shortcoming by creating a dataset of firm-level observations covering the
first half of the Depression from 1929 through 1935 involving both a random
sample and complete enumerations of specific industries and
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collecting this firm-level data has potentially
large social benefits far exceeding any that come from the proposed work. It is
a pure public good .The Atack-Bateman sample of the 19th century Censuses of
Manufactures has been used in a variety of studies by the creators of the sample
to examine capital deepening of (Atack et al. 2004a) and trends in wage
inequality (Atack et al. 2004b). It also has been used by a number of other
people for a variety of projects such as studies of industrialization and
urbanization (Kim 2005) and in international comparisons (Inwood 2008). This
demonstrates the range of studies that this data has been used for. While the
Atack-Bateman sample comes from an interesting point in time in American
economic history and spans 30 years, the sample here would cover the most
turbulent period in all of American economic history. It seems certain that this
sample would be used in a similarly wide variety of studies to understand the
Depression and in conjunction with the Atack-Bateman sample to study long-run
changes in the American economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a number of
projects to be undertaken with this dataset. One project relevant to policy
debates today is the effect of what was a "random" banking crisis in Mississippi
over the first two years of the Depression. In a paper by Richardson and Troost
(2005), the authors argue that for historical reasons, the St. Louis Fed, which
covered the northern half of the state, believed that credit should expand and
contract with the business cycle. This left them very reluctant to extend cash
to banks that were in trouble. On the other hand, the Atlanta Fed, which covers
the southern half of the state, was much more aggressive in stemming incipient
bank runs at the beginning of the Depression. The authors show how this quasi-
random difference had a major impact on how many banks failed in these two
regions over the first part of the Depression. Unsurprisingly, banks in the St.
Louis district failed at a much higher rate than those in the Atlanta district.
After watching a huge number of their member banks fail in the first two years
of the Depression, finally, in July 1931, the St. Louis Fed relented and started
funneling cash to struggling banks. The question though that still plagues
policy debates today is whether the money given to the banks ends up in the real
economy or does it just sit as reserves back at the Fed. This question can be
answered with this data at least with regards to the manufacturing sector. Did
these discount loans foster output growth? Hiring? Maybe even productivity
growth?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal intends to build a random sample of
manufacturing firms over the first six years of the Depression as well as
collect all the data from a number of selected industries. In the process, it
aims to address a number of the outstanding issues surrounding the Depression.
With that, the results can shed light on some of the knotty policy issues that
are so pressing today. Should governments bailout Wall Street to help Main
Street? Is government spending effective in stimulating the economy? What role
does competitive policy play in helping or hindering productivity growth? The
data collected here will surely prove to be exceedingly valuable for
understanding firm-level dynamics in this most interesting period in American
economic history for the economics community and the public at large.