* 1122527
* Partially-supplied graphs as a unifying concept in biology
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Eric Stone, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Graphs are used throughout the biological sciences to represent how objects of
interest are interrelated. A common problem, and the focus of this project, is
how to elicit the properties of such a graph when only pairwise distances
between objects are available. This project responds to the case when there is
missing data; that is, when there exist pairs of objects for which pairwise
distance information is not supplied. To do so, it introduces the concept of
partially-supplied graphs and develops their mathematical properties. Emphasis
is on uncovering the spectral properties of Laplacian matrices that represent
partially-supplied graphs, with the goal of relating eigenvectors to the
underlying graphical structure. Subsequently, this research will exploit a
connection between the Laplacian matrices of partially-supplied graphs and
pairwise distance matrices with missing data. Doing so will provide a missing
link between larger graphs of biological objects and smaller matrices
representing a subset of vertices of these graphs.

This project has an arc spanning more than fifty years. It is motivated by a
particular type of data and a particular type of analysis that recurs, decade
after decade, throughout the biological sciences. As a result, this project will
address a number of long-standing questions. One such question concerns
evolutionary trees, which are graphs whose vertices are species, including those
that are extinct. Fossils aside, only extant species yield data, and thus
evolutionary trees can be thought of as partially-supplied. Using this
observation, the project will rectify two major branches of biological
systematics that represent extant species data in seemingly different ways.
Simultaneously, this research contributes a new perspective to the mathematical
literature on graph theory by introducing graphs with missing data. Thus, this
project sits directly at the interface between mathematics and biology, and it
supports a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher to be trained as
interdisciplinary scientists. More broadly, this research serves as an example
of the synergy between fields, showing how biology can advance mathematics while
mathematics is advancing biology. As such, it is hoped that dissemination of
this work will motivate mathematically gifted students toward the biological
sciences.