* 1122462
* Modeling and Adaptive Control of Complex Immune Responses
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Seddik Djouadi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 270,000.00

The mathematical models (usually ordinary differential equation (ODE) models)
created to describe the dynamics of the inflammatory response are complex,
highly nonlinear systems. As a result, existing methodologies that are typically
useful for estimating parameters and finding appropriate control measures have
limited effectiveness when applied to such nonlinear systems. We propose to
develop and apply adaptive control and parameter estimation techniques for this
problem and explore more complex and realistic settings than previously
examined. This will subsequently involve developing new and modifying current
mathematical theories to ensure the methods are stable and robust. The methods
that arise from this work will also be applicable for a variety of processes
that can only be adequately described by complex, nonlinear ODE models.

The inflammatory response is a crucial process for restoring health following a
wide range of biological stresses. However, uncontrolled systemic inflammation
is also the primary cause of organ failure and death in victims of severe
trauma, infections, and many other conditions leading to admission to an
intensive care unit. Controlling inflammation, while a key focus of clinicians,
is a challenging endeavor. The complexity of the inflammatory response makes it
extremely difficult to predict the effects of therapeutic interventions. Much
needed effort has been put toward the creation of mathematical models to better
understand the mechanisms that orchestrate a systemic inflammatory response.
However, little work has been done to develop strategies to control the process
and restore a dysfunctional inflammatory response to a healthy equilibrium by
delivering appropriate interventions in the correct amounts and at the right
times. The main goal of our proposal then is to modify existing and develop new
techniques to address this need.