* 1122357
* Motivation Gains on Divisible Conjunctive Tasks
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* James Larson, Jr., Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 251,946.00

In this project the research team will examine the conditions that prompt people
to exert more effort when working on a task as part of a group than when working
alone -- a motivation gain in groups. This research will extend current
knowledge in three ways. First, it will test for motivation gains when members
perform different subtasks, making different contributions to the group's
overall product. Theory suggests that the structural interdependence among
subtasks plays an important role in promoting group motivation gains. Second, it
will test whether the same overall task, with the same subtask structure, can
induce motivation gains in group members who vary widely in task-relevant
ability. In past research, the types of tasks found to prompt motivation gains
in more-capable members have been quite different from those found to prompt
motivation gains in less-capable members. Third, it will test the independent
effect of a critical psychological variable presumed to underlie motivation
gains: felt indispensability. Past research has not been able to fully
disentangle the effect of this variable from that of upward social comparison,
due mainly to limitations inherent in the tasks employed. These objectives will
be accomplished in four laboratory experiments using a novel physical
persistence task that is structured with two interdependent subtasks varying
both in difficulty and in criticality to the group's overall success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research seeks to change
in a fundamental way the dominant view of motivation in groups, from one that
emphasizes the possibility (even likelihood) of motivation loss, to one that
acknowledges as well the potential for genuine motivation gain. Further, by
using a task with a subtask structure, and by testing for motivation gains
simultaneously in both more-capable and less-capable group members, this
research will better indicate how generalizable motivation gains found in the
laboratory are to real-world settings, and so the likelihood that such gains can
be harnessed to benefit organizational productivity and effectiveness.