* 1122166
* Mechanisms of Plant Steroid Hormone Regulated Gene Expression in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Yanhai Yin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 135,000.00

Plant steroid hormones, Brassinosteroids (BRs), play important roles in plant
growth, development and response to environmental stresses. BRs act through
several signaling components to regulate BES1/BZR1 and other families of
transcription factors (TFs), which in turn control the expression of about 4000
genes required for various BR responses. How BR-regulated TFs control the
expression of the large number of target genes and various BR responses is not
well defined and will be the main focus of the proposal. The functions and
mechanisms of several BR-regulated transcription factors (proteins responsible
for activating or inactivating genes) will be studied by reverse genetic and
genomic approaches and their regulation by BR signaling will be investigated by
biochemical experiments. The results will reveal how each of the BR-regulated
TFs controls a subset of BR target genes and a portion of BR responses. The
studies will also provide important insight into how BR signal is integrated
into the complex transcriptional network to control various BR-regulated
processes. The knowledge obtained can be used to design strategies to improve
the crop yield and tolerance to environmental stresses. Both mutants and
transgenic lines generated from the project will be made available through the
Arabidopsis Information Resource. In addition, the large-scale gene expression
data will be deposited into NASC Arrays or GEO Datasets for wide dissemination.
The proposed research will generate new knowledge that is essential for
agriculture and bioenergy, especially under the constant environmental changes.
In addition, a graduate student, research assistant and high school teacher will
be trained to carry out the proposed experiments as a coordinated and cohesive
team. The high school biology teacher will also be trained to bring some of the
BR mutants to high school biology classes. The proposal, therefore, has a great
potential in training future scientists and educators.