* 1122148
* Collaborative Research: Integrating two different roles of the proton-pumping pyrophosphatase in the regulation and efficiency of carbon utilization and transport in planta
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Roberto Gaxiola, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2015
* USD 380,000.00

Plant productivity is determined in large part by the partitioning of reduced
carbon (sugar) between the sites of production (photosynthetic tissues) and the
sites of utilization (growing tissues such as roots and young leaves, etc). To
judiciously engineer increased yield of crop plants, a better understanding of
the regulation and efficiency of sugar transport throughout the plant is
required. Work by the principal investigators and others has shown that the up-
regulation of proton-pyrophosphatases (H+-PPases) results in enhanced root and
shoot growth and increased photosynthetic output. The principal investigators
hypothesize that plant H+-PPases play a crucial role in regulating sucrose
synthesis, partitioning and utilization. The hypotheses will be tested using a
combination of genetic, metabolomic, molecular biological, and ultra-structural
approaches. The research will shed light not only on the fundamental
physiological subject of carbon utilization and transport, but also has
potential downstream applications since increased H+-PPase activity enhances
plant biomass, nutrient uptake capacities, and stress tolerance. With growing
populations, decreasing arable land, and a national desire to exploit plants for
biofuels, understanding the role of H+-PPases in plant growth could be
transformative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project will be made
available to the scientific community through timely publication and by the
participation of the principal investigators in their undergraduate and graduate
education programs. The professional development of undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows will occur at the interface of genetics,
physiology, cell biology and cutting-edge metabolomics. The project participants
will work together with the Arizona State University "Ask a Biologist" program
to develop topical content on biomass for fuel and how it relates to the
movement of energy throughout biological systems.