* 1122472
* Collaborative Research: BeSocratic: A Free-form, Interactive System to Investigate the Development of Representational Competence
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Michael Klymkowsky, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 466,439.00

Robust learning requires both conceptual understanding and procedural fluency.
One reason chemistry is a difficult subject is that students must understand
macroscopic phenomena using molecular level (that is, non-visible, and concept
laden) explanations. A wide range of models and visualizations exist to
represent molecular level structures, reaction details, and reactivity of
materials. Students must learn to use these representations both fluidly and
meaningfully in order to achieve a rigorous understanding of molecular concepts
(rather than merely memorizing them). However, it is becoming increasingly
apparent that learning how to construct and use these representations is far
more difficult than many instructors recognize. This project builds upon work
that has resulted in the creation of OrganicPad and SocraticGraphs. It is
further integrating both programs into the BeSocratic system and expanding the
analysis system. By bringing together a group of chemists and computer
scientists, a system is being developed and implemented that allows
investigations into how to improve the representational competence of chemistry
students "in the wild." Previous research by these Principal Investigators has
produced a large database of information on how students construct and use
representations, and this project further develops and deploys a flexible, web-
based system, BeSocratic, that can recognize and respond to free-form student
input. This input is in the form of graphical representations that include
chemical structures, reactions, and graphs. Specifically, tutorials and
formative assessment activities are being developed based on the previous
research in combination with the available evidence of how people learn. Because
a disciplinary team was already in place, and because working versions existed
of OrganicPad and SocraticGraphs, chemistry was chosen as the "test-bed" for the
development, assessment and deployment of the new materials. The systems being
developed, and the insights being gained through the project's research
activities, are expected to be directly applicable to other STEM disciplines,
including physics, biology, mathematics, and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research is investigating what
factors improve student skill in constructing and using representations, such
as: Does actually drawing a structure (as opposed to recognizing or construction
using a template) improve student understanding? Can the use of gesture, which
can be captured by the BeSocratic touchscreen or track pad interfaces, improve
the fluidity by which students use representations? Can the use of contextual,
Socratic questioning and feedback improve student conceptual understanding of
the meaning of the representations? By answering questions such as these, an
understanding is being gained of how students develop representational
competence, and what instructional techniques can enhance student learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The use of the BeSocratic system allows
the investigation of activities from the introductory (and high school)
chemistry course to graduate level instruction. Two far-reaching impacts will
result from this project. The first is finding what "works" to produce more
robust development of representational competence. From drawing structures to
understanding mechanistic organic chemistry, the results from the BeSocratic
system and mixed method research designs will be used to inform the chemistry
community. The second important impact is to provide evidence for what works
with on-line systems. For a new learning modality to be adopted it must be
relatively easy to use, with no steep learning curve. If online teaching and
learning systems are designed to provide research-validated, effective
activities that incorporate both procedural fluency and conceptual
understanding, the result will be more robust learning by students. The
BeSocratic system will be available on the web, and research findings will be
presented at professional meetings. Workshops for faculty interested in learning
about the research findings or in using the BeSocratic system will be offered at
regional and national meetings.