* 1122478
* Ultrasensitivity in the Absence of Allostery for Multisite Chemical Reaction Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* German Enciso, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2016
* USD 293,537.00

Multistite proteins have frequently been studied for their ability to produce
all-or-none (ultrasensitive) responses to given stimuli. A widely made
assumption is that of allostery, or the ability of one protein site to affect
another through structural interactions. In recently published work by the PI
and colleagues, it was shown that if more phosphorylation sites are present than
are necessary for protein activation, a protein can produce ultrasensitive
responses in the absence of allostery. In this project, the PI and graduate
student will construct and analyze different input/output chemical reaction
networks that are ultrasensitive (or bistable) as well as robust to stochastic
noise and parameter changes. They will focus on nonsequential multisite networks
in which ultrasensitivity or bistability arises naturally through network
properties rather than through possibly restrictive conditions on parameter
values (which are usually justified by allosteric properties). They will pursue
specific applications beyond protein phosphorylation, such as DNA transcription
regulation through packaging and histone modifications, signal transduction in
clusters of membrane receptors, and gene expression regulation through binding
of multiple identical transcription factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells are
often faced with what one could describe as a decision to make: should it grow
and divide in response to a given stimulus? Should it differentiate into a heart
cell or a liver cell? Understanding the roots of cellular decision-making is a
key problem in biology: for instance, a cell that divides too easily in response
to a stimulus can - and often does - turn cancerous. In this proposal, the PI
and student will seek to understand some of the basic mechanisms that cells
likely use to produce such all-or-none behaviors. They will pursue an
alternative to the so-called allosteric mechanism, which was first developed in
work by Monod and others in 1965. While that elegant mechanism is rightly well
known and widely cited, there may be many analogous biological systems where
this property is not satisfied and which may have been overlooked. Recent work
by the PI and colleagues provides an example of decision systems which are
similar to allosteric systems but do not require that property. They will apply
this principle to several specific systems of importance in molecular biology
such as gene regulation and cell communication. They will also study the
mathematical properties of these new systems and seek to collaborate with
experimental biologists to determine to what extent these theoretical mechanisms
represent actual biological functions.