* 1122619
* Wage Inequality in the US, UK, and Canada
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Jake Rosenfeld, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 12/31/2012
* USD 84,002.00

SES-1122619&lt;br/&gt;Jake Rosenfeld&lt;br/&gt;University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Wage Inequality
in the US, UK, and
Canada"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few
decades, the liberal democracies have experienced increases in pay inequality
marked by steadily rising top-level incomes combined with stagnant wages for
average workers. This rise in inequality has occurred alongside increases in
productivity levels. In decades past, productivity improvements were generally
spread across a wide swath of the workforce, spurred on by labor unions that
helped institutionalize norms of pay allocation, patterning wages across broad
industries among union and nonunion workers, and internal labor markets within
firms that smoothed over changes in individual productivity over the life
course. This de-coupling of productivity and earnings over the past generation
represents a profound shift in how wages are allocated to workers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes five individual- and business
establishment-level datasets on U.S., English, and Canadian workers, and has
three specific objectives. The first is to estimate the causes and consequences
of the collapse of union wage bargaining among remaining union members. The
second objective is to document the rise of personalized pay at the workplace
and measure how this wage-setting institution has exacerbated within-group
inequality among union and nonunion workers. The third objective is to estimate
how personalized pay practices help de-couple average wages from productivity
levels. Each objective explores workplace dynamics that have widened wage gaps
while de-linking average pay from productivity
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have broad reaching social impacts in the following ways. First, the data
depository made available to the public will combine establishment-level data
from three different nations standardized with a common codebook, and will serve
as one of the most comprehensive sources of establishment-level workplace data
available. Second, the availability of establishment-level information combined
with the dissemination of the results of the analyses will open up new areas of
inquiry, especially for researchers interested in racial and gender
discrimination at work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the focus of this project
centers on patterns of within-group inequality and their relation to new wage-
setting institutions, the analyses can be easily adapted to focus on the
employer characteristics that lead to inequality between ascriptive categories.
The data and analyses provided by this project will allow future researchers to
explore how ascriptive categories translate into unequal economic outcomes in
the contemporary era of growing employer power. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, the
analyses proposed in this project will help illuminate debates surrounding
inequality trends that extend well beyond the research community. As
policymakers and public intellectuals wrangle over potential remedies for recent
inequality trends, rigorous research about the causes and consequences of these
much-discussed developments is crucial.