* 1122629
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Child/Adult Differences in Implicit/Explicit Knowledge of a Second Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 11,985.00

It is thought that children "pick up" languages naturally, whereas adults must
study grammar in order to learn a second language (L2). Adult L2 learners
typically develop extensive explicit knowledge about the L2 (knowledge that is
conscious and can be verbalized), but may lack implicit knowledge (knowledge
that cannot be verbalized, but can be accessed quickly and easily.) The reverse
is typical of children. But children also experience a very different learning
environment from adults. Are age differences in implicit/explicit language
knowledge maturational, or environmental?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
research explores how adults and children in different learning conditions
develop implicit and explicit L2 knowledge, specifically asking (1) whether
children favor implicit knowledge, (2) whether adults favor explicit knowledge,
and (3) whether this still holds when children and adults are under the same
controlled training conditions. Such research has not been done to date, since
research on implicit/explicit knowledge only tests adults, and research on
children has not included task comparisons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support
from the National Science Foundation, two studies addressing explicit and
implicit knowledge in children and adults will be carried out. The first tests
child and young adult L2 learners of Spanish who have had similar instructional
experiences on their implicit and explicit knowledge of verb morphology. The
second study trains adults and children to speak an artificial mini-language;
half the subjects receive explicit rule instruction, and the other half do not.
The goal of these studies is to examine whether age or instruction is the
primary factor in determining reliance on explicit vs. implicit knowledge. This
research contributes to the discussion of whether child and adult language
learning are fundamentally similar or different, helping to develop theories of
language learning across the lifespan. Results are expected to have implications
for the development of effective pedagogy for different age groups.