* 1122322
* Bayesian Methods for Predictive Models of Glioblastoma Growth and Treatment Response
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Andrea Hawkins-Daarud, Hawkins-Daarud          Andrea         J
* Fellowship Award
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2014
* USD 240,000.00

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive type of primary brain tumor
in humans with a median survival time of about 14 months. As the expected
survival time is so short, treatment plans must be made quickly and are
traditionally based on population statistics instead of the individual tumor
kinetics of the presenting patient. This research is directed at creating a
cyberinfrastructure system such that the physician would be able to explore
individual tumor kinetics for treatment planning via simulated treatment of a
virtual tumor based on mathematical models and patient-specific data. If such a
system could be shown reliable with quantifiable uncertainty, it could
significantly transform current medical practices.

GBM's tend to grow with constant rates and to expand diffusively, allowing for
surprisingly accurate results from relatively simple reaction-diffusion models.
This research aims to push such results further by providing quantifiable
uncertainty in the model simulations. Proof of concept is to be shown using
currently available sequences of serial MRI images from past patients for the
calibration of model parameters and then testing the validity of the model
against a final MRI image. This approach differs from earlier work in that
parameters are described with probability density functions characterizing the
uncertainty in their values and Bayesian methods are being employed to solve the
statistical inverse problems. This theory provides an all-inclusive framework
for identifying the key features of a predictive model and characterizing
uncertainty. Methods of reducing data containing high-dimensional feature sets
to a form compatible with statistical inverse methods are being investigated.
Additionally, the researcher is developing a fast, parallel and adaptive solver
so that sophisticated statistical sampling techniques are feasible