* 1122098
* A New Structural Architecture for DNA Processing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Brandt Eichman, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2015
* USD 690,000.00

Intellectual merit. DNA is under constant chemical assault from cellular and
environmental DNA damaging agents. To maintain integrity of their genomes, all
organisms possess damage-specific DNA repair proteins faced with the common
challenge of locating a particular lesion within a vast excess of "normal" DNA.
This research addresses this fundamental question through structure-function
analysis of a newly discovered enzyme from Bacillus cereus named AlkD; this
enzyme, which belongs to a group of proteins referred-to as DNA glycosylases,
will recognize certain DNA bases that have been chemically modified. DNA
glycosylases initiate a particular repair pathway by detecting and removing the
modified bases from DNA. The basis for glycosylase specificity is poorly
understood, but is believed to result in part from instability of the damaged
bases themselves. X-ray crystal structures of AlkD bound to damaged DNA,
determined in the PI's laboratory, revealed that AlkD utilizes a new DNA binding
architecture, referred-to as a HEAT repeat, to capture DNA damage by an
unprecedented mechanism. HEAT repeat proteins have recently been identified to
form expansive domains within several DNA damage response proteins. Thus, AlkD
represents a new class of DNA processing enzyme that offers an opportunity to
determine 1) the molecular details by which HEAT repeats engage DNA damage, and
2) the chemical and physical determinants of damaged base recognition and
removal. A combination of structural biology methods, including X-ray
crystallography and NMR, will be used to obtain high-resolution structures of
AlkD complexes with damaged DNA, and the structural data will guide biochemical
analyses of DNA binding and base excision activities. Results from this research
program will be placed in the context of on-going DNA repair research in the
PI's laboratory and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. Students are
typically only exposed to the theoretical aspects of X-ray crystallography and
advanced structural techniques in a lecture setting. This project will integrate
research and education by providing practical structural biology training to
students at all levels in both the laboratory and the classroom. A hands-on
X-ray crystallography module will be incorporated into the PI's protein
chemistry course to provide undergraduate and graduate students with the unique
opportunity to participate directly in all aspects of protein structure
determination. Students will aid in crystallization, structure solution, model
building, refinement, and validation of protein-DNA complexes as part of the
AlkD research program, and will be directed in groups by both the PI and
graduate students in the PI's laboratory. Graduate students associated with this
award will direct undergraduates working on their own independent projects in
the PI's laboratory in fulfillment of research course credit. Thus, in addition
to undergraduates gaining practical research experience in X-ray
crystallography, graduate students will gain invaluable teaching experience by
guiding students in the laboratory. The PI's affiliations with the College of
Arts and Science and five research centers in the medical school at Vanderbilt
University offer a rich research and teaching environment involving
undergraduates, graduate students postdoctoral fellows, and visiting scientists.