* 1122343
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Mayan Exchange Mechanisms, Consumption and Household Provisioning Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Christopher Gunn, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,267.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Christopher A. Pool, Christopher M. Gunn will
conduct analyses of pottery collections from the ancient Maya site of Kiuic.
This site was a mid-sized community located in the Puuc Hills region of the
northwestern Yucatan Peninsula. Beginning around 600 AD, the Kiuic community
underwent an intense and rapid period of growth in which new households were
founded, established households were expanded, and new public architecture was
begun. However, by approximately 1000 AD, the Kiuic polity had been abandoned,
leaving several of the largest building projects unfinished. This research
project focuses on how the social processes involved in the expansion and
decline of the Kiuic community affected household
economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Household economies provide an important window
on political processes for two primary reasons. First, households in all
societies - present as well as past - rely on external exchanges to survive over
time. Economic interaction among households provides the goods that households
need, and fosters community integration. Second, a household's socioeconomic
status in its community directly influences the kinds of exchange relationships
its members use. Minimal differences in status encourage economic exchanges that
are mutually beneficial for participating households. When differences in
socioeconomic status are greater, wealthier households often manipulate economic
systems to their advantage. They may do so by rewarding supporting households
with high value items that they manufacture or import from other places, or they
may use their power to demand tribute or taxes from lower ranking households.
All three of these kinds of exchanges may exist alongside markets controlled by
local elite households. Each of the kinds of exchange fosters economic
integration, but has different consequences for interaction among elites and
non-elites. Although this research project is specifically focused on ancient
Maya economies, it raises issues of community economic integration that are
relevant to modern households experiencing cycles of economic growth and
decline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project forms the basis of Mr.
Gunn's doctoral dissertation research, which uses utilitarian and more elaborate
kinds of pottery excavated from several of Kiuic's households to test for
evidence of exchanges among equally ranked households, among unequally ranked
households, and through markets. Results of the research will be shared with the
academic community through online publication of the dissertation at the
University of Kentucky, through articles published in peer review journals, and
in papers presented at professional meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Gunn's
research also forms part of the broader research and educational objectives of
the Kaxil Kiuic A.C. non-profit organization. Mr. Gunn will collaborate with
Mexican ceramic analysts, thereby fostering international scientific
collaboration. Part of this collaboration will result in the construction of a
reference collection of Kiuic's ceramics. This collection will be housed in
Oxkutzcab, Mexico, and will be available for students and researchers working in
the region. In addition Mr. Gunn will prepare an electronic presentation on the
role of pottery in ancient Maya households. This presentation will focus on the
role of ceramics in ancient Maya households, and will be geared towards general
Spanish and English speaking audiences. It is hoped that this presentation will
foster greater appreciation of the abundant archaeological remains of the
northern Yucatan Peninsula, and encourage reflection about the value of studying
ancient societies to increase understanding of modern ones.