* 1122424
* Arterial wall viscoelasticity and cardiovascular networks
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Mansoor Haider, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This project develops mathematical and computational models of the
cardiovascular system that couple dynamics of blood flow to vessel wall
viscoelasticity at the scale of individual vessel segments and vessel networks.
The project design integrates novel mathematical modeling, new numerical
techniques for soft tissue viscoelasticity, and extensive data analysis via
collaboration with experimentalists at the Republic University, Montevideo,
Uruguay. Models of both individual vessel segments and networks of multiple
vessels will be developed in coordination with a systematic analysis of
experimental data that employs parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis
techniques. The highly integrative and interdisciplinary nature of this study
will yield outcomes that can lead to new standards for modeling cardiovascular
dynamics in vessel networks. In particular, the importance of arterial wall
viscoelasticity will be analyzed according to vessel location and type, species
(sheep, humans) and experimental conditions (in-vivo, ex-vivo). In addition,
effects of disease will be simulated with an emphasis on variables of clinical
relevance. The models developed in this project will facilitate accurate
prediction of waveforms for blood flow, blood pressure, and vessel cross-
sectional area in cardiovascular networks.

This project develops a novel, integrative approach to analyzing cardiovascular
dynamics both in single vessels as well as vessel networks by coordinating
mathematical and computational modeling with a systematic and comprehensive
approach to analysis of experimental data. Present approaches rely on models
that neglect energy loss (viscoelasticity) in the deformation of individual
vessel walls, or models that do not consider downstream effects on blood
pressure, blood flow, and vessel cross-sectional area in cardiovascular networks
of blood vessels. The models developed in this project will be assessed,
calibrated and refined in coordination with experimental collaborators allowing
analysis of data from varying experimental conditions, different species (sheep,
human), and in different states of health (healthy vs. hypertensives). The
techniques and outcomes of this project have the potential for setting a new
standard in modeling cardiovascular blood flow and can also be applied to study
effects of other diseases (e.g., diabetes) that significantly affect
cardiovascular health. The models of vessel networks developed in this project
have the potential to provide clinicians with a reference library of blood
pressure waveforms that can be incorporated into medical simulators and
databases for diagnostic applications in cardiovascular medicine.