* 1122541
* MPS: BIO: Theory,  Algorithms, Software, for Predicting Geometric Entropy-driven Virus Assembly, using  Multiscale Configuration Space Atlasing and Combinatorial Enumeration
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Miklos Bona, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

This project is focused on modeling and validating the macromolecular assembly
of viral capsids. &lt;br/&gt;Rigorous, mechanistic explanations and predictions
are lacking for many milestone processes that occur during self-assembly of
symmetric macromolecular structures. This is despite the fact that numerous
representative structures of self-assembled viral capsids are available. In this
project, we are specifically interested in: a) nucleations, b) autostery,
conformational switches and c) scaffolding removal, all of which are processes
driven by configurational and combinatorial entropy, a stumbling block for
commonly used computational molecular simulation paradigms including molecular
dynamics and Monte Carlo methods. Multiscale Geometry and Symmetry Constraints
(MGSC) is a versatile and computationally highly efficient new modeling paradigm
developed by this PI team during a prior NSF project: it complements and
integrates with former paradigms while addressing key shortcomings. The project
will use the MGSC paradigm to translate key questions about biological processes
driven by configurational and combinatorial entropy into diverse mathematical
and algorithmic questions that elucidate the influence of geometry and symmetry
upon these processes. These questions are independently interesting and are
related to longstanding open problems in combinatorial rigidity, algebraic
geometry of configuration spaces, algebraic combinatorics, and complexity.
Moreover, using MGSC, we will obtain a systematic modeling procedure not only
for extracting the minimal, relevant data (model input) for answering focused
questions about these processes (Occam?s razor), but also for interpreting the
answers (model output) biologically. Finally, the project will use existing
experimental results (in vitro and in vivo, performed at a co-PI?s lab) on
representative families of viruses (such as the Murine Parvovirus (MVM), Maize
Streak Virus (MSV), Adeno associated viruses (AAV4) to validate its predictions,
for instance, on crucial inter-molecular interactions whose removal disrupts
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viral capsid self-assembly from its constituent
protein molecules is a phase of the viral lifecycle that is relatively
independent of the structure and processes of the host cell. Yet, the self-
assembly phase has not been targeted in the design of drugs or vaccines for
treating viral infections, nor has it been leveraged in the design and use of
viral vectors in gene therapy. This is because the rapidity, efficacy,
robustness, spontaneity and mathematically complex orchestration of viral capsid
self-assembly, occurring at the nano-scale, is extremely difficult to
understand. This project aims at bringing new insights into the viral capsid
self-assembly process by combining the expertise of two mathematicians, a
computer scientist and an experimental structural biologist. &lt;br/&gt;The
project will build upon these results to continue the development of an open
source software suite EASAL (Efficient Atlasing and Search of Assembly
Landscapes). This has the potential to be used by a wide variety of disciplines
that are interested in isolating the crucial inter-atomic interactions that
drive macromolecular self-assembly. Hence the project will provide outstanding
interdisciplinary research experience not only to the graduate students and
postdocs involved, but to the PIs as well. The project will provide research
experience for STEM teachers at local schools and will additionally involve
Tertl Studos - a game-based learning software company that is interested in
working in the public domain - to creatively incorporate geometric constraint
solving algorithms into a wide variety of math and science benchmarks in grades
4-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted to the DMS programs in
Mathematical Biology and Computational Mathematics, to CCF/CISE and to MCB/BIO
in response to the Dear Colleague Letter: Unsolicited Proposals at the Interface
of the Biological, Mathematical and Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;It is co-
funded by sevral NSF programs: Mathematical Biology/DMS/MPS, Molecular and
Cellular Biology/BIO, Algorithmic Foundations CCF/CISE as well as by the DMS
Cyberinfrastructure for the 21st Century (CIF21) fund.