* 1122434
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the development and treatment of plant diseases caused by the bacterium Xylella fastidiosa using theoretical and experimental methods
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Leonardo De La Fuente, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2014
* USD 142,641.00

Xylella fastidiosa (Xf) is a bacterium that causes devastating plant diseases in
crops such as grapes, citrus, peaches and blueberries. The goal of this project
is to understand the progression and treatment of xylem fouling by bacterial
biofilms formed by the plant pathogen Xf using tightly coupled theoretical and
experimental techniques. The core mathematical model developed for the project
uses a multiphase approach that is a flexible framework accounting for the
complex interactions occurring during the disease progression. Multiphase
modeling is a natural framework to account for the dramatic variation in scales
(from the bacterial scale to the channel length scale). The transfer of material
from free-swimming bacteria to biofilm-bound bacteria and the production of
biomass (bacteria and extra-cellular polymeric 'glue') requires a distinction
between the types of material within the system. Finally, multiphase models are
essentially statements of conservation laws providing a relatively simple method
for incorporating physical and chemical processes. Experimentally, the use of
microfluidics for studies of specific behaviors of bacterial cells is recognized
as a useful tool for new discoveries. Studies on single bacterial cells under
controlled conditions are leading to new understandings of bacterial growth and
relationship with the. Microfluidic chambers have been developed by De La
Fuente's lab as a new technological approach to study the infection process of
vascular plant bacterial pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular
objectives are to determine whether the dominant symptoms of the plant
infection, such as leaf scorch, are due to reduced water flux caused by
occlusion of the water transport network by the biofilm or whether active plant
responses are also implicated. Further, the investigation will focus on non-
destructive methods of treatment of the disease. These two objectives provide
fundamental insight into the disease process and treatment. The collaboration
between the theoretical (mathematics) and experimental (biological) methods are
used to validate the mathematical theory and suggest new avenues of disease
treatment. The project initially uses experimental data to validate the
theoretical modeling. In turn, the modeling and analysis is used to test various
hypotheses on the disease development (e.g. occlusion versus plant responses)
that are difficult to test in the laboratory. In addition, the theoretical
predictions point to particular experimental designs (e.g. treatment regimes)
that may provide valuable insight into non-destructive disease treatment.