* 1122703
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Causes and Consequences of Land Use Changes in Rural North America
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Molly Doane, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 8,700.00

Doctoral student John Michels (University of Illinois at Chicago), with the
guidance of Dr. Molly Doane, will undertake research on the processes of class
transformation currently being experienced in rural areas of North America and
elsewhere. This research will be carried out in the Almaguin Highlands, Ontario,
Canada, where working-class spaces are being transformed into upper-class
residential and commercial zones. These processes recast the countryside from a
place of work to a place of leisure, sometimes generating both tensions and
alliances between various groups of residents over proper uses and meanings of
rural space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the course of the project the
researcher will carry out both ethnographic and archival research. Archival
research will take place in village offices, village and university libraries,
and provincial governmental offices. The ethnographic portion includes
participant observation and a series of in-depth, semi-structured interviews.
Activities include regular attendance at community meetings, open houses, job
fairs, festivals, food drives, fundraisers, and other social events. Additional
time will be spent with participants as they go about their daily activities at
their places of employment and in their homes. Furthermore, a series of 200
semi-structured interviews will be conducted with a sample of 100 informants
over the course of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By ethnographically
tracking these changes from labor-oriented rural production to leisure-oriented
rural consumption, this study promises to help theorize the processes involved
in the transformation of rural landscapes wherever they are found. Findings from
the research will also be useful to planners and policy makers concerned with
encouraging the beneficial effects and ameliorating the less beneficial ones for
affected residents. Funding this research also contributes to the training of a
graduate student.