* 1122993
* Improving Beyond-First-Year Physics Laboratory Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Beth Cunningham, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 451,757.00

This project supports two synergistic programs aimed at improving one aspect of
STEM education: beyond-first-year (BFY) laboratory instruction of undergraduates
in physics departments in the US. The first program is a 2012 Conference on
Laboratory Instruction Beyond the First Year of College (the BFY Conference),
aimed at broad curricular impact. The second program is the ALPhA Immersions
Program, focused on faculty-staff development, with sites distributed around the
country. Each initiative is in response to and plans to feed back into national
surveys.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The BFY Conference initiates these programs by
offering opportunities for hands-on exposure to a broad smörgåsbord of
contemporary instructional labs appropriate to Modern Physics, Electronics,
Optics, Advanced Labs, as well as key instructional labs in Statistical Physics,
Condensed Matter Physics, Quantum Mechanics, etc. These focused-topic portions
of the program are designed to lead into discussion of supporting curricular
models that improve the degree of cohesion and integration of the 4-year
laboratory curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the most productive
exchanges about modernizing curricular content, structure, and pedagogy emerge
when the conversation is focused at the level of discussing particular courses
or even particular experiments. So, each site of the ALPhA Immersions Program is
offering focused faculty-staff development coupled with larger curricular
discussions, and initial results demonstrate that this program will be an
extraordinarily effective agent for curricular change. Each participant is
immersed for three days in the details of a single, key instructional BFY
laboratory topic of their choice. A month before arrival, each participant will
be given preparatory reading and assignments, and after the program they will
have access to (and be prompted for) follow-up support. Experts mentor the
participants throughout the process, ensuring that participants can confidently
update their curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: By
disseminating 4-year models of instruction regarding interconnected topics such
as single-photon interference, indistinguishability, entanglement, quantum
correlations, and Bell's inequalities, the intellectual landscape of
undergraduate physics laboratories is being dramatically modernized. In addition
to disseminating contemporary curricular models, pedagogies, curricular content,
and experimental techniques, this project promotes shared adoption of assessment
tools, particularly emphasizing ones dealing with student conceptual
understanding of quantum mechanics. All material is made accessible through the
AAPT/ComPADRE archival website for laboratory materials. This project thereby
addresses the relative stagnation of laboratory curricula that our survey data
suggest exists in many programs throughout the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: An initial national survey regarding BFY
laboratory instruction has been conducted, highlighting clear, common
shortcomings among undergraduate physics programs. It makes a strong case that
shared opportunities for faculty, staff, and curricular development in this area
are especially important, particularly for the surprisingly large number of
institutions where the relevant instructors must develop this portion of the
curriculum in relative isolation. Critically, the initial survey results make
clear that impact can be achieved by improving the professional qualifications
and effectiveness of an identifiable and relatively small cohort of persons who
collectively play a crucial role in the experimental instruction of nearly all
students who major or minor in physics. The two programs described here can
collectively impact a significant number of these instructors, and special
efforts are being made to include those serving historically underrepresented
groups.