* 1122519
* Topology of Neural Coding in Recurrent Networks:  Theory and Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Vladimir Itskov, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 316,862.00

This project develops a mathematical theory that relates the coding properties
of neuronal populations to the structure of the local networks to which they
belong. An important ingredient is the analysis of topological invariants, such
as homology groups, of the stimulus spaces represented by networks of neurons,
and how they constrain the connectivity of the underlying networks. This
necessitates an approach that blends algebraic-topological methods with more
traditional dynamical systems models. The research will produce testable
predictions about the structure of networks that support stimulus
representation, and will deepen our understanding of the relationship between
network structure and function. The theory will be both tested and guided by the
analysis of multi-unit electrophysiological recordings in behaving
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The brain is a vast collection of interconnected
neural circuits. In many brain areas, important neural computations are
accomplished by local networks of neurons. However, the structure of local
recurrent circuits in the brain is still poorly understood, even in the most
studied brain areas such as the hippocampus. In contrast, neuroscience
experiments have been much more successful in uncovering coding properties of
individual neurons and, more recently, in characterizing patterns of population
activity in local neuronal circuits. This research develops a mathematical
theory that exploits our knowledge of the representational properties of
neuronal populations in order to better understand the structure of the
underlying networks. The findings yield new insight into the role of neural
circuits in learning and memory, and of how the brain organizes knowledge.
Progress in the basic understanding of neural circuits is essential for
improving our understanding of learning disabilities and diseases (such as
epilepsy and schizophrenia) that are believed to be related to the malfunction
of neural circuits.