* 1122898
* Collaborative Research: Development of Adaptable Web Modules to Stimulate Active Learning in Hydrology using Data and Model Simulations
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Ehab Meselhe, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2017
* USD 461,637.00

This collaborative project is creating case-based, web-enabled educational
hydrology modules that encapsulate real-world hydrologic systems. This project
expands on the results of a Type I CCLI pilot study and grounds the learning
experiences using three large-scale natural hydrologic systems (Coastal
Louisiana, the Florida Everglades, and the Great Salt Lake Basin in Utah).

Intellectual Merit: The project leverages recent research advances on monitoring
and modeling of complex natural systems and synthesizes them to develop a suite
of flexible, adaptable web-based modules. The selected natural systems, each
presenting some unique concepts and physical settings, contribute to redefining
the teaching of hydrology by focusing on the dynamics of fundamental hydrologic
processes and their connections to climate drivers, ecosystems' response, and
water resources operational constraints. An extensive set of interactive
learning modules is being built into the system and is supported by an
instructional interface, an instructor's guide, and a set of implementation and
adaptation procedures. The project adopts an improvement-focused evaluation
model with an iterative design process which includes multiple iterations of
design, implementation, evaluation, and redesign.

Broader Impacts: To facilitate wide dissemination and adaptability, the system
is being implemented using open source geospatial web technologies and
community-based tools for data publication and analysis. The architecture of the
system supports the addition of future hydrologic applications developed by
other members of the hydrologic educational community. The participating
institutions include a primarily African American institution, a college for
women, a primarily Hispanic institution, and a minority high school. Through a
design-based research approach, the project is identifying and implementing
successful strategies so that the innovations can be scaled and adapted in
diverse settings.