* 1122823
* Native American-based Mathematics Materials for Integration into Undergraduate Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Charles Funkhouser, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 598,224.00

The California State University at Fullerton (CSUF) project entitled, 'Native
American-based Mathematics Materials for Integration into Undergraduate
Courses', further develops mathematics materials based in the mathematical
traditions of Native American peoples for integration into undergraduate courses
at CSUF, Turtle Mountain Community College (TMCC), and other Western States
universities and colleges . Building on NSF-DUE Project 0341346, the researchers
are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* further developing and enhancing materials based in
mathematics and Native traditions, &lt;br/&gt;* continuing the integration of
these materials into existing courses at the CSUF, TMCC and other
sites,&lt;br/&gt;* fostering faculty expertise through classroom-ready lessons
and previously utilized instructor-training models, &lt;br/&gt;* assessing the
materials' effects on student attitude and dispositions toward mathematics by
means of an external evaluator,&lt;br/&gt;* conducting research in the STEM
affective domain, and&lt;br/&gt;* making these materials available for
dissemination to other undergraduate institutions through both traditional and
technology-based means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit is demonstrated
by 1) its original and transformative nature, 2) advancing knowledge of the
relationship between Native American culture and mathematics, 3) a partnership
of public and Tribal institutions, and 4) a diversely-staffed framework for
project development, implementation, evaluation and dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project are demonstrated in part by 1) a
partnership which includes full-time university and community college faculty,
Tribal colleges, graduate and undergraduate students, Tribal members and Elders,
and 2) dissemination through professional meetings and publications, and
technology-based means to allow all students to 'Think Indian' and have a fuller
appreciation of the diversity of mathematics and Native American intellectual
and cultural traditions.