* 1122079
* Identification of the Dinuclear Metallo-Cofactor and Elucidation of the Reaction Mechanism of the Aldehyde Decarbonylase from the Alkane-producing Cyanobacterium Nostoc Punctiforme
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Squire Booker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 812,813.00

This award in the molecular biosciences program supports work at the
Pennsylvania State University to study the enzyme aldehyde decarbonylase (AD)
from the alkane-producing cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme (Np). The reaction
catalyzed by Np AD is the second of the two reactions in the biosynthesis of
alkanes by cyanobacteria. Thus, research supported by this project aims at
elucidating the detailed chemical steps of the key alkane-producing step in
cyanobacteria. Because cyanobacteria are environmentally versatile, rapidly
growing, genetically alterable, and (most importantly) photosynthetic, they are
being actively pursued as a vehicle for development of renewable energy. These
studies include the identification of the dinuclear metallocofactor required for
activity of Np AD and determination of the reaction mechanism of Np AD by a
combination of biochemical and biophysical approaches. The utilization of fatty
acids suggests that the soluble Np AD has devised a novel strategy to obtain
this water insoluble substrate. The mechanism of substrate acquisition by Np AD
will also be evaluated to differentiate between a channeling mechanism and
membrane targeting. This project uses a versatile set of experimental strategies
to evaluate the biosynthesis of alkanes. The results from these proposed studies
will provide valuable information on new chemical properties of an enzyme metal
center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work are two-fold.
First, the research area at the interface of biological and inorganic chemistry
is very interdisciplinary and offers students and postdoctoral scholars to be
trained in a wide variety of methods. A workshop will be offered by bioinorganic
chemists from Penn State and other institutions to approximately 80 students and
postdoctoral scholars as a unique training opportunity in many of the methods
used in this research field. Second, the research is relevant for the
development of renewable energy, because the use of cyanobacteria for alkane
production is a promising strategy for biofuel production. This process is
particularly environmentally friendly, because the process is (i) carbon neutral
(all carbon found in the alkane product derives from carbon dioxide fixed by the
cyanobacteria) and (ii) driven by solar energy (due to the photosynthetic nature
of cyanobacteria). This project will aid in the rational design of genetically
engineered cyanobacteria for enhanced biofuel production.