* 1122286
* VOSS: Virtual organizations in action: Understanding socio-technical systems through changes in structure and technology
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tony O'Driscoll, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2015
* USD 399,896.00

Virtual organizations are groups of individuals whose members and resources may
be distributed geographically and structurally, yet who function as a coherent
unit through the use of collaborative technology. In the context of business,
virtual organizations offer the promise of growth and innovation through
flexible and fluid structures, yet employees face the challenge of managing
coordination costs as a result of the dynamic and evolving work. New
collaborative technologies, such as those that facilitate communication and
knowledge sharing as well as social media and task integration capabilities,
offer coordination benefits that could counter, and possibly exceed, the
coordination costs that arise from working in virtual
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through qualitative interviews of
individuals and an online survey of working groups, this project will: (a)
define and measure features of organization structure, collaborative technology,
and workflow outcomes in a range of structures (including virtual organization
structures) within a business organization adopting a new and emergent
organizational structure, (b) describe the consequences (positive and negative)
of different organization structures and collaborative technologies in terms of
their impact on workflow outcomes, and (c) create a public web-based resource
that can be used by the organizational and technology communities to better
understand the kinds of structures and technologies that affect workflow
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on the intersection of virtual
organization structures and collaborative technology is still in its infancy.
Data collected from this unique empirical setting will provide critical insight
into how new structures and new technologies influence each other as well as
workflow outcomes. In addition to furthering scientific understanding of virtual
organizations, a potentially transformative outcome of this research is
facilitating understanding of virtual organizations for science, education,
healthcare, and other types of organizations. Moreover, study results can be
incorporated into the design and testing of collaborative technology, which
could contribute to new advances in tools to support distributed work.