* 1122603
* MIRT: Exploring Unusual Properties of Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,820,000.00

The mission of the Materials Interdisciplinary Research Team (MIRT) is to
investigate the unusual properties of transition-metal oxides while producing a
next generation of scientists and engineers well-trained in the area of advanced
materials. The MIRT integrates materials researchers at the University of Texas
at Austin (UT-Austin) and the University of Virginia with educational outreach
programs involving K-12, undergraduate and graduate students, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MIRT consisting of leading scientists with
diverse theoretical and experimental expertise will investigate transition-metal
oxides on three fronts: (i) developing a thorough and deep understanding of the
change of d-electron properties from bulk to surface, which is critical for
catalytic as well as insertion-compound electrodes for electrochemical energy
conversion and storage, (ii) addressing strategically the long-standing problem
of the localized to itinerant electronic transition, which is relevant to high-
transition-temperature superconductivity and to the solid-state theory of
magnetic interactions in orbitally disordered systems, and (iii) synthesizing
new transition-metal oxides by novel approaches including high-pressure
synthesis, soft chemistry synthesis, and growing high-quality crystals
exhibiting exotic physical and chemical properties. The MIRT also focuses on
emerging research topics such as oxide topological insulators, which includes
exploring new magneto-optical effects in a sandwiched structure consisting of a
topological insulator and a ferromagnetic layer, superconductivity, and new
quantum states with potential application for quantum computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental understanding of the unusual surface and
bulk properties of transition-metal oxides is anticipated to have a profound
impact on new materials development for the next generation of electronic and
electrochemical energy devices. The project will establish broad collaborations
with scientists at synchrotron and neutron facilities in the U.S. and abroad.
The project would provide research training to graduate students with advanced
equipment/facilities and specialized coursework that offers an interdisciplinary
view of the physics, chemistry, and materials science phenomena that drive the
key outstanding questions addressed by this MIRT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
graduate-undergraduate research environment, through the Graduates Linked with
Undergraduates in Engineering (GLUE) program in partnership with the Women in
Engineering Program (WEP) at the University of Texas, will provide not only a
graduate-level research environment for female undergraduates, but also career
and professional development. The planned recruiting and mentoring of Hispanic
undergraduates will motivate them to pursue graduate studies in advanced
materials. The undergraduates will receive hands-on training on various
instruments available as shared user facilities or in the MIRT faculty
laboratories and participate in research projects involving materials synthesis,
characterization, and physical-property measurements. The MIRT faculty and
students will give lectures and/or demonstrations of clean energy technologies
involving oxides to Magnet Program students at middle and high schools as well
as to the general public and K-12 students at Explore UT, a campus-wide open
house.