* 1122315
* CAREER:  Towards Better Representations of the Nocturnal Low-Level Jets in New Generation Large-Eddy and Mesoscale Models
* GEO,AGS
* 11/10/2010,05/31/2014
* Sukanta Basu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2014
* USD 298,800.00

This work will focus on a closely coordinated observational and numerical study
of wind structure in the lowest layers of the atmosphere, with particular
attention to mechanisms leading to development of a recurring wind pattern known
as the "low level jet" (as in jetstream, aka LLJ, which frequently develops
during nighttime hours over the U.S. central plains during spring/summer
months). Particular attention will be directed toward identifying environmental
controls on the degree to which this elevated source of momentum (and hence
energy) is mixed down toward the earth's surface and its subsequent impacts on
renewable energy production via wind turbines. The investigator's approach will
embody a combination of: (1) development of an expanded observational database
describing LLJ structure via an array of existing facilities operated by Texas
Tech (including a 200 m tower mounted with sonic anemometers at 10 discrete
levels) in conjunction with a newly acquired scintillometer--all of which are
key to better understanding near-surface wind profile evolution under LLJ
conditions; (2) numerical simulations to quantify turbulent controls on the
intermittent vertical mixing of momentum from the level of the LLJ down to that
of wind turbines during stably-stratified conditions typical of nighttime; (3)
development of a new graduate-level course at Texas Tech University entitled
"Wind Power Meteorology"; and (4) a broad K-12 outreach effort exposing teachers
and students at local schools to a variety of classroom and field activities
that will significantly enhance both primary and secondary science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particularly novel aspect of this project is
inclusion of the "Large Eddy Simulation" (LES) approach in tandem with more
traditional mesoscale simulations conducted via the Weather Forecasting Model
(WRF). This effort, in tandem with above-mentioned special observations, will
better describe the occurrence (and ultimately serve to achieve more accurate
prediction) of episodes of turbulence in which stronger winds rooted aloft in
the core of the LLJ mix downward toward the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Broader Impacts of this work are substantial, and will include more accurate
forecasts of changes in urban air quality and power generation capacity across
large networks of turbine-powered electric generators ("wind farms") whose
implementation is expanding rapidly in this era of mounting petroleum prices.
Considerable enhancements to education at primary, secondary and university
level will also occur as students are exposed to various aspects of the
observation and numerical forecast of near-surface winds through suitable data
visualization techniques (in the classroom) and field trips to become more
familiar with renewable energy generation systems.