* 1122483
* MIRT: Stressed Polymers - Exploiting Tension in Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Sergei Sheiko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,180,000.00

MIRT: Stressed Polymers - Exploiting Tension in Soft
Matter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical stress is integral to all living and many
synthetic systems, from cells and muscles to catalysts and elastomers. It
underpins the most common types of actions, responses, and stimuli. The general
goal of this MIRT is to develop new principles in soft materials design, ones
wherein mechanical stress in materials is generated, managed, and harvested by
molecular engineering. One specific goal is to explore the interplay between the
stress state of macroscopic materials and the chemistry of specific, addressable
bonds within them. Novel materials functions will be made possible through
controlled self-generation of bond tension and the intelligent processing of
both internal and external stress into activation of specific chemical bonds.
The other goal is to design multifunctional polymer particles and substrates
that autonomously change their shape, surface structure, mechanical, and optical
properties. The Team will further exploit its know-how in the fabrication of
nanostructured objects with unprecedented fidelity and uniformity to prepare the
next generation of shape-memory particles and substrates, designed to store
mechanical stress and focus it at the molecular level via controlled strain
release. The outlined goals will be achieved through interdisciplinary research,
international collaboration, and interactive teamwork of synthetic chemists,
experimental and theoretical physicist, and engineers across three campuses of
the University of North Carolina, Carnegie Mellon University, and Duke
University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will provide
considerable opportunity for innovation and technology transfer, integrating
science into education, and broadening participation of underrepresented groups.
Increasing diversity for enhanced research innovation and collaboration is an
integral dimension of the UNC MIRT: diversity in race and gender will complement
the diversity of thoughts, skills, backgrounds, and disciplines. The education
program includes four key constituents: 1) Summer Research Experience for
Undergraduates focused on minorities and women from neighboring Historically
Black Colleges and Universities and women's colleges with research, education,
and social events; 2) Year round mentoring for undergraduate and high school
students with active participation in the full cycle of MIRT research
activities; 3) Graduate education with research support, travel awards and a new
personal development program focused on innovation, diversity, and communication
skills; 4) Junior researcher engagement for 7th-12th graders with activities to
increase their exposure to, and enthusiasm and interest in, innovative science.