* 1122617
* GENEVA: Generalizing Evolutionary Algorithms
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* David Knoester, Knoester                David          B
* Fellowship Award
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2014
* USD 240,000.00

Evolutionary algorithms (EAs), which are automated problem solving techniques
inspired by biological evolution, have been used to address many challenging
problems in a variety of fields. For example, EAs have been used to layout
electronic circuits, design radio antennas, identify drug interactions, and to
predict cancer malignancy. EAs have also been used to advance our understanding
of evolutionary biology, including the evolutionary origins of complexity and
altruism. This broad applicability of EAs has led to a variety of different
incompatible approaches, which complicates the replication of experiments,
promotes duplication of effort, and hinders collaboration among researchers.
Moreover, while a powerful tool for solving complex problems, many EAs require
that thousands of computationally-expensive simulations be performed before a
solution is found. A framework that enables the use of advanced computational
resources, while minimizing the incompatibilities between different evolutionary
algorithms, is needed.

This research involves the development of "GENEVA," a framework to GENeralize
EVolutionary Algorithms. GENEVA is designed to address the challenges facing
users of EAs in three ways: First, it provides a C++ and Python-based software
abstraction layer so that components from existing EA software packages can be
used within a common environment. Second, it enables users to transparently make
use of available high-performance computing resources. Finally, GENEVA provides
an interactive graphical environment that can be used by students and
researchers alike to explore and analyze evolutionary algorithms. To guide the
development of GENEVA, two case studies will be investigated, one from each of
engineering and evolutionary biology.