* 1122573
* EXP: Fostering Collective Progress in Online Discourse for Sustained Knowledge Building
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mei-Hwa Chen, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 08/31/2014
* USD 549,945.00

The PIs are designing, developing, and testing a software tool, called Idea
Threads Mapper (ITM) that helps young learners (grades 4 and 5) sustain inquiry
and discussion more regularly in their classrooms. The tool allows them to
visualize the ways the class's ideas are taking shape and being improved over
time and help them analyze the on-line discourse (e.g., threaded discussions,
notes) of other classes or communities and use the ideas of others to move
forward their own ideas. The tool helps learners examine on-line discourse and
index the pieces in new ways. The tool and learners work together to examine
discourse and index it, with the tool providing scaffolding for the examination
of discourse that learners do. ITM is being added to Knowledge Forum, a platform
for community knowledge building that is used extensively in elementary-school
classrooms. It is being designed as an open-source tool that will be usable
within other collaborative learning platforms as well in which students
contribute, examine, refine, and build upon their own ideas and those of others
through sustained discourse (e.g., WISE, Blackboard).

Along with design and development of innovative technology in support of
sustained inquiry, PIs are conducting research that investigates how to foster
reflective awareness of and monitoring of community knowledge. This research is
expected to produce conceptual, pedagogical, and technological advances that
will make sustained, progressive inquiry more achievable among young students,
whether they are working together in small groups, as a class, or across a
network of classrooms. It is expected that pedagogical designs enabled by this
tool will foster students' collective responsibility to monitor, build on, and
advance community knowledge for deep understanding at the same time they are
contributing to and gaining support from the shared knowledge of the knowledge
building communities they are participating in. Because teachers will use the
same system to collaboratively plan across classrooms, it is expected that the
project will also contribute ideas about effective planning tools for teachers
and teacher professional development.

A key to creative productivity is a sustained, progressive trajectory of inquiry
by a collaborative group in which ideas are continually generated, refined, and
further built upon to formulate more advanced ideas and problems, expanding the
community's shared knowledge and using that knowledge to continually inform
further initiatives. Inquiry-based learning requires similar sustained efforts
of students to be productive in developing deep understanding and
creative/adaptive capabilities. Such a sustained, progressive trajectory of
inquiry is rare in classrooms; but it is achievable. This project is focusing on
how to make sustained, progressive inquiry more achievable among young students
and in the classrooms of more teachers. Cultivating collaborative, inquiry-based
practices that expand the knowledge of a community is expected to prepare
students for careers in our knowledge-based society in which they play key roles
in expanding our society's knowledge.