* 1122889
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Transmission in the Real World: A quantitative study of teaching and cultural learning in the Yasawa Islands, Fiji
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Robert Boyd, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

University of California at Los Angeles doctoral student Michelle Kline, with
the guidance of Dr. Robert T. Boyd, will undertake research to test predictions
of the hypothesis that cumulative cultural evolution is integral to human
adaptation, and that humans possess unique social learning capacities that have
coevolved with culture. The research will produce the most extensive existing
data set on cultural transmission outside the laboratory. The research is
important both to cultural evolutionary theory and to more general understanding
of how human beings learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kline's project has four aims:
(1) test whether subtle teaching is important to social learning in a small-
scale society; (2) measure within-group variation in knowledge relevant to
adaptive skills; (3) test whether theorized learning biases generate adaptive
behavior outside the laboratory; and (4) measure patterns of social interaction
to infer the geometry of cultural information networks. She will carry out the
research in villages on Yasawa Island, Fiji. Each village is about 100 people,
who subsist mainly on fishing and horticulture. Political units are composed of
interrelated clans, a council of elders, and a hereditary chief. There are no
local markets, broadcast television, automobiles, or public utilities here.
Since face-to-face societies like this one are more similar to the environments
to which the human mind first evolved, this is an ideal setting for this study.
The Co-PI will collect data using mixed methodology, including focal follows,
structured interviews, and video-recorded observation and video-assisted
interviews. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research will be
significant for the study of human origins, because culture is a major source of
human adaptability, and because interpreting the early hominin archaeological
record accurately requires empirically verified theory about how cultural
transmission creates patterns of cultural variation. Findings will also be of
interest to researchers in the fields of education. The project will train a
graduate student and will train a female Fijian research assistant.