* 1122333
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Sciences: Breaking the Wall of Impunity?  Strategic Litigation and Human Rights in Mexico and Colombia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Kenneth Roberts, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

In democracies struggling with violence and the rule of law, when is legal
mobilization effective in encouraging the state to take judicial responsibility
for harming its own people? This project will analyze how victims of serious,
state-perpetrated human rights abuses (extra-judicial killing, torture and
disappearance) collaborate with NGOs in pursuit of justice, and when and why
they succeed. It will measure the influence of strategic litigation (domestic
litigation used together with NGO-organized protests, lobbying, media campaigns,
high-level meetings, international solidarity networks, and international
litigation) on domestic judicial outcomes and litigants' ongoing safety. It
posits that with strong strategic litigation, victims are more likely to achieve
justice and improve their safety. By comparing human rights cases in Mexico and
Colombia, this study will explore how factors like judicial autonomy, citizen
faith and participation in the judicial system, and the domestic situating of
international law affect the success of these strategies. By using both
quantitative regression and paired case studies, it will interrogate the
relationship between mobilization, justice and safety.

Analyzing the efficacy of the rule of law from the bottom up will provide a
balance for scholarship that has approached questions of rule of law from a top-
down, often state-centered understanding of courts and law. The data on judicial
outcomes in lower courts, citizen mobilization and victim security will add to
the burgeoning legal mobilization scholarship on international outcomes. Beyond
these scholarly contributions, the project seeks to provide victims and their
NGO advocates with analysis of the efficacy of their mobilization activities.
Further, it seeks to inform the policymaking community about levels of state
impunity, and may suggest the need for reform: if victims with access to
advocacy resources receive more justice, this suggests the need to ensure all
victims have a means of redressing the resource imbalance that they confront
when accusing the state of violating its own laws.