* 1122742
* Discovering Patterns in the Natural World Through Student Inquiry in Ecology and Biodiversity
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Philip Myers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 07/31/2014
* USD 577,538.00

This project expands the reach of a previous CCLI grant to establish a search
engine, Quaardvark, for the Animal Diversity Web (ADW) structured database
sponsored by the University of Michigan Museum of Zoology. The Quaardvark query
tool allows the database, which contains information and images for over 3,500
animal species, to be searched according to a number of properties of
ecological, evolutionary, anatomical, and physiological interest. Researchers
find it useful, as do teaching faculty and their students. Its flexibility has
led to its being used for activities in courses at the University of Michigan
and a number of additional colleges and universities in Michigan and Virginia.
In this new award, the project has expanded to serve a network of faculty at 18
colleges and universities around the country. These partners include community
colleges, liberal arts colleges, historically Black universities, comprehensive
state universities, colleges and universities serving Hispanic or Native
American populations, and major research universities. Teachers of organismal
biology are assisted to integrate activities involving ADW materials into their
curricula. Tools for assessment of student learning from these activities are
under development, and Quaardvark is being modified to access data from other
rich collections besides ADW. Because students can use the system on questions
of their own design, even new students of biology are able to carry out research
at progressively more intricate levels as they become more skilled and
sophisticated in their understanding of biological concepts and searching
strategies. Software supporting the project is freely available, so it can be
adopted and adapted for students around the world and incorporated into other
sites that promote the use of digital STEM resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts
toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education .