* 1122135
* Investigation of the yeast prion [SWI+]
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2016
* Liming Li, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 10/31/2016
* USD 781,559.00

Intellectual Merit: There are a group of atypical genetic elements in the
budding yeast, S. cerevisiae that are known as "yeast prions" because they are
transmitted as altered, stable conformations of proteins. This is similar to
infectious agents that have been characterized in mammalian systems. Yeast prion
studies have provided valuable information on protein folding, information about
proteins that assist folding of other macromolecules (molecular chaperone
function), and information about protein-based infectivity. This project
examines the molecular mechanisms responsible for the prion conformational
switch of Swi1p. This protein functions as a subunit of an evolutionarily
conserved complex named SWI/SNF, whose function is to remodel chromatin, the
fundamental unit of DNA and histone proteins that condenses to form chromosomes.
As condensed chromatin represses gene expression, chromatin remodeling by
SWI/SNF plays an important role in regulation of gene expression. A combined
approach of biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology will be used to 1) examine
the structural requirement of Swi1p for prion formation and transmission; 2)
identify interaction partners and cellular factors essential for Swi1 prion
propagation; and 3) elucidate the biological significance of the Swi1 prion.
Results from this investigation will significantly add to the understanding of
prion biology and the role of Swi1 prion in chromatin-remodeling and regulation
of gene expression. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to the intellectual
merit, this project will be a platform for training postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students as future independent scientists. Summer undergraduate interns
will also be recruited from universities/colleges in the Midwest area. Another
major educational goal of this project is to establish a High School Science
Club program to connect high school students who are underrepresented minorities
in the Chicago area with the biological science community in the Feinberg School
of Medicine, Northwestern University. This includes after-school programs and
summer camps. Planned activities include science-based discussions, talks and
demonstrations, and hands-on activities. This project will likely propel the
disadvantaged youth in the Chicago area towards further science education and
potentially to a science-oriented career.