* 1122250
* Tools and Technologies to Enable Genome-Wide Screens in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,543,394.00

Intellectual Merit: This project aims to develop genome-wide experimental tools
and technologies for analyzing gene regulation and function in Arabidopsis.
Computational analysis of the initial genome sequence of Arabidopsis thaliana,
completed in the year 2000, provided evidence for the existence of approximately
25,500 protein-coding genes. Intensive efforts during the past ten years to
experimentally annotate this genome sequence have now identified 31,128 genes,
which include additional protein-coding genes as well as non-coding RNA genes.
The identification of T-DNA insertion mutations in all Arabidopsis genes has
been an on-going aim of worldwide functional genomics programs. Analysis of the
available set of TDNA mutants reveals that ~24,000 additional mutant alleles are
needed to create a comprehensive homozygous mutant collection. This research
specifically addresses the following goals: to identify two genetically stable
loss-of-function mutations in all Arabidopsis genes and to complete the goal of
isolating two homozygous alleles for every gene in the genome. llumina paired-
end deep sequencing will be used to identify mutations in these "missing" genes,
thereby allowing completion of the "unimutant" for the annotated set of
Arabidopsis genes. Further development of the T-DNA-Seq method for large scale
capture and sequencing of ~ one million T-DNA insertion sites will allow
identification of the inventory of essential genes as well as provide insights
into the mechanism of T-DNA integration and associated gene silencing events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The genomic resources developed by this
project will be widely available to a large number of researchers and will
provide the basis for a variety of research projects that rely upon whole genome
information. Completion of the proposed research will provide a new important
resource for the plant biology community, enabling a variety of genome-wide
mutant screens for any visible phenotype of interest. An important feature of
this research is that all of the mutant plants/populations will be available to
the research community as soon as they are produced. The beneficiaries of this
program will be the entire plant biology community, providing essential reagents
necessary to elucidate the functions of the Arabidopsis genes. Additionally, the
new technology developed to rapidly and inexpensively index insertion mutants by
next generation sequencing in any plant or animal will have applications far
beyond Arabidopsis research. The long-term impact of these enabling tools and
technologies on agriculture is expected to be profound, providing fundamental
knowledge for the construction of new plant varieties with superior agronomic
traits. An equally important aspect of our research program is the hands-on
training in plant genome research that will be provided at a variety of levels,
including outreach to minority high school and undergraduate students.