* 1122088
* Lysine Deacetylases as Coactivators in Glucocorticoid Receptor Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Catharine Smith, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 10/31/2015
* USD 824,364.00

Intellectual Merit: Cells adapt to their environment through modulation of
intracellular signaling pathways that cause changes in gene expression. Enzymes
that modify proteins directly are key components of signaling pathways. Lysine
acetylation is a type of modification conserved from bacteria to humans. Recent
studies have revealed its widespread occurrence on proteins in eukaryotic cells,
but its roles in signaling are poorly understood, and so are the roles of
enzymes that regulate it, lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) and lysine
deacetylases (KDACs). Present understanding of the functions of acetylation,
KATs, and KDACs has been dominated by studies of histone acetylation, which
facilitates gene expression. Thus, KATs and KDACs are considered to promote and
impair RNA synthesis, respectively. However, recent studies have shown that
KDACs are concentrated in regulatory regions of active genes, that they are
recruited to genes by factors that promote RNA synthesis, and that their
inhibition or depletion can cause repression of gene expression. In addition,
many regulatory proteins are acetylated, yet the functional impact is largely
uncharacterized. In the few cases that have been studied, acetylation has been
found to either impair or enhance protein function. Thus KDACs may indeed
facilitate transcription. This project addresses this possibility using
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) signaling as a model system. Like other members of
the nuclear receptor family, the GR binds directly to target genes and assembles
protein complexes that facilitate gene expression. This study will determine the
impact of KDAC inhibition or depletion on GR-induced complex assembly at GR
target genes, identify the KDACs that cooperate with GR to activate gene
expression, assess the acetylation state of key proteins, and define the impact
of that acetylation on protein function at GR target genes. Once completed this
project will generate new and unconventional models for the role of acetylation
in GR signaling and provide a more comprehensive view of the contributions of
KDACs and non-histone protein acetylation to regulation of gene expression
through signaling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: The research project
will provide research and training opportunities for graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students in the course of generating critical
new knowledge of a fundamental post-translational modification. The
incorporation of undergraduates and high school students into the research team
will provide mentoring experiences to the graduate students and serve under-
represented groups through several University of Arizona programs that provide
scientific research and training opportunities to undergraduates and high school
students from these groups. All students will be trained to develop critical
thinking, problem-solving, and communication skills, which will enable them to
pursue careers that contribute to strengthening and diversifying the national
scientific workforce. The research findings will be broadly disseminated through
publication in peer-reviewed, open-access journals and presentations at national
meetings and other public-speaking opportunities.