* 1122248
* How is pheromone stereochemistry regulated in Ips bark beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Gary Blomquist, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2015
* USD 359,999.00

Bark beetles are among the most significant economic pests in North America,
causing the loss of billions of board feet of timber each year and adding to the
fuel load that contributed to the devastating wild fires in the western U.S.
over the past several decades. The long term goal of this project is to develop
new and effective pest management tactics based on pheromone systems (chemical
secretions produced by the beetles). Except for a brief pheromone directed
flight, bark beetles spend the majority of their lives protected beneath the
bark of the trees they colonize and kill. Pheromones are essential for beetles
to mount the mass attack that leads to tree death. This research project is
designed to gain a better understanding of the biochemical processes by which
bark beetles produce pheromones. Bark beetles produce pheromone components in
the midgut by mobilizing and up-regulating the enzymes of the mevalonate pathway
and by specialization of the enzymes that detoxify tree defensive chemicals. The
final steps in pheromone production involve changing the stereochemistry of
terpenoid alcohols to achieve the final blend that functions as the pheromone.
This project is designed to characterize these enzymes. In addition, a post-
doctoral fellow, a graduate student, and several undergraduates will be trained
during the work on the project.