* 1122206
* VOSS: Creating Global, Multi-lateral, Knowledge-Sharing Communities of Practice
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mark Riddle, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2015
* USD 399,806.00

Social knowledge sharing networks are central to organizational success, but
with the growth in distributed global organizations, many firms are struggling
with the challenge of creating and maintaining relationships that cross
geographic, disciplinary, national, and cultural boundaries. This study
investigates communities of practice within multinational engineering and
construction organizations to build a theory of inclusive, global, knowledge
sharing networks. Through social network analysis and qualitative interviews,
the research team will theorize knowledge connection formation drivers and
knowledge flow patterns. Existing techniques allow us to map networks of
relationships, this project will go much further by (1) identifying and
measuring the influence of geographic location, discipline, business practice,
and generation on knowledge sharing connections; (2) determining the central
sources of knowledge and directional flow of knowledge within the networks; (3)
analyzing and explaining the conditions facilitating and impeding intra-
organizational boundary-spanning knowledge sharing connection creation; and (4)
determining why knowledge flows in a particular direction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the movement toward distributed international
organizations grows, the networks of social relationships that encourage the
transfer of knowledge within a firm will weaken and knowledge sharing will
become increasingly difficult. A better understanding of the drivers underlying
the formation of knowledge-sharing connections and their ongoing maintenance can
improve our effectiveness in addressing major societal and organizational
challenges. This research will advance social science theory of knowledge
sharing in global, interdisciplinary, technology-based communities of practice
and provide recommendations for creating and maintaining multi-lateral knowledge
sharing connections to enhance interdisciplinary communities of practice in
multinational engineering and construction firms.