* 1122179
* The betalain secondary metabolic network.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Alan Lloyd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 08/31/2015
* USD 682,857.00

Intellectual merit: Beets and roses are red for completely different reasons.
Virtually all flowering plants contain one of two mutually exclusive red/purple
pigment pathways, anthocyanins or betalains. The anthocyanin biosynthetic /
regulatory network has been heavily studied and occurs in the vast majority of
taxa including the major crop families: Poaceae (grasses), Brassicaceae (canola,
mustards, cole crops), and Rosaceae (apples, pears, cherries). Betalains on the
other hand are restricted to certain families of a single order, the
Caryophyllales, where they assume the role of anthocyanin pigments in all
biological contexts. These roles include attracting pollinators and seed
dispersal agents, and as protective pigments during stress and aging. The
betalain families contain crop species and ornamentals that are grown worldwide
and form important staples in many agricultural economic systems, including
Beets, Spinach, Amaranthus, Quinoa, and Prickly Pear cactus. This project is
aimed at understanding the betalain biosynthetic and regulatory network at the
molecular level and how pigment emergent properties are generated.&lt;br/&gt;
While anthocyanins are based on the amino acid phenylalanine, while betalains
derive from the animo acid tyrosine. Prior to the start of this project, the
investigators identified a novel cytochrome P450 enzyme and a MYB-type
transcription factor regulator that function in the betalain network. In
particular, hypotheses will be tested regarding the identity of the last unknown
betalain ring structure biosynthetic enzyme by silencing genes in beet to test
their functions and beet gene expression in yeast to test function. One
hypothesis is that betalains are regulated by the same set of interacting
proteins that regulate the anthocyanin pigment pathway in other plants. The
investigators will test this hypothesis using gene silencing and overexpression
in beet. Anthocyanin pigments are regulated by well-characterized environmental
signals. The hypothesis that betalains are regulated by these same signaling
pathways will be tested. In order to ask the question about whether
environmental signals work through increasing gene expression of the MYB
regulator, plants will be treated with known elicitors and plant hormones, or
nutrient deprivation (e.g. phosphate), and expression of all know betalain
network genes will be measured. The hypothesis that the MYB regulator directly
binds to cis regions of the betalain biosynthetic genes will be tested through
protein-DNA binding assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research
will enhance our basic understanding of the control of plant secondary metabolic
networks. Betalains are important dietary antioxidants with high human
availability and this project will lead to an ability to manipulate this network
and to move the pathway into heterologous systems. Eventual impacts include the
ability to create crops that are more nutritious for humans and livestock. The
project will provide excellent training for all levels of students. Integral to
this project is a new inquiry-based Freshman Research Initiative stream for 30+
students that emphasizes creative and critical thinking within science. Students
receive lecture-based training in hypothesis building and testing, data
collection, record-keeping, statistical analysis, and ethical research
standards. In the spring, students enter the stream for two semesters of hands-
on self-directed research. For the past ten years, all lab members, including
undergrad and grad students, have participated in judging yearly science fairs
at local elementary schools, including interactive interviews of the elementary
students. For the past six years, the PI and his graduate students have
conducted prefair outreach workshops at the schools. This past year, 3 graduate
students, about 180 4th and 5th graders, and 6 teachers participated in the
workshop on hypothesis driven scientific method, project conception, and project
execution. This outreach activity will continue throughout the period of this
project.