* 1122620
* A Digital Evolution Infrastructure for Experimental Investigations into the Evolution of Division of Labor
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Heather Goldsby, Goldsby                 Heather        J
* Fellowship Award
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2014
* USD 240,000.00

Division of labor, where organisms specialize on roles and cooperate to survive,
is a strategy employed by bacteria, slime molds, eusocial insects, and even
humans. Moreover, major transitions in evolution, where formerly distinct
individuals join together in a higher-level unit that functions as a single
reproductive entity, also exhibit division of labor. For example, single cells
join together and specialize to become a multicellular organism. A fundamental
question in biology is why does division of labor evolve? While biologists are
fascinated by this question, it remains challenging, if not impossible, to study
with natural systems due to imperfections in the historical data and long
generation times. This research involves developing a software infrastructure to
investigate the evolution of division of labor.

Efficiency gains resulting from division of labor are a central component of
hypotheses for why division of labor evolves within groups and why major
transitions in evolution occur. To understand whether efficiency gains are
sufficient to motivate these evolutionary changes, the investigators study
populations of digital organisms, which are fully-functional computer programs
that evolve in an open-ended manner. In contrast to experimental evolution with
natural systems, digital organisms have rapid generation times, unparalleled
experimental control, and automated data collection that facilitates
explorations of underlying mechanisms. Using the Avida digital evolution
platform as a foundation, the researchers are building an infrastructure to
investigate topics surrounding the evolution of division of labor, including:
(1) the role of learning in the evolution of task-based division of labor, (2)
whether an increased cost of reproduction influences when fraternal major
transitions occur, and (3) whether specialization capabilities motivate
genetically distinct organisms to reproduce as a group.