* 1122064
* Collaborative RUI Proposal: Effects of Contrasting Cloud Regimes on Plant Carbon/Water Relations at Treeline
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Nicole Hughes, High Point University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2015
* USD 207,845.00

Potential changes in cloud patterns due to global warming are of critical
importance because of their strong influence on sunlight, temperature, and
precipitation experienced by plant communities. Plants are especially sensitive
to changes in cloud cover because sunlight, temperature, and water availability
are important factors driving photosynthetic carbon gain, growth, reproduction,
and spatial distribution patterns. The most dramatic response to changes in
cloud patterns are projected for plant communities currently characterized by
frequent cloud cover (e.g. mountain cloud forests, temperate and tropical
rainforests). The purpose of this project is to use field measurements of
photosynthesis, water stress, leaf temperature, and growth of native tree
species in the Southern Appalachians Mountains (eastern US) and the Rocky
Mountains (western US) under a range of naturally-occurring cloud regimes. From
these data, a model will be developed that predicts long term effects of
changing cloud-cover patterns on future growth and survival. These forest
ecosystems represent two common types of mountain cloud regimes found across the
globe?morning cloud-immersion and afternoon broken clouds, respectively. These
forest tree species are physiologically adapted to their current climactic
conditions, and it is anticipated that predicted changes in cloud cover may
result in increased water, sunlight, and leaf temperature stress, leading
ultimately to geographic and altitudinal migration, and/or extinction. Loss or
decline of these high-mountain forests would have major impacts on such
important features as timber production, snow accumulation, and corresponding
water supply for agricultural and municipal use. This project will involve a
collaborative effort between a university with a strong graduate program (Wake
Forest University) and a local liberal arts college lacking the facilities and
equipment to facilitate undergraduate research (High Point University). Three
undergraduates from HPU (from underrepresented groups in science) have committed
to the project and are highly motivated to become graduate students.