* 1122246
* 1,001 (Epi) Genomes Project
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2014
* USD 969,375.00

Intellectual merit: Plant biologists need many completely sequenced and
functionally annotated genomes within each species to fully exploit the power of
evolution and to understand how an organism functions and adapts to its
environment. This project will contribute to an international effort aimed at
generating genomic DNA sequences from over 1,000 inbred strains of Arabidopsis
thaliana, while driving technology developments in both the hardware for the DNA
sequencing itself and in software development to make sense of the sequence
data. Specifically, this project will generate genome, transcriptome, and
methylome sequences. The genome sequences will provide an unparalleled view of
haplotype structure and structural variation for Arabidopsis thaliana. The
transcriptome sequence data will assist in genome annotation and identification
of naturally occurring splice isoforms. Lastly, the DNA methylome sequencing
data will permit identification of epiallelic variation on a population-wide
level. These three sequencing data sets (genetic, transcriptional and DNA
methylomes) will dovetail nicely with each other to provide a comprehensive set
of variants within the Arabidopsis thaliana population. Combining genetic,
epigenetic and transcriptional variation from different individuals in a
population or within a species will provide a potential source for analyzing
phenotypic diversity via quantitative trait loci mapping or genome-wide
association studies. Moreover, these data will enable subsequent mechanistic
studies through experimental manipulation of Arabidopsis thaliana strains and
will complement the efforts of individual investigators who are using the same
accessions to catalog phenotypes for thousands of traits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The impact of this project will be in two
broad areas. First, the completion of the planned research will result in
important new resources for the plant biology community: large-scale information
on genetic, epigenetic and transcriptional variation within a species. All of
the DNA, cytosine methylation and RNA sequence data will be made freely and
easily accessible to the research community. The long-term impact of these
enabling tools and technologies on agriculture and forestry is expected to be
profound, providing fundamental knowledge for the construction of new plant
varieties with superior agronomic traits. An equally important aspect of this
program is training, which will be provided at a variety of levels, including
outreach to high school, undergraduate and graduate students as well as
postdoctoral mentoring.