* 1122018
* Evolutionary and Functional Significance of 5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in Mitochondrial DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Richard Moran, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2014
* USD 630,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Eukaryotic organisms simultaneously maintain two genomes,
the diploid nuclear genome and the mitochondrial genome, which consists of small
circular DNA, packaged in protein-containing structures called nucleoids and
distributed throughout the mitochondrial network, with hundreds to thousands of
copies per cell. Although the mitochondrion is responsible for efficient energy
generation, its genome encodes only 13 proteins, each intimately involved in
electron transport that is required for ATP production. All other proteins
required for mitochondrial function are encoded on the nuclear genome and
imported into the mitochondria. Epigenetic modification of cytosine residues to
5-methylcytosine (5mC) and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) in the nuclear genome
is critical for regulation of gene expression and, at least in higher
eukaryotes, is essential for normal development and survival. Until recently, a
role for cytosine methylation in the mitochondrial genome had not been found.
However, identification of a mitochondrial form of the mammalian enzyme
responsible for conversion of cytosine to 5mC, DNA methyltransferase 1 (mtDNMT1)
has revealed the presence of both 5mC and 5hmC in the mitochondrial genome.
Moreover, changing the level of this mitochondrial enzyme impacts mitochondrial
transcription in a gene-specific fashion. The current project follows on these
observations by seeking to uncover the mechanisms generating these modifications
on mtDNA cytosine residues, their role in mitochondrial function, and the
evolutionary significance of epigenetic modification of the mitochondrial
genome. Successful completion of this project is likely to provide a paradigm
shift in the current understanding of mechanisms controlling gene transcription
within this organelle. This research is expected to uncover the biochemistry
involved in mitochondrial cytosine methylation and hydroxymethylation and
whether the process differs significantly from that operating in the nucleus.
The conservation of epigenetic modification of mitochondrial DNA will allow an
understanding of whether this process affords a metabolic advantage to the
organisms in which it operates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will offer a unique opportunity to both undergraduate and graduate
students to participate in the process of discovery of new and exciting
biological knowledge. The project will provide students with experience in
critical thinking, data analysis, teamwork, oral and written presentation of
research results, and participation in a multidisciplinary approach to problem
solving in the laboratory environment. The inclusion of undergraduate students
in the project will offer mentoring experience to graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, which is essential to their development as active
participants in scientific discovery.