* 1122504
* DIP: Teaching Writing and Argumentation with AI-Supported Diagramming and Peer Review
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Diane Litman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,390,735.00

The PIs are investigating the design of intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs) that
are aimed at learning in unstructured domains. Such systems are not able to do
as much automatically as ITSs working in traditionally narrow and well-
structured domains, but rather they need to share responsibilities for
scaffolding learning with a teacher and/or peers. In the work proposed, the
three PIs, who share expertise in automated natural language understanding,
intelligent tutoring systems, machine learning, argumentation (especially in
law), complex problem solving, and engineering education, are integrating
intelligent tutoring, data mining, machine learning, and language processing to
design a socio-technical system (people and machines working together) that
helps undergraduates and law students write better argumentative essays. The
work of helping learners derive an argument is shared by the computer and peers,
as is the work of helping peer reviewers review the writing of others and the
work of learners to turn their argument diagrams into well-written documents.
Research questions address the roles computers might take on in promoting
writing and the technology that enables that, how to distribute scaffolding
between an intelligent machine and human agents, how to promote better writing
(especially the relationship between diagramming and writing), and how to
promote learning through peer review of the writing of others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is bringing together outstanding researchers
from a variety of different disciplines -- artificial intelligence, law
education, engineering and science education, and cognitive psychology -- to
address an education issue of national concern -- writing, especially writing
that makes and substantiates a point -- and to explore ways of extending
intelligent tutoring systems beyond fact-based domains. It fulfills all aims of
the Cyberlearning program -- to imagine, design, and learn how to best design
and use the next generation of learning technologies, to address learning issues
of national importance, and to contribute to understanding of how people learn.