* 1122752
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Computer Science Education with Microlabs
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Barry Kurtz, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 59,759.00

This two-year project is evaluating the efficacy of the Microlab Learning Cycle.
The Microlab Learning Cycle is an innovative approach to active learning based
on Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL). During the learning cycle,
students explore a problem with guided discovery. The instructor then introduces
the topic in lecture and students apply this knowledge to related problems.
Microlabs are 10-15 minute computer-based activities that are completed during
lecture. In a logical microlab, students are asked to solve a problem by
entering their answers using a graphical input tool and submitting their
solutions to an automated grading system. In a programming microlab, students
are asked to complete a skeleton program that uses automated grading. The
Microlab Learning Cycle is based on using logical microlabs during the
exploration phase and programming microlabs during the application phase.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal evaluation methodologies are being used to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the Microlab Learning Cycle. Faculty
participants at several universities, including HBCUs, are initially teaching
the target topics using traditional lecture. During the next offering of the
course they are using the microlab learning cycle approach. Students are solving
similar problems in both terms and an external evaluator is measuring the
learning outcomes. Faculty participants and students are being asked to report
on their experiences using microlabs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A "cloud-based"
approach allows access to the learning materials to anyone with Internet access.
The principal investigators are presenting papers and offering workshops to
promote active learning using microlabs.