* 1122812
* Collaborative Research: Development of Adaptable Web Modules to Stimulate Active Learning in Hydrology using Data and Model Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* David Tarboton, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 106,203.00

This collaborative project is creating case-based, web-enabled educational
hydrology modules that encapsulate real-world hydrologic systems. This project
expands on the results of a Type I CCLI pilot study and grounds the learning
experiences using three large-scale natural hydrologic systems (Coastal
Louisiana, the Florida Everglades, and the Great Salt Lake Basin in
Utah).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project leverages recent
research advances on monitoring and modeling of complex natural systems and
synthesizes them to develop a suite of flexible, adaptable web-based modules.
The selected natural systems, each presenting some unique concepts and physical
settings, contribute to redefining the teaching of hydrology by focusing on the
dynamics of fundamental hydrologic processes and their connections to climate
drivers, ecosystems' response, and water resources operational constraints. An
extensive set of interactive learning modules is being built into the system and
is supported by an instructional interface, an instructor's guide, and a set of
implementation and adaptation procedures. The project adopts an improvement-
focused evaluation model with an iterative design process which includes
multiple iterations of design, implementation, evaluation, and redesign.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: To facilitate wide dissemination and
adaptability, the system is being implemented using open source geospatial web
technologies and community-based tools for data publication and analysis. The
architecture of the system supports the addition of future hydrologic
applications developed by other members of the hydrologic educational community.
The participating institutions include a primarily African American institution,
a college for women, a primarily Hispanic institution, and a minority high
school. Through a design-based research approach, the project is identifying and
implementing successful strategies so that the innovations can be scaled and
adapted in diverse settings.