* 1122403
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science;International Security and the Politics of Interdependence
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Marina Henke, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 11,463.00

This project develops a theory of cooperation in multilateral military
interventions. Whether launched ad hoc or in the institutional framework of the
United Nations, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, European Union or African
Union, multilateral interventions rely on voluntary troop contributions by
sovereign states. For states, however, participating in such endeavors is costly
in financial as well as political terms. This project thus addresses the
question: what are the motivating factors behind an individual country's troop
deployments?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes that participants to most
military interventions need to be divided into leaders and laggards. Leaders are
understood as the drivers behind the launch of specific operations, pursuing
sharply defined political, economic or normative interests. Laggards, on the
other hand, lack such interests or at least do not share the same interest
intensity as do leaders. The laggards thus need additional incentives to
motivate their force deployments, and such incentives are most often provided by
leaders. The project then develops a theory about how interdependence between
leaders and laggards influences the probability that the laggards will join the
security coalition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator tests this theory by
examining the recruitment process of three distinct security operations: the
United Nations operation in East Timor, the European Union operation in Chad and
the Central African Republic, and the US-led operation in Iraq. This qualitative
analysis complements the results of the already completed large-N regression
analysis, which includes all 132 multilateral military operations conducted
since the end of the Cold War. Its results suggest that there is a statistically
significant correlation between the degree of interdependence between leaders
and laggards and the laggards' probability of contributing troops to an
operation of the leader's choice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project thus lies in its capacity to shed new light on multilateral
military interventions, arguably the most forceful tool to create world order.
Although often depicted as mounted by international organizations, military
interventions never ensue from international rules or regulations but are always
the product of pure political will mustered by participating actors. This
project breaks new ground in analyzing how such political will can be created.
The empirical basis for the analysis comprises both qualitative case studies and
an original dataset encompassing all security operations since the end of the
Cold War.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has broader implications as well.
Interdependence is a defining feature of contemporary global politics. At times
interdependence carries negative connotations. This project suggests the
positive impact of interdependence. In particular, interdependence between
states can enhance international cooperation in the security realm.