* 1122700
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Vote-Buying and Political Preferences in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Daniel Posner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 11,800.00

The distribution of small material resources by politicians to voters during
election campaigns, often in the form of money, food, beer, or clothing, has
long been common in many democracies around the world. These activities
typically go by the name of vote buying. Where ballot secrecy is not legislated
or enforced, buying votes can be effective because politicians can enforce vote-
buying bargains. In some settings, however, vote-buying persists despite the
secret ballot. In Kenya, over 40 percent of voters in some areas received money
before the 2007 election; yet the ballot is formally secret, parties lack the
capacity to monitor voters, and large majorities believe that powerful people
cannot figure out how they voted. Vote buying in Kenya is puzzling. It is even
more puzzling because Africans and Kenyans in particular are often said to vote
ethnically. If African voters vote ethnically, as the conventional wisdom
suggests, why must their votes also be bought?

To understand vote buying in the African context, this project develops a fuller
understanding of how vote buying influences the preferences and expectations of
recipients and observers. Indeed, despite the prevalence of vote-buying in many
settings, there is little systematic evidence documenting its impact on support
for and perceptions of politicians. This project provides such evidence while
addressing largely unanswered questions: Is vote buying effective in building
support for politicians? If so, with whom is vote buying effective, and why?

Answering these questions is difficult with survey data for at least two
reasons. First, because of embarrassment or fear, many survey respondents are
unwilling to respond honestly to survey questions about vote buying, which
biases the surveys. Second, different theories of vote buying predict outcomes
that are observationally equivalent in survey data.

To avoid these problems, this study conducts field experiments in Kenya. The
experiments will present participants with artificial, but realistic, audio
recordings discussing hypothetical political candidates, varying only the
inclusion of subtle references to the politician's vote-buying behavior in the
recordings heard by randomly selected treatment groups. Follow-up questions will
gauge support for and perceptions of the politicians discussed in the recording,
and will yield a dataset with which to analyze and measure vote buying's impact
on voter support for and perceptions of politicians across a number of key
dimensions. The artificiality of the experiment provides the control necessary
to test competing theories. Moreover, the use of recordings allows the
investigator to gain subtlety in referring to vote buying.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in its capacity to advance
understanding of the workings of the critical democratic process of elections in
Africa. The project illuminates in particular the widespread and puzzling
phenomenon of vote buying. By contributing to our understanding of whether and
why vote buying is effective, the project enhances knowledge of when and why
democratic elections do--and do not--yield responsive and accountable
government.

The broader implications of the project are tied to its intellectual
contributions. The project can inform the design of policies and programs
seeking to promote the responsiveness and accountability of governments to their
citizens.