* 1122290
* Human Immunodeficiency Virus Persistence Despite Prolonged Combination Therapy: Modeling and Control Strategies
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Libin Rong, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 189,551.00

The major goal of this project is to develop mathematical models of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) persistence and control strategies in the setting
of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Although HAART can often
suppress the plasma viral loads of HIV-infected individuals to below the
detection limit of current standard assays, it cannot eradicate the virus from
patients. HIV can be identified in resting memory CD4+ T cells (the latent
reservoir) and persists at a low level in the presence of HAART for a prolonged
period of time. These latently infected cells decay slowly, but can produce
virions when activated by their relevant antigens. The mechanisms underlying low
viral load persistence and extremely slow decay of the latent reservoir are not
fully understood. The first part of this project is to develop novel
mathematical models to study the long-term dynamics of both virus and the latent
reservoir during HIV treatment. Models will be analyzed and predictions will be
compared with data to test the mechanisms. Since HIV infection requires lifelong
therapy at present, efficient control strategies are urgently needed to reduce
treatment cost and toxicity associated with long-term drug use. The second part
of the project is to develop control strategies using the models of HIV
persistence we developed in the first part. Practical treatment schedules such
as structured treatment interruptions are also obtained using the developed
models.

The project represents an effort to develop control strategies based on
mathematical models whose predictions agree with much of our knowledge about HIV
infection and prolonged treatment. Results improve our understanding of the
biological events underlying HIV persistence and may have important implications
for the management of HIV infection in the era of HAART. If the control
strategies, particularly those interrupted treatment schedules, can be shown to
provide similar treatment benefits as the continuous therapy with maximum drug
use, they will significantly reduce the financial burden, minimize drug
toxicity, and improve the life quality of HIV patients. Additionally, the
project provides extensive interdisciplinary training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students from the math and biology departments, as
well as the new medical school at Oakland University. The research will be
incorporated into a graduate mathematical biology course and a variety of
undergraduate research programs, most of which place priority on involving
minority students.