* 1122575
* NSF Support for Travel Expenses for US Participants in ACS Symposium "Controlled Living Radical Polymerization" to be held in Denver, CO August 28-31, 2011
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 03/31/2012
* USD 4,500.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesis and characterization of new
materials with precisely controlled macromolecular dimensions, functionalities
and composition as well as with well-defined topologies is the ultimate goal of
contemporary polymer science. For many years control of molecular architecture
and functionalities in radical polymerization was very difficult. However,
recently controlled/living polymerizations have been extended to radical systems
which are not only commercially the most important but also have the largest
potential due to availability of polymerizable monomers, facile copolymerization
and undemanding reaction conditions. Therefore, controlled/living radical
polymerization of vinyl monomers expands and enhances fundamental knowledge.
This proposal requests support for 3 US assistant professors, 3 postdoctoral
fellows and 3 graduate students to participate in the Symposium on
"Controlled/Living Radical Polymerization" at the National Meeting of the
American Chemical Society in Denver, CO, August 28-31, 2011. The Symposium will
cover recent advances in controlled/living systems. Three general approaches to
controlled radical polymerization will be highlighted. This includes use of
nitroxides and other organic stable radicals, application of metal catalyzed
polymerization such as atom transfer radical polymerization, and techniques
employing chain transfer and addition-fragmentation chemistry, including
inifers. The lectures will cover mechanisms, synthesis and characterization of
materials with novel molecular architectures, functionalities&lt;br/&gt;and
composition. The symposium will include one tutorial and 7 regular sessions with
approximately eighty lectures and 6 poster sessions. The meeting will allow to
exchange and disseminate information among researchers from various countries
and many US academic (including graduate students and postdoctoral fellows),
governmental and industrial laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlled radical polymerization is among the
most rapidly developing areas of polymer and materials science. It impacts many
advanced technologies enabling unprecedented advances in biomedical materials,
optoelectronics, environmentally related areas and other areas such as coatings,
lubricants, adhesives, additives, surfactants, dispersants and health and beauty
products. Thus, knowledge generated during the 2011 Denver Symposium on
"Controlled/Living Radical Polymerization" will benefit many participants,
including undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, their
advisors as well researchers from governmental and industrial laboratories. As
in the case of the previous 2008 ACS Symposium on "Controlled/Living Radical
Polymerization" held in Philadelphia, the PI plans to publish proceedings with
the major lectures presented at the meeting.