* 1122003
* Integrated Stomatal Responses to Environmental Input
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* David Peak, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2016
* USD 524,502.00

Stomata are tiny pores on the surfaces of plant leaves that allow the exchange
of gases between the plant and the atmosphere. Plants control the apertures of
these pores in response to environmental factors so that they can maximize
uptake of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere (for sugar production in
photosynthesis) while minimizing water loss to the atmosphere. Because the
exchange of these gases is critically important to plant productivity and water
use in natural and agricultural systems, it is important to understand the
processes that control stomatal apertures. This project will explore the
mechanisms by which stomata respond to light, carbon dioxide, temperature, and
atmospheric humidity. In particular, the project will test several novel
hypotheses that provide simple explanations for a complex suite of responses to
these environmental factors that are not well explained by previously proposed
mechanisms. In addition, the idea that interactions among individual stomata may
function as a type of primitive information processing will be explored. Much of
the work in the proposal is highly interdisciplinary, and students will benefit
from the combined expertise of the two Principal Investigators: a biologist and
physicist. The PIs will also collaborate to teach a new, interdisciplinary,
undergraduate course entitled 'Dynamics, Information, and Multicellularity',
which will cover information processing and emergent behavior in artificial and
natural systems and the role of information processing in the development of
multicellular organisms. The improved mechanistic understanding of stomatal
responses to the environment that will result from this project will aid in
producing more water-efficient crops, and in addition, because water loss
through stomata is important for global circulation models, it will provide
better predictive models for weather and the effects of global climate change.