* 1122965
* Using Research to Shape Instruction and Placement in Algebra and Precalculus
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Caren Diefenderfer, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 524,487.00

This project is developing a new research-based instrument for placement of
students in algebra and precalculus and disseminating documented descriptions
and sample items of this new instrument. The work is based on earlier research
and testing that produced a Calculus Concepts Readiness test (CCR) and a
companion Precalculus Concepts Assessment (PCA). In particular, researchers
considered students' conceptual understanding of key concepts required for
success in subsequent mathematics courses, in future careers, and as informed
citizens. The purpose of this follow-on development and dissemination effort is
twofold: i) to influence and improve college mathematics placement tests and ii)
to inform and shape instructional practice in algebra and precalculus courses.
The intellectual merit of this project rests in its recognition that while there
is an adequate research base to inform more effective instructional practice,
teachers at all levels lack ready access to assessment tools that reinforce
teaching for improving students' deep conceptual understanding. Indeed, most
placement tests currently in use focus on procedural fluency, thus reinforcing
traditional instructional approaches. The new placement test becomes part of a
coherent suite of instruments that serve to improve teaching and learning
throughout the entire algebra-precalculus-calculus pathway. The project is
exerting its broader impacts in several ways. Firstly, the reasoning and
conceptual taxonomies of the new instrument, as well as sample items to
illustrate the conceptual reasoning coverage, are being made publicly available
and used throughout the dissemination phase of the project to inform
professional development efforts not only for college and university faculty
teaching lower-division mathematics courses, but also for K-12 teachers.
Secondly, the project is being led by the Mathematical Association of America
(MAA), the largest professional organization in the world with a focus on
undergraduate mathematics. The organization's online and print publications, and
sessions at national and regional meetings provide diverse and far-reaching
channels for dissemination. In addition, existing relationships with other
national organizations seeking to raise the quality of mathematics instruction
gives the MAA a unique opportunity to develop, pilot, and rigorously document
the reliability and validity of placement tests. Finally, the results of this
project are contributing to improved articulation between secondary and post-
secondary mathematics and informing pre-service and in-service teacher education
in mathematics.