* 1122252
* Mechanisms Governing Wolbachia Replication and Germline Transmission
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* William Sullivan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2014
* USD 444,569.00

Intellectual Merit

Animals often live in close association with bacteria and other microbes. The
most intimate form occurs with endosymbiotic bacteria which reside inside the
cells of its host. The widely accepted bacterial origin of mitochondria
illustrates the key role endosymbionts have played in animal evolution. Among
bacterial endosymbionts, the interaction between Wolbachia and their hosts is
one of the most successful. Wolbachia are gram-negative bacteria present
worldwide in over 70% of all insect species as well as numerous nematodes.
Because Wolbachia replicate and concentrate in the female reproductive organs
and are efficiently passed to the eggs, they have an amazing ability to rapidly
spread through uninfected insect populations. Currently little is known about
how Wolbachia replicate and concentrate in the female germline. Therefore the
research in this project is aimed to precisely define the molecular components
in the insect reproductive cells that interact with Wolbachia to facilitate
their transmission. An exciting aspect of these studies is that they provide a
molecular understanding of the global spread of Wolbachia throughout insect
communities.

Broader Impacts

This project is built on material and concepts that are taught in genetics and
cell biology classes and is therefore well suited for undergraduates and
graduate students. The research relies on the Drosophila model system, which has
abundant publicly available genetic tools, thus providing opportunities for
relatively quick success in generating results, which is so important for those
just beginning their research career. While pursuing these projects, the
students will also become proficient at using many of the extensive Drosophila
molecular and genetic databases available. In addition, large-scale genomic
functional screens are a key part of this project and involve the use of newly
developed technology, including robotics and automated microscopy. This provides
excellent training for those pursuing careers in the biotech industry as well as
academics. While technically demanding, a dedicated student can become very
adept and able to generate publishing-quality data within a couple of months. In
the laboratory, each undergraduate is paired with a senior graduate student or
post-doctoral fellow. This is ideal to produce rewarding undergraduate projects
with skilled daily supervision while giving the graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows the chance to supervise students as a part of their
training within the larger scope of their research. Wolbachia is also of
tremendous interest to the agricultural community as an alternative to
pesticide-based insect eradication programs. For this reason, rare virulent
Wolbachia strains have generated considerable excitement. To identify additional
virulent strains, we rely on undergraduates to collect and analyze Wolbachia-
infected Drosophila from wild populations. These studies provide opportunities
for students to understand the connection between the cell biology of Wolbachia-
host interactions and their effect on insect populations. In addition to ongoing
regular classes, an intensive one-week course for minority undergraduate
students is taught in the summer that includes molecular biology as well as
camping and insect collections at the Big Creek field research station in order
to identify new Wolbachia strains.