* 1122001
* Developmental Functions of SNR1 and the BRM Chromatin Remodeling
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Andrew Dingwall, Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2015
* USD 720,344.00

Intellectual Merit: The ability of a cell to access genetic information embedded
in the genome is essential for proper development; thus, it is of great
importance to understand the cellular processes that guide proper gene
regulation in vivo. The nucleosome, composed of a set of core histone proteins
and DNA, is the basic building block of chromatin and acts as a primary scaffold
for chromosome protection and compaction. Nucleosomes also act as barriers to
restrict access to DNA and as a result can serve to prevent the expression of
genes and consequently block cell division. Chromatin remodeling is a key step
in the process of gene activation through disruptions of DNA-histone contacts
that result in changes in DNA wrapping within nucleosomes, referred to as
chromatin accessibility. Highly conserved from yeast to vertebrates, chromatin
remodeling complexes (such as the SWI/SNF complex) function as essential
cofactors to initiate gene transcription and assist in the regulation of
transcription elongation as well as alternative splicing that produces different
forms of the same gene. Fundamental questions needing to be resolved include how
these complexes are targeted to genes in vivo and how they contribute
mechanistically to both transcription activation and repression. Although
generally acknowledged that chromatin structure can influence how gene
transcripts are spliced to produce a variety of protein forms from the same
gene, many assumptions are made and questions remain concerning the role of the
nucleosome in vivo. This project tests the hypothesis that chromatin remodeling
complexes contribute to gene repression through regulated remodeling of
nucleosomes that normally act as impediments to transcription elongation at
critical points in development. The research will address the in vivo functions
of nucleosome remodeling complexes using biochemical assays of chromatin
compaction, protein binding to chromatin and unique leading edge genetic tools
developed for this research study. This project uses the fruitfly Drosophila
melanogaster as a genetic model system to provide much needed and more detailed
knowledge of the mechanisms by which chromatin remodeling complexes participate
in programming gene expression during development. The results derived from this
research are likely to have important and widespread implications for
understanding the roles of the chromosome building blocks in gene regulation, as
well as the remodeling enzyme complexes that control how that genome information
is accessed by other factors, including the regulation of RNA polymerase
elongation and alternative splicing in diverse
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this
project include (1) providing opportunities for high school, undergraduate and
graduate (both MS and PhD) students to directly participate in mentored
research, and (2) widespread dissemination of the results of this research
through invited seminars and presentations at national meetings. Specifically,
this research project will seek to actively recruit and train students from
traditionally underrepresented minority groups, including local high school
students from the Maywood (IL) and greater Chicago area, as well as college
undergraduate students. Trainees will be mentored in basic research and assigned
non-trivial roles on the project. Multidisciplinary training and education are
vital to prepare students for diverse science careers; therefore, students are
encouraged to think creatively and, in order to function effectively in the
laboratory, they are taught developmental biology, genetics, scientific
techniques, molecular/cellular biology and biochemistry. Students are also
taught how to read and evaluate scientific literature, they are encouraged to
identify role models to enforce their educational objectives, and to train them
to give clear presentations, they attend and present at lab meetings for faculty
and other students. Students are also encouraged to present their work at
regional and national meetings and also to collaborate with expert investigators
outside the institution in diverse scientific fields to enhance their
multidisciplinary training experience. Within the institution, this work
represents the only eukaryotic model system utilizing developmental genetics,
and graduate lectures incorporate aspects of the work from the lab.