* 1122130
* An Approach to Inferring Networks From Complex Phenotypes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Toni Kazic, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

Understanding the genetic mechanisms through which complex traits arise remains
one of the most important and challenging problems in biology. There has been
impressive progress in sequencing genomes, cataloguing genes and describing the
biochemical functions of their products. However, the network of genetic and
biochemical processes that form and change organisms, the "wiring diagram of
life" is not well understood. There are two approaches to understanding
biological networks. The first, or "bottom up" approach, starting at the
molecular level, has to date had limited success. Geneticists, using a second or
"top down" approach have had success in deducing the molecular mechanisms that
underlie genetic traits. However, applying this top down method to complex
traits is extremely hard because of the highly complicated systems that underlie
the expression of such traits. This project will develop and test new
mathematical and computational methods to infer, using top down approaches, the
networks that produce complex traits. For the connections between traits and
mechanisms a multidimensional mathematical function is substituted, allowing
estimation of the probability that a proposed connection between a trait and a
group of genes is correct. This mathematical function uses existing automated
reasoning techniques to develop new applications to biology. For moving from the
trait down to the network, models will be generated and evaluated using a set of
rules that encodes the knowledge and experience of geneticists. Two model
systems from corn (maize) will be used to test these methods. The first will
utilize a small, very well understood set of biochemical pathways that
determines the colors of corn kernels to test and validate the computational
methods. The second is a system of approximately 200 genes that are involved in
the plant's defenses to pathogens, including fungi that devastated the U. S.
corn crop in the 1970s and that are a world-wide threat to corn crops. The goal
of this second part is to characterize and accurately quantify the plant's
responses to infection, using a set of mutant genes that mimic the plant's
defensive response to pathogens, and to infer the underlying genetic network
responsible for these responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Food, fuel, and climate security depend on improving crop yields while
reducing the nutrients, agricultural chemicals, and water used by the farmer.
This project will develop and test new tools for understanding how best to meet
these challenges. The project brings together an interdisciplinary, multi-
institutional team of researchers who will provide training at the undergraduate
and postdoctoral levels in plant biology, computational biology, and
biostatistics, a combination increasingly needed in both academic and commercial
enterprises.