* 1122654
* Improving Students' Problem-solving in Engineering Dynamics Through Interactive Web-based Simulation and Animation Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2018
* Ning Fang, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

This project has 4 primary goals:1) to improve students' problem solving by
developing and implementing 36 interactive web-based computer simulation and
animation (CSA) modules in diverse education settings; 2) cultivate student
interest in learning dynamics and improve their attitudes toward engineering as
a career; 3) assess the effectiveness of the CSA modules on student learning
outcomes that are associated with diverse learning style preference, gender, and
ethnic/racial background; and 4) actively disseminate the CSA modules and the
experiences and lessons learned from this project to the broad STEM education
community from K-12 to undergraduate education. The CSA modules effectively
integrate visualization with mathematical modeling of dynamics problems to help
students connect dynamics/physics with mathematics, thus providing students a
transformative experience of learning dynamics. The modules will be assessed in
diverse education settings, including research and teaching institutions, 4-year
and 2-year institutions, institutions with a significant number of ethnic/racial
minority students, and small and large class sizes. The modules will be used as
a problem-based active learning tool in a variety of ways: embedded in regular
classroom lectures and/or after-class recitation sessions, used as students'
homework assignments, or used along with corresponding real-world laboratory
experiments to offer students an enhanced and diversified learning experience.
Longitudinal mixed-method assessments that include control and experimental
groups, pre- and post-tests, questionnaire surveys, and structured individual
and focus-group interviews will be performed to assess students' learning
outcomes. The assessment results will show how learning style preference,
gender, and ethnic/racial background affect learning with CSA, thus improving
understanding of how to better design computer simulation programs to meet the
needs of diverse students. Partnering institutions will integrate the modules
into dynamics courses. The CSA modules and associated lesson plans will be
broadly disseminated to the instructors who teach dynamics at peer institutions,
broad Internet dissemination, conference presentations and journal publications,
special sessions and workshops at professional meetings, professional societies
and local student chapters, and dissemination via the National Center for
Engineering and Technology Education and via Dynamics textbook publishers.
Selected modules will also be disseminated to both pre-service and in-service
K-12 teachers and students.