* 1122692
* VOSS - Use of Web 2.0 Technologies to Build Distributed Communities of Practice among K-12 Science Educators
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Tora Bikson, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2016
* USD 399,907.00

This project explores the diffusion of Web 2.0 technologies among science
educators and the ways these technologies are used to build teacher professional
communities of practice (CoP). Such technologies are claimed to offer new ways
to foster interaction and community building, content creation, and knowledge
building and management. However, there is very little research examining the
extent to which use of these technologies foster professional CoPs among
educators. The project uses a replicated case study design, with replications
corresponding to two online communities from the National Science Teachers
Association (NSTA) Learning Center. NSTA is a member-driven organization that
promotes excellence in science teaching and learning; the Learning Center has
approximately 70,000 users including science teachers, science supervisors,
administrators, scientists, and others involved in science education. The study
uses a longitudinal approach and multiple methods including surveys, web
metrics, interviews, and content analysis of discussion forums to characterize
these CoPs, understand what motivates educators to participate, assess how
participation leads to the development of sociotechnical capital, and evaluate
how sociotechnical capital influences professional outcomes including self-
efficacy, instructional practices, and job
satisfaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work stands to have
significant broader impacts by establishing the role that virtual CoPs can play
in continuous learning for educators in general and for science educators in
particular. A focus on science is especially important in light of the national
emphasis on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education,
the lack of research on science teaching relative to other academic subjects,
and the mismatch in the demand for and supply of professional development
opportunities for K-12 science teachers. In addition, because of the relatively
low and declining cost of access to web-based applications of the sort studied
in this project, such avenues for continuous learning and access to high-quality
resources could be widely available to science teachers in both low-income
school districts and in rural areas where access to physical resources or
collocated colleagues is extremely limited. Whereas collocated peers and in-
person opportunities to participate in professional community activities may be
scarce, virtual CoPs could go far to address the needs of K-12 science
educators.