* 1122578
* SENCER Phase III
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2011,02/28/2013
* William David Burns, HARRISBURG UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/28/2013
* USD 399,488.00

In this one-year project, the National Center for Science and Civic Engagement
is undertaking a coordinated set of activities to achieve three goals for
sustaining SENCER (Science Education for New Civic Engagements and
Responsibilities) for another year and assist in its effort to become a self-
sustaining enterprise. The first goal is to secure and extend benefits of the
core SENCER faculty development program to current and newcomer cohorts of the
STEM education reform community through the summer of 2012. Project elements
supporting this goal are supervision of the completion of 39 SENCER-supported
small implementation awards, continued provision of key core project elements
(an e-newsletter, an on-line journal, the SENCER web site and digital library,
the leadership fellows program, and house call consultations), planning the
SENCER Summer Institute 2012, and continued administrative coordination for each
of the six regional SENCER Centers for Innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second goal is to complete the analysis of several assessment and evaluation
initiatives in order to guide future program initiatives. This is work is being
done by an evaluation consultant and the SENCER Assessment Team working with
other program staff and associates. Project elements are completion of the
analysis of faculty surveys (including report preparation for publication),
comparison of the survey findings with new findings from applications of the
revised SENCER-SALG evaluation tool now in use on some campuses as well as
campus reports from sub-awardees, and evaluation of the results of applications
of a revised rubric (Rubric 2.0) to new SENCER courses (to assess depth and
degree of reform elements within individual courses). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
third goal is to support the planning process designed to transition to
independence from NSF support for SENCER core program operations.