* 1122413
* VOSS Collaborative Research: Open Innovation Intermediaries: Brokering Technology and Wisdoms of the Crowds
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Anne-Laure Fayard, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2016
* USD 128,000.00

Economic competitiveness relies upon innovation and organizations are
increasingly pursuing open innovation through crowdsourcing. Though several
models have arisen for how to tap into the crowd for ideas, little research has
been done to understand and assess this new phenomenon. Previous work has
investigated relatively simple crowd-sourcing techniques such as Amazon
Mechanical Turk, but additional web-enabled platforms for organizing large
numbers of individuals to contribute ideas and solutions to a client's
innovation challenges have been developed. Firms providing such platforms for
crowdsourcing are now competing with traditional innovation consultancies and
together serve as intermediaries for open innovation. This project investigates
and compares the socio-technical systems that these open innovation
intermediaries have created. Successful innovation requires translating and
integrating ideas in science, engineering, design, and business originating from
diverse organizations, industries, and countries. The current literature on this
process focuses on collocated teams with little attention paid to organizational
aspects the emergent technology-brokering phenomenon. This research extends the
theory of technology brokering to this new form of virtual organization,
building a more general framework of how technology brokering occurs and the
role of individual backgrounds, organizational practices, and social networks in
spanning multiple boundaries. It will explore the tradeoffs involved in
increased reliance on codified methods to support technology brokering and
investigate the role of institutional contexts in shaping the relative positions
and organizational practices of technology brokers. Through in-depth, multi-site
field studies this project will develop a theory of how technology brokering is
accomplished in the new era of crowdsourcing and document this new phenomenon.

As web use has grown, new web-enabled methods have been developed for collecting
ideas from the large globally distributed population of inventors. Crowdsourcing
can be an effective innovation technique and these new platforms are being used
to find solutions for such diverse problems as cleaning up oil spills, improving
diaper absorbency, finding biomarkers for diseases, and designing new rail
services. Understanding the advantages and disadvantages of different forms of
crowdsourcing for various types of problems can help firms optimize their
innovation processes and enhance economic competitiveness. Successful
crowdsourcing also provides intellectual and economic opportunities for members
of underrepresented groups and for scientists and engineers in impoverished
regions. Research results will be disseminated broadly through curricular
materials appropriate for undergraduate and MBA and through a cross-disciplinary
research workshop focused on the crowdsourcing of innovation.