* 1122389
* LTREB Renewal: Emergent landscape patterns in stream ecosystem processes resulting from groundwater/surface water interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2018
* John Duff, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2018
* USD 456,736.00

This study focuses on how the water chemistry of tropical streams is influenced
by surface and groundwater inputs and how these inputs are, in turn, affected by
climatic variations such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation. This is a
continuation of a long-term study that has compiled the only continuous long-
term (&gt;20 yrs) record of stream chemistry in Central America. Following long
dry periods associated with El Nino events, poorly-buffered lowland streams
exhibit 100-fold increases in acidity for up to eight months. These prolonged
acidification events appear to be an amplification of normal seasonal (i.e. dry
season/wet season) trends. This project investigates the mechanisms causing
these events and how this acidification affects the ecology of the
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lowland streams in Central America support diverse
aquatic communities and transport large amounts of carbon from highly productive
terrestrial ecosystems to the atmosphere and ocean. The climate in Central
America is predicted to have decreased dry-season rainfall. This climatic shift
will likely have major deleterious effects on the chemistry of neo-tropical
streams. To better understand these research findings in a more global context,
the long-term data set from this project in Central America is being linked to
other data sets throughout the tropics (e.g., Amazon, Congo, Mekong and Ganges
Rivers). In addition, the results of this project will be disseminated in the
Water for Life/Agua para la Vida program, which includes outreach activities in
local communities and an internationally accessible web page equipped with
teaching tools on river conservation and water quality/quantity issues.