* 1122416
* Collaborative Research: Increasing the Impact of TUES Projects through Effective Propagation Strategies: A How-To Guide for PIs
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Jeffrey Froyd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 122,781.00

This TUES Central Resource Project is being designed to help TUES PIs and others
engaged in improving STEM education to increase the propagation of their work
among undergraduate instructors in STEM and STEM departments. This goal is being
pursued through the creation of more deliberate strategies by TUES applicants
designed to facilitate wider adoption and adaptation of new learning materials
and teaching strategies. &lt;br/&gt; Substantial work has taken place within the
TUES program and its predecessors to develop improved instructional methods and
materials based on current scientific understanding of how students learn. These
materials and strategies have developed into resources that many STEM faculty
members could apply with good effect in their courses. Awareness of these
resources has increased, as has the fundamental idea that some materials and
instructional methods are more effective than others. Nevertheless, there is a
growing realization that moving beyond increased awareness to increased adaption
of effective teaching practices is not occurring apace. &lt;br/&gt; This project
is working to improve propagation strategies within the TUES community through
four core activities: &lt;br/&gt;1. Collecting and reviewing propagation
strategies used by current and former TUES/CCLI projects to promote adaptation
and implementation of innovative developments in STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;2.
Analyzing and categorizing propagation strategies in terms of empirical evidence
of success and factors identified by theories of change. &lt;br/&gt;3. Promoting
discussion about and awareness of the importance of deliberately designing
propagation strategies and explicitly using appropriate strategies in project
planning. &lt;br/&gt;4. Developing accessible resources about a range of
possible propagation strategies as well as knowledge to identify and optimize
strategies to enhance impact. These resources are a written "how-to" guide,
webinar presentations, and individual consultations. &lt;br/&gt; Intellectual
Merit: This project addresses a core problem in STEM education reform. A 2008
National Academies Workshop concluded that the greatest gains in effective STEM
education are likely to come from the development of strategies to encourage
faculty and administrators to implement proven instructional strategies. This
project is promoting the use of such propagation strategies within the TUES
program. &lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: Many of the instructional strategies
developed within the TUES program have been shown to help all students learn
while having a disproportionately positive impact on the learning and retention
of women and minorities, who are historically underrepresented in STEM.