* 1122013
* Dynamic Modulation of Protein Recycling by Spectrin
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Claire Thomas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

Intellectual merit. Epithelia are an essential tissue type in the body plan of
all multicellular animals where they play a vital role in development, structure
and physiology. Epithelia are also the most common tissue type in the body. To
establish an epithelium successfully, cells must develop "polarity"--a strong
asymmetry in the distribution of cellular proteins. Many epithelial functions,
from nutrient uptake to organ formation, depend on such asymmetric distributions
of proteins and this fundamental property of an epithelium. Polarity is
generated by groups of proteins that reorganize the cell to transport different
sets of proteins to each of the main epithelial surfaces: apical, lateral and
basal. During this process, specific groups of proteins are tasked with the
formation of the apical surface specifically. This project will analyze the role
of a group of proteins involved in steps that lead to the stabilization of
proteins at the apical surface using the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) as
a model system. These proteins include the membrane-associated proteins annexin
B9 and beta H spectrin. Preliminary data has led to the hypothesis that this
annexin and spectrin form a complex that determines the level of proteins at the
apical membrane, and that they do this by modulating the movement of proteins
inside the cell to and from the apical domain during a process called "protein
recycling". To test this hypothesis the project will quantitatively measure the
influence of these two proteins on protein recycling in normal and mutant cells
and tissues. Annexin B9 and beta H spectrin also modulate a major polarity
regulator called Rac during this process, and this relationship is also a focus
of the research. Finally, the hypothesis suggests that many many proteins are
likely to be modulated in this way. Therefore, the project will also develop a
way to identify all such proteins using "proteomic" techniques. Although the
action of the key proteins that initiate a polarized cell phenotype are
beginning to be understood, the stabilization and elaboration of the incipient
apical domain are still poorly understood. Thus, the project will produce new
insights into the development and maintenance of epithelial organization. This
project will also help redefine the role of spectrins in general. These proteins
have been depicted in every basic cell biology textbook for over two decades as
static structural proteins. This research is part of a growing body of evidence
that demonstrates that these proteins actually have a much wider and more
dynamic role in the cell that challenges this long-held
view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The broader impacts of this project
will be in the area of science education. Not only will the project provide
training for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, but it will also
integrate undergraduate-driven experiments with the research. Undergraduate
participants will be drawn from those doing honors theses projects and also from
underrepresented groups through the WISER (Women In Science and Engineering
Research) and MURE (Minority Undergraduate Research Experience) programs at Penn
State. In addition, lab experiments will be used for a "Reality Science"
approach in a large (&gt;500 student) introductory cell biology class, which
serves several majors. For this approach a tractable research thread that is
performed by an undergraduate researcher is then integrated into the curriculum
(including examinations). The undergraduate's experiments are followed in class
throughout the semester with regular updates on that student's progress. This
will demonstrate real-life applications of techniques that are mentioned in
class, but which cannot be covered in the lab sections of the course. At the
same time this will impart a feeling for the nature, pace, and thought processes
that underly basic research amongst students who may choose not to become
professional biologists, but nevertheless will become science-literate citizens.