* 1122665
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Politics of Governing Capacity
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Barry Driscoll, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 6,472.00

Social scientists have identified governing capacity as a key component of
explanations about violence, democracy, and wealth. What accounts for variations
in governing capacity, however? Although scholars have developed explanations
for why capacity varies across countries, scholars have neglected the fact that,
in an era of decentralized governance, developing countries often display
substantial variation in the capacity to govern not across countries but within
countries. In particular, conventional wisdom holds that governments are
effective in the center but less so in the periphery. This project illustrates
the fallacy of that assumption. In the developing world, governments are not
strong in the capital and weak elsewhere, for pockets of effective government
can exist throughout the country, at sub-national levels. Why?

This project investigates that question by examining sub-national variation in
governing capacity within Ghana. Ghana offers an excellent case study because it
is one of the most effective states in Africa and yet exhibits uneven sub-
national capacity. This makes the question of the politics of governing capacity
all the more puzzling.

This project develops a theory that grounds the effectiveness of political
institutions in the legitimacy of those institutions. It specifically isolates
the role that boundaries play in structuring the legitimacy of a given district,
which produces variation in the way that actors perceive and react to their
local governments. The project tests its theory through a mixed methods approach
that combines cross-district statistical analysis, four case studies,
qualitative interviewing, and quantitative survey methods.

This project advances the understanding of governing capacity in developing
countries, shifting the focus from comparisons across countries to comparisons
within them. This refocus is most appropriate, for decentralization has shifted
many realms of governance downward to local authorities, further accentuating
variation in the quality of local institutions. Understanding how and why local
authorities vary in their effectiveness is of interest to political scientists,
sociologists, and economists. This project contributes to development studies
and political science by constructing the first database on the match between a
country's internal political boundaries and the boundaries of its traditional
authorities. It also innovates by offering the first study of systematic
variation in governing capacity within an African country.

The project has broader implications as well. It sheds light on uneven outcomes
in government performance and the delivery of public goods within developing
countries at the same time that it examines the operation of local political
institutions in their local social context.