* 1122354
* Workshop: Freshwater Advanced Aquatic Sensor Workshop: Sensors, Platforms and Data Management, to be held, May 15-17, 2011 in Ann Arbor, MI
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Sameer Tilak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 44,021.00

The University of Michigan Ann Arbor is awarded a grant to support a two-day
workshop focused on planning, deployment and operation of advanced aquatic
sensors. The workshop will be conducted by the Global Lakes Ecological
Observatory Network (GLEON) and the Great Lakes Partner of the Alliance for
Coastal Technologies (ACT), and will be hosted by the University of Michigan
Biological Station (UMBS). Aquatic sensor technology is developing rapidly, yet
mechanisms and opportunities for limnologists and field biologists to receive
exposure to and training in these new technologies are limited. The workshop
will address several critical aspects of data collection and management, as well
as instrument lifecycle, which are routinely encountered by users of aquatic
sensors. These topics include: exchange of knowledge among leading aquatic
sensor developers and the end-users of this technology; assembly of project
teams for the purpose of deploying, operating and maintaining sensor networks;
demonstration of the latest in aquatic sensor and sensor platform technology;
development of sensor-oriented curriculum for limnologists and field biologists;
fundamental skills needed for sensor deployments such as data logger
configuration, data telemetry and data management. Products of the workshop will
include a report on the technologies demonstrated and multimedia(recorded audio
visuals) from panels and presentations will be made freely available
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will, for the first time, bring
together members of the Alliance for Coastal Technologies (http://act-us.info)
and the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network (http://www.gleon.org). The
complementary missions of these organizations, sensor evaluation (ACT) and
sensor applications (GLEON), affords opportunities for discussions on future
collaborations. The workshop will also provide opportunities for graduate
students and young researchers from diverse regions and backgrounds, including
students and researchers working for upper Midwestern Native American tribal
organizations, to gain skills in acquiring and applying data derived from state-
of-the-science aquatic sensors. It will also provide students and young
investigators with opportunities to collaborate across disciplinary and
geographic boundaries.