* 1122352
* Exploring the conflict between self-interest and concern for others
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* William Cunningham, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The commonly-held view of human nature, often put forth by economists, is that
people are motivated strictly by self-interest. However, the intensely social
nature of human beings suggests that people are not purely self-interested. Dr.
William Cunningham (Ohio State University) attempts to shed new light on the
age-old question of whether people are ever motivated to look after the
interests of others (i.e., to think and behave unselfishly). Pilot data from Dr.
Cunningham's lab have already shown, for example, that people who score high on
measures of compassion engage in what appears to be unselfish helping.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three studies will study the question of whether people
are ever unselfish by (a) using a novel decision-making activity designed to
uncover people's motivations and (b) an eye-tracking method that will directly
measure visual attention. The studies will address three important questions:
(a) For whom are people more likely to show concern (e.g., similar versus
dissimilar others)? (b) Is self-interest a more automatic or fundamental process
than concern for others? (c) What are the attentional and motivational
mechanisms that drive these effects? In each of the proposed studies, compassion
(and the absence thereof) will be measured to see whether automatic self-
interest is a human universal, or if there are critical individual differences
that may shift people from self-interest to a less selfish focus on others. For
example, if people have to make decisions quickly, is self-interest more likely
to dominate their decisions? Is this true even for people who are highly
compassionate? Further, will the amount of time people spend looking at what
could happen to another person predict how generously they behave toward that
person? Answering such questions will yield new insights into the motivation to
help others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the proposed
studies will facilitate the training of a wide range of students. As a part of
this work, the researchers plan to refine and polish a new measure that will be
made freely available to other researchers interested in studying altruism
and/or self-interest. Better understanding whether and when people behave in a
truly unselfish fashion could have important implications for understanding a
host of important questions ranging from questions about helping strangers in
distress to choosing careers in demanding helping professions such as nursing or
firefighting.