* 1122261
* Elucidating the symbiotic signaling pathway in legumes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Douglas Cook, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2014
* USD 152,998.00

Legumes contribute 1/3 of humankind's protein intake, a fact that is directly
related to their unusual capacity to access atmospheric nitrogen through
symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Biological nitrogen fixation also makes
legumes key components of both natural and agricultural systems because they
return vital nitrogen to the environment. This project will extend existing
knowledge of how legumes and their symbiotic bacteria establish this unique
partnership, in particular by bridging traditional genetic methodologies with
specialized tools that the investigators have developed for protein biochemistry
and cell biology. The outcome of these studies will be increased understanding
of a critical phase in symbiotic development, namely the period during which
legumes select efficient symbiotic bacteria from the soil environment. In
particular, the proposed research will identify new genes and proteins that
underlie symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Knowledge of symbiotic nitrogen fixation
has great relevance to agricultural systems, because US agricultural is highly
dependent on input nitrogen, which for non-legumes involves consumption of
fossil fuels to drive conversion at atmospheric nitrogen (N2) to fertilizer
nitrogen. The fact that legumes produce fertilizer nitrogen directly, using
solar energy obtained through photosynthesis, makes them key components of cost-
effective, carbon-neutral, sustainable agricultural systems. Increased
understanding of symbiotic development will enhance our ability to
constructively manipulate this vital biological process. The anticipated broader
impacts of this work include training of graduate students, and students will
participate in an active international collaboration with scientists in the
Republic of Korea through the Korean Rural Development Administration.