* 1122888
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expanding the new legal socialization model to parents, police, and teachers using the factorial survey design
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Ellen Cohn, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 12,862.00

This research investigates why some adolescents are more likely to break rules
than others by investigating the legal socialization process (i.e., how
individuals develop their understanding of society's rules and make decisions to
obey or break those rules). Traditional models of legal socialization focus on
individuals' ability to reason about moral and legal issues and their attitudes
about the legal system. The current project tests a new legal socialization
model. Individuals who view authority figures that enforce rules in a fair
manner are predicted to perceive the process as legitimate, to be less cynical
about the rules, and to break fewer rules. Previous research testing this model
has focused solely on the legal world (e.g., police officers and laws); the
current research will include parents, teachers, and police as authority
figures. The study will use a sample of 500 adolescents currently participating
in the New Hampshire Youth Study (NHYS), a seven year longitudinal study of the
predictors of delinquency. Participants will read scenarios describing
situations in which an authority figure (i.e., parent, teacher, and police
officer) behaves fairly or unfairly when enforcing a rule. After each scenario,
participants will rate how legitimate the authority is, their cynicism toward
the rule, and the likelihood they would break the rule if they were in the
situation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings will be used to develop an
expanded model of legal socialization that integrates both traditional and new
models of this process. Ultimately, the proposed research will provide a more
comprehensive understanding of the manner in which adolescents develop their
understanding of rules and decide to break or obey rules; thereby providing a
basis for developing interventions aimed at reducing rule breaking among
adolescents.