* 1123727
* Collaborative Proposal: School Attendance Boundary Information System (SABINS)
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* John Warren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 476,548.00

Collaborative Proposal&lt;br/&gt;SES - 1123727&lt;br/&gt;John Robert Warren (PI)
&lt;br/&gt;Department of Sociology&lt;br/&gt;Steven Manson (Co-PI)
&lt;br/&gt;Department of Geography&lt;br/&gt;University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES - 1123894&lt;br/&gt;Salvatore Saporito
(PI)&lt;br/&gt;Department of Sociology&lt;br/&gt;The College of William and
Mary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Proposal: School Attendance Boundary
Information System (SABINS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With prior
NSF funding (SES 0921794, 0921279), the PIs at the College of William and Mary
and the University of Minnesota created the School Attendance Boundary
Information System (SABINS) data infrastructure project. It is designed to
disseminate a rich, new data source of elementary, middle and high school
attendance boundaries in a GIS framework via www.sabinsdata.org. The database
currently contains 2009-2010 school year data on K-12th grade school attendance
boundaries for three states (Minnesota, Delaware and Oregon), over 500 districts
embedded in 13 metropolitan areas across the country, and over 5,000 unified
school districts located in mostly rural areas. Each school attendance boundary
in the SABINS database is integrated with population and housing data from the
2010 Decennial Census and the American Community Survey (ACS), allowing users to
analyze an extensive set of the social and economic characteristics describing
populations residing within each school attendance zone. SABINS data are also
integrated with school-level information from the Common Core of Data (CCD) so
that users can identify the characteristics of schools that supply services to
each school attendance boundary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This second phase of the
SABINS project builds on the initial investment social science data
infrastructure in two ways. First, the database adds annual, longitudinal
updates to the existing geographic and tabular files so that users can explore
school attendance boundary information for the 2009-2010 through the 2011-2012
school years. Since the ACS and CCD data are updated yearly, users will be able
to explore the dynamic interplay between shifting educational geography,
demographic change, and educational outcomes across schools and their
corresponding catchment areas. Second, new activities will support an improved
data retrieval system, enhance outreach activities and provide robust user
support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This new phase
involves a significant contribution to national cyberinfrastructure by making
the SABINS data freely available to all users, including schools and school
districts. Moreover, the project leverages NSF's existing investment into the
National Historical GIS (NHGIS) housed at the University of Minnesota by
improving existing software tools that optimize data dissemination and analysis
of SABINS and associated data (ACS, CCD). The database is already being used
widely for social science training, for policy research at the local, state and
federal levels, and in the private sector. The SABINS project will be
increasingly accessible for basic social science research, broadening the scope
of local and regional analyses to explore variations across time and space
simultaneously. The addition of longitudinal data combined with dissemination
via the NHGIS at the University of Minnesota seeks to enable local, state, and
federal administrators to deliver educational services more efficiently.