* 1123058
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring the Effects of Stereotype Threat in Police Encounters: Why Innocent African Americans are at Risk of Being Targeted as Suspects
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Bette Bottoms, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 06/30/2012
* USD 13,900.00

This research tests a novel social psychological explanation which focuses on
police-citizen interactions. Specifically, in police encounters, innocent Blacks
might be concerned about being judged unfairly because of stereotypes depicting
them as prone to crime. Such "stereotype threat" produces anxiety and arousal,
leads individuals to manage their behavior, and increases demands on cognitive
resources. Ironically, however, these correlates produce the same nonverbal
behaviors that police use to distinguish liars from truth-tellers. Thus,
threatened Blacks might be more likely than non-threatened Whites to behave in
ways that police perceive as suspicious. The researchers will test whether
stereotype threat and its correlates explain differences in the frequency with
which Blacks and Whites engage in deceptive-looking behavior. Pre- and post-
tests will assess whether a staged police encounter differentially affects
Blacks' and Whites' feelings of stereotype threat, anxiety, physiological
arousal, self-regulation, and cognitive load. Videotapes of the encounter will
be coded to determine whether participants engaged in nonverbal behaviors
commonly perceived as deceptive (e.g., gaze aversion,
fidgeting).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unwarranted disparate treatment of
different racial groups can undermine the legitimacy of the police and prevent
them from being effective. Findings from the current research will inform future
research on curbing Blacks' experiences of stereotype threat in police
encounters and preventing effects on nonverbal behavior from translating into
racial disparities in the criminal justice system.