* 1123771
* Collaborative Research: Extending the Scope of Inference in Partially Identified Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Federico Bugni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 244,082.00

A model is said to be partially identified when the sampling process and the
maintained assumptions restrict the value of the parameter of interest to a set,
called the identified set, which is smaller than the logical range of the
parameter but potentially larger than a single point. Partially identified
models arise naturally in economic models when strong and usually unrealistic
assumptions are traded by weaker and more credible ones. Since their relatively
recent introduction, partially identified models have become increasingly
popular in many areas of economics and other social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research proposal is to
extend the scope of inference in partially identified models and it is divided
into three related research projects. The first project studies the behavior of
several confidence sets commonly used in the literature on inference in moment
inequality models when we allow for the possibility of making small mistakes in
the specification of the model (i.e. local misspecification). The motivation for
this project stems from the fact that econometric models are only approximations
to the underlying phenomenon of interest and are therefore intrinsically
misspecified. There are different inference procedures available in the
literature that have been compared in terms of asymptotic size and power
properties under the assumption of correct model specification. This project
proposes the amount of distortion to asymptotic confidence size as a criterion
to choose among competing inference methods, and applies this criterion to
compare across critical values and test statistics employed in the construction
of confidence sets in partially identified models. As a result, the applied
researcher will be aware of the problems caused by these mistakes and will be
able to choose a methodology that minimizes these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project addresses inference in models
where there is a multi-dimensional confidence set for a parameter vector of
interest. At the time of the presentation of the results, researchers typically
resort to the use of a projection of the identified set in each of its
individual coordinates, generating a multi-dimensional hyper-rectangle. While
researchers typically know the properties of the original confidence sets very
well, little is known about the properties of these hyper-rectangles. This
project has the objective of filling in this void.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
third project proposes an inference approach for partially identified models
based on moment equalities with unknown/unidentified functions as opposed to the
now standard approach of deriving moment inequality restrictions. The approach
can handle models that are not easily framed into moment inequality models (e.g.
missing covariates in a regression model).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three
projects in this proposal are motivated by problems that applied researchers
face when working with partially identified models. The ultimate objective of
this proposal is to provide applied researchers and policy makers with a better
understanding of the statistical properties of these models. For example, when
analyzing data for policy recommendations, researchers typically make
assumptions to simplify the analysis and the exposition of the results. This
proposal aims to help the researcher choose tools that are less sensitive to
those assumptions. Furthermore, the implementation of these projects requires
developing computational tools that will be of interest to computational
economists and computer scientists.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the developments of this
research agenda are incorporated into the curriculum of courses targeted to
graduate students interested in econometrics and even outstanding undergraduate
students.