* 1123200
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Death and Migration: Negotiating the Secular and Islam in Greece
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Marcia Inhorn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 19,000.00

Doctoral student Christina Palivos (Yale University), with the guidance of Dr.
M. Kamari Clarke, will undertake research on secularism, the state, and
migration. As migrants with particular religious orientations move into secular
and semi-secular democracies, they pose unanticipated challenges for both the
theory and practice of modern state governance, as evidenced by the head scarf
debate in France. Palivos will focus her research on the problems of burial of
migrant Muslims who die while moving through Greece on their way to various
destinations in Europe. In the past decade, the Evros River and the Aegean Sea
along the eastern borders of Greece have become the main points of entry for
approximately 90 per cent of migrants en route to Europe from the Middle East,
Africa, South Asia, and Central Asia; many of them are Muslim. As the number of
people crossing these bodies of water has grown, so has the number who die along
the way, making Greece an excellent site to explore these issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Palivos will undertake eighteen months of ethnographic
research amongst Muslim immigrants in three Greek locations: Athens, Lesvos, and
Alexandroupolis. She will gather data on the different treatments that Muslim
dead receive in Greece, including repatriation of remains to the country of
origin, relocation of remains from to Thrace (the only Greek site with Muslim
cemetaries), and local burial of unidentified remains in unmarked graves.
Research methods will include participant observation, semi-structured
interviews, burial case studies, repatriation case studies, and archival
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will
contribute to social scientific understanding of how the current economic crisis
and attendant migration are together changing what it means to be a modern state
subject. Her research also will fill gaps in what is known about the circulation
of dead bodies within and across national borders and contribute to the
ethnography of contemporary Greece. Supporting this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.