* 1123091
* AHRC-NSF MOU: Swahili Town Planning: The Songo Mnara Urban Landscape
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2017
* Jeffrey Fleisher, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 259,669.00

Archaeological survey and excavation at the ancient Swahili stonetown of Songo
Mnara will enable the exploration of aspects of ancient urban planning in
coastal East Africa. Dr Jeffrey Fleisher (Rice University) and Dr Stephanie
Wynne-Jones (University of York) will lead an international team of specialists
from the U.S., U.K., and Tanzania in the investigation of economic and ritual
activities at Songo Mnara and of how they related to planned and unplanned parts
of the town. Support from the National Science Foundation in collaboration with
the Arts and Humanities Research Council in the United Kingdom, allows for three
seasons of fieldwork at this site on the southern Tanzanian coast. Swahili
stonetowns, found along the eastern African coast, were the home to an
indigenous and cosmopolitan form of urbanism that linked Africa with the Indian
Ocean world system from AD 700 to 1500. A World Heritage Site, Songo Mnara is
recognized as the most impressive of all Swahili townscapes, including more than
40 coral-built houses and room-blocks, 5 mosques and multiple cemeteries.
Occupation of the site was brief, from the 14th to 16th centuries AD, coinciding
with the golden age of Swahili towns along the coast, and particularly at its
neighboring site of Kilwa Kisiwani. This work will contribute substantially to
discussions of organizational principles in ancient town plans more generally,
and to research on aspects of town layouts that were formed by movement,
activity and use, rather than formal planning from above. By exploring the way
the actions of people both shaped and were shaped by town plans, this study will
provide a holistic case study that addresses current concerns with the plans and
spatial practices of ancient complex societies. The fieldwork will explore the
urban space of Songo Mnara at four interlinked scales: (1) household activities
through excavations within and around buildings; (2) public and communal
practices in the open areas and monuments of the site; (3) the site plan will be
accurately plotted; and (4) the site will be positioned within its broader
island landscape. The exceptional preservation at Songo Mnara allows the
construction of a robust dataset to explore how Swahili towns were both planned
and unplanned. This will offer insight into the multiple ways that towns plans
emerged - through the efforts of powerful people, but also through the more
basic and daily acts of those living in and moving through the town. Broader
impacts of the project include important training for American, British, and
Tanzanian students, both graduate and undergraduate. Additionally, the project
contributes to the preservation and conservation of Songo Mnara, which remains
an "endangered" World Heritage Site. A long term commitment to archaeological
research at the site will provide important opportunities for community
involvement, and educational opportunities to demonstrate the unique role that
archaeology can play in its preservation and documentation.