* 1123788
* Language Production-Comprehension Linkage
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Maryellen MacDonald, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2015
* USD 394,301.00

This project tests specific hypotheses about the dependencies between language
comprehension, acquisition, and production, particularly the role of experience
in developing language skills. Whereas the role of experience is well known in
vocabulary development, there is very little research on how experience affects
sentence comprehension. This gap is very unfortunate because comprehension of
complex sentences is critical for success in school and reading, and this domain
is particularly affected by language delays or impairments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Principal Investigator, Maryellen MacDonald, will use
her Production-Distribution-Comprehension (PDC) Framework to guide research on
the role of experience in language comprehension. This includes investigations
of where experience comes from in the form of documenting speakers' production
choices in various situations; why speakers make those utterance choices and not
others; what comprehenders can learn from the patterns of utterances that they
experience in their language environment; and how knowledge of these patterns
shapes subsequent comprehension. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To better understand how
language production processes create linguistic patterns in the environment,
language production is studied in four distinct language environments: English,
Japanese, Korean, and Mandarin Chinese. Comprehension processes are studied in
these same four languages in a coordinated effort that allows the researchers to
relate production choices in each language to comprehension patterns in that
language, yielding a much stronger test of claims than with a single language
alone. Additional studies investigate how learning from experience shapes
language comprehension skill. The research plan will further a number of
international collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research integrates the
study of three typically-distinct fields in language processing (comprehension,
production, acquisition), revealing their mutual dependence and how experience
shapes processing skill. As a result, this work should provide a foundation for
understanding how targeted therapeutic linguistic experiences can best be
developed for those with language or reading delays or impairments.