* 1123378
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Public attitudes toward vaccination: Interactions between message frames, parenting attitudes, and cultural worldviews
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Matthew Nisbet, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 06/30/2012
* USD 7,900.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;There have been a number of recent controversies surrounding
vaccine adverse events (VAE) (e.g., measles-mumps-rubella vaccine and autism).
There has been speculation that the typical vaccination promotion message, with
its focus on individual risk of vaccine-preventable disease, may have the
unintended effect of reinforcing parents' concerns about the risk of their child
experiencing a VAE. There has also been speculation that a message that
emphasizes the societal benefits of vaccination may not have this effect. In
this project the co-Principal Investigator will use a framing paradigm to
investigate which kinds of messages effectively convey the importance of
childhood vaccination and community immunity in the promotion of children?s
health and, ultimately, healthy child development. The effects of individual-
and community-framed vaccination messages on people?s attitudes toward both
vaccination uptake and vaccination policy will be compared and the ways in which
individual characteristics, like cultural worldviews and parenting attitudes,
interact with the message frames to produce particular attitudes toward
vaccination uptake and vaccination policy examined. The goal of this research is
to contribute to efforts to align personal decision-making about vaccination and
vaccination policy with the current scientific understanding of vaccination and
its importance to health child development.&lt;br/&gt;This research will
establish a critical link between existing theory of risk perception and
existing understanding of how parenting attitudes influence child development.
In terms of broader impacts, findings from this research will have implications
for efforts to promote vaccination decision-making and policy in a manner that
reflects the scientific consensus on vaccination. More broadly, this research
can inform the development of communications that promote the well-being of
children and families.