* 1123290
* RCN: Reshaping Global Governance through Indicators: A Collaborative International Network for Empirical Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2015
* Sally Merry, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 12/31/2015
* USD 280,992.00

Rankings and other quantitative indicators now occupy a growing role in
international as well as national governance. Indicators describe such diverse
phenomena as rule of law, corruption, health, labor regulation, freedom, state
effectiveness, corporate social responsibility, and culture. Yet despite the
resources invested in the promulgation, use and contestation of indicators,
surprisingly little is known about the effects of this turn to indicators on
global regulation and the exercise of power. The lack of study of these issues
is particularly striking in relation to the use of indicators in global or
transnational governance practices where indicators are linked to extra-state
power. Some global indicators have direct effects in the allocation of
development aid or investment decisions, but most have indirect effects,
influencing knowledge and the decisions of many different actors and publics. In
order to understand the implications of global governance indicators for power
relations and their influence on behavior, discourse, and contestation, this
Research Coordination Network draws together scholars from a variety of
countries to individually and collectively engage this problem. In the next
three years, the Research Coordination Network will use a series of seminars to
build new research findings in order to develop a broader theoretical framework
for understanding how indicators act in global governance.

The participants are mostly junior scholars, so this project combines research
and theory development with training and mentoring of US and international
scholars. The scholars differ in their disciplinary training but share a common
approach and research focus. The interdisciplinary steering committee joins
scholars in anthropology and international law. Building from the initial group
of scholars, the network will expand over time to incorporate a broader range of
scholars interested in the issue from several countries and disciplines.