* 1123399
* GALANA Conference 2012: Psycholinguistic and Neurolinguistic Approaches to Language Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Utako Minai, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 30,371.00

This grant provides support for the 2012 Generative Approaches to Language
Acquisition-North America (GALANA) conference, with a special theme on
Psycholinguistic and Neurolinguistic Approaches to Language Development. The
conference will be held at the University of Kansas in Lawrence, Kansas on
October 11-13, 2012. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will be the fifth
meeting of GALANA, an international conference which has emerged as a leading
forum for research in language development that is informed by linguistic
theory. Language acquisition research in the generative framework addresses
several core questions regarding the mental representation of linguistic
knowledge, the ways in which that knowledge emerges over time, and the degree to
which that knowledge is specialized or independent of other cognitive domains.
In recent years, psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic techniques have provided
new ways to investigate the recruitment of linguistic knowledge in real time
processing, and have successfully been utilized with both child and adult
learner populations. The goal of this session is to consider the application of
these new approaches for theory building and testing in the domains of first and
second language acquisition. This session will be the first of its kind to
consider first language acquisition, second language acquisition, and language
disorders under the same umbrella. As there is overlap with respect to the core
theoretical questions at the heart of these sub-fields, it is advantageous to
encourage discussion among researchers from these different
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this conference will be
broadly disseminated in two outlets: a proceedings volume for the general
conference and a special issue of a journal that will be dedicated to the
special theme. The conference encourages broad participation by highlighting the
work of junior scholars in several invited presentations. The conference also
encourages participation from junior researchers by offering merit-based travel
awards to graduate students and post-docs.