* 1123610
* Dissertation Improvement Grant: Domain Specificity in Learning Phonology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Jeffrey Heinz, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2013
* USD 6,575.00

A fundamental question facing researchers in linguistics and cognitive science
is whether children's ability to learn language is due to specialized cognitive
modules or to more general learning capacities. This research tests a strong
version of the hypothesis that specialized cognitive modules for language
learning exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the goal of this research is
to find evidence for or against the claim that a specialized module is present
for learning how sounds pattern in languages. This claim is grounded by
computational considerations, which reveal that the way languages combine speech
sounds to make words (phonology) is fundamentally different from the way
languages combine words to make sentences (syntax).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
exploit this computational understanding to develop a series of artificial
language learning experiments that investigate how specialized the module for
learning phonology is in two ways. First, the learnability of an attested sound
pattern is compared with the learnability of a minimally different, but
unattested, sound pattern. Theoretically, the only known difference between
these two patterns is their computational complexity. A second series of
experiments examines the learnability of patterns only found in the syntax, but
not the phonology, of natural languages. A distinguishing feature of both series
of experiments is that the specific patterns to be tested are well understood
both in theoretical computer science and in theoretical
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will lead to a
better understanding of the psychological reality of the computational
boundaries investigated here. This in turn will provide a deeper understanding
of what constitutes a possible phonological pattern, how such patterns are
learned, and first language acquisition in general. The results also directly
address the extent to which human language learning is domain-specific or
domain-general. Studies of language processing and clinical research into speech
and language disorders may also benefit from this investigation.