* 1123609
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Phonology of Betsimisaraka Malagasy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Jeffrey Heinz, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2014
* USD 11,803.00

The goal of this research project is to deepen our understanding of the range of
possible phonological systems across human languages by documenting and
analyzing the understudied phonology of the Betsimisaraka dialects of Malagasy,
spoken on the East coast of Madagascar. This project consists of at least six
months' fieldwork on Northern Betsimisaraka with the aim of producing a complete
phonological analysis of the dialect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Careful observations
of native, monolingual speakers' articulations and acoustic measurements will be
used to answer basic questions regarding the language's sound inventories.
Systematic variations in pronunciation will be documented and analyzed, with
special attention paid to processes known to occur in the Standard dialect of
Malagasy. All data collected during elicitation sessions will be entered into a
database and later archived following E-Meld's school of best practices. In
addition to theoretically neutral descriptions of the phonology, analyses will
be provided in both rule-based and constraint-based theoretical frameworks.
Xerox's Finite State Transducer software will assist in the construction of
these analyses, resulting in scripts that offer complete models of the
language's phonology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It should be noted that Northern
Betsimisaraka, though usually referred to as a dialect, may even constitute a
language itself, based on recent studies on the mutual intelligibility of
Malagasy speech varieties. The data and phonological analysis from this project
could be used to help determine the Madagascar's exact dialectology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sound files, digital photos, and videos, will be made
publicly available to those who wish to do further phonological studies on the
language, as well as to cultural institutions in Madagascar. Sound and video
files will largely consist of local stories and conversations, granting them
applications outside of phonology, from linguists wishing to investigate
Betsimisaraka sentence structure to those researchers outside linguistics with
interests in anthropology and other cultural studies.