* 1123998
* DIP: Collaborative Research: Transforming Science Learning with an Interactive Web Environment for Data Sharing and Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Samantha Michalka, Machine Science Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 264,155.00

In this Cyberlearning Design and Implementation Project, the University of
Massachusetts Lowell (UML) and a non-profit collaborator, Machine Science Inc.
of Cambridge,Massachusetts, are studying classroom implementations of a web
platform that helps middle school and high school teachers engage their students
in collaborative scientific inquiry. This technology -- the Internet System for
Networked Sensor Experimentation (iSENSE) -- provides a shared repository of
user-contributed classroom activities, such as tabletop science experiments,
environmental analyses, engineering projects, and surveys, together with the
data generated by these activities. The system features tools that enable
teachers and students to create their own experiments, upload and tag data, and
configure and share dynamic visual representations of the data.

School districts in Massachusetts and New Hampshire are participating in the
four-year study. Teachers from each district attend annual summer professional
development workshops at UML and receive ongoing support from the project team
in integrating iSENSE into their science teaching. Educators participate in
follow-up meetings during the academic year to report their experiences and
exchange best practices. The most promising approaches are documented as lesson
plans and shared with the larger iSENSE community. Throughout the project,
researchers from UML's Graduate School of Education are collecting formative
data to inform system refinement and curriculum development and to answer
questions about integration and use of cyber-enabled learning technologies in
classrooms, and conducting a summative assessment to determine the project's
impact on student learning and science teaching practice.

Project deliverables include a set of iSENSE lesson plans, developed in close
consultation with participating educators, together with several significant
enhancements to the iSENSE data collection and visualization technology and a
set of guidelines and justifications for those guidelines pertaining to
developing data scientists and to integrating cyber-enabled learning
technologies into classrooms. In particular, the project partners are developing
data collection and visualization apps for Android and iOS mobile devices. On
the iSENSE website, community-building features are being integrated into the
system, giving users the ability to "follow" each other's system activity, in
the manner of Twitter or Facebook. To foster a sense of community, students and
teachers are encouraged to append comments to experiments, data sets, and saved
visualizations. This enables them to ask questions relating to ongoing
experiments,share resources, suggest further investigations, and critique one
another's work.

Because iSENSE incorporates many emerging cyberlearning technologies, including
interactive data visualizations, on-line community-building features, and the
use of mobile computing platforms, the project has broad potential implications
for the cyberlearning field. The project team is investigating how interacting
with cyberlearning technologies and collaborating on-line changes the way
students think about scientific data and the nature of science. The team is also
examining how cyberlearning resources, such as user-contributed web content,
web-based software tools, and mobile computing platforms, can enhance science
teaching practice. At the same time, the investigators seek to identify what
resources are needed, in terms of technology, professional development, and
curriculum, to effectively support incorporation of sophisticated learning
technologies in support of science practice and learning in the classroom.