* 1123181
* Collaborative Proposal:  EURO: Enhancing Undergraduate Research Opportunities
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* David Bahr, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 168,505.00

The Boyer Report (Boyer Commission on Educating Undergraduates in Research
Universities, "Reinventing Undergraduate Education; A Blueprint for America's
Research Universities," 1998) identified three challenges that still permeate
many public research universities: the need to start students in research
activities earlier, providing quality research experiences for more students,
and creating experiences that can be delivered to increasing numbers of transfer
students. The second America COMPETES Act (January 2011) urged that
undergraduates be included in standard NSF grants. However, increasing
participation in early undergraduate research continues to be a challenge at
many institutions of higher education. This project is developing a
collaborative approach to increasing early undergraduate participation in
significant research activities. This is being accomplished through courses and
programs designed to teach general research skills, rather than only engaging
students in specific disciplinary research activities. By focusing on "research
oriented" or "research skills" experiences, more students can be economically
included early in their undergraduate studies. The project is a partnership
comprised of Washington State University, the University of Central Florida, and
the University of Alabama, with faculty members from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison participating in an advisory role. The partners are adapting
each others' existing research skills courses (one per institution, three in
total). All three courses are being made available to students at each partner
institution. The three models are: &lt;br/&gt;- A faculty led boot camp short
course, running one week in the summer as an intensive program (developed
originally at WSU) &lt;br/&gt;- A peer mentored short course for transfer
students just prior to the beginning of the academic year (developed originally
at UCF) &lt;br/&gt;- A semester long seminar course that meets during the
academic year using asynchronous delivery of lecture material (developed
originally at Wisconsin). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal is increased by an ongoing, comprehensive assessment of the
effectiveness and cost of these programs at three universities, as undertaken by
a centralized evaluation team. The assessment is addressing the following
questions: &lt;br/&gt;- Do these three skills programs increase the number of
students participating in undergraduate research while maintaining the quality
of existing experiences? &lt;br/&gt;- Do skills programs decrease the
"incubation period" of new undergraduate researchers in the laboratory and
increase faculty participation campus-wide? &lt;br/&gt;- What are the costs and
benefits of implementing sustainable research-oriented teaching and training
modules at three public research universities? &lt;br/&gt;This information is of
potential value for institutions considering efforts to institutionalize or grow
their undergraduate research programs.