* 1123427
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Nominations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Ian Ostrander, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2013
* USD 10,806.00

A small army of administrators and high-level staff are required to operate the
departments and agencies of the U.S. government. While the bulk of
administrators are career civil servants, the high-level positions are filled
through the appointments process. Presidents, who wish to see their policy goals
implemented, have a strong incentive to control who is appointed to the key
posts. For many executive branch positions (approximately 1,100), Senate
confirmation is required.

Despite the fact that conflict between the president and the Senate would seem
likely under these conditions, few nominees are denied confirmation. In fact,
presidential nominees are often confirmed with overwhileming majorities in the
Senate. The success of presidents is attributed to their anticipation of the
Senate's wishes and, for many positions, apparent Senate indifference. There are
exceptions. Some nominees have to wait month for consideration and some are
never given a vote. The high presidential success rate then masks a pattern of
strategic delay, which is where the conflict between the two branches actually
exists.

This study examines which candidates are delayed. It is important because it is
not well understood. We know more about inter-branch relations in other realms
of interaction, such as legislative politics and judicial nominations.

In this study, previous theories concerning partisanship are updated to take
into account how agency-level characteristics may influence outcomes. For
example, some agencies are considered to be more silimar to and in greater
agreement with a give president than other agencies. These updated theories will
then be tested using an expansive data set covering individual appointments to
executive agencies and independent regulatory commissions between 1981 and 2010.

With regards to broader impacts, the results of this study may be of interest to
policy makers. The data developed in this project will be made available to the
large scholarly community and the public.