* 1123629
* De Facto States in World Politics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Douglas Lemke, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2015
* USD 234,947.00

This project enriches understanding of when civil wars are likely to occur and
of whether and under what conditions war contributes to state making, that is,
the construction of effective political order. Existing research on the onset of
civil war focuses only on official governments. Current research incorporates no
information about groups likely to rebel. Theories about state making assert
that war and preparation for war are important elements of the process by which
effective governance is created. And yet extant empirical assessments of the
proposition that wars help make states are deeply flawed: the political
organizations that do not succeed are omitted from analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In both of these areas of research, the gaps in our
knowledge stem from the fact that existing datasets only contain information
about official states. What is lacking is information about de facto states,
defined as political organizations governing recognizable, populated
territories, but lacking universal diplomatic recognition. Examples include
Abkhazia, Somaliland, and the Turkish Republic of North Cyprus. Many and perhaps
even most civil wars occur because a de facto state has arisen within the
territory recognized as governed by some official state. The war is then an
effort either to protect the independence of the de facto state (as occurred
when Eritrea won its civil war against Ethiopia) or to re-assert the sovereignty
of the official state over its territory (as occurred when Sri Lanka eliminated
the last pockets of Tamil independence). Importantly, it is not uncommon for a
de facto state to emerge without subsequent violence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project generates a dataset on de facto states and permits identification of a
population of potential rebels?groups that did and some that did not wage war
against official governments. With that dataset, the researcher is equipped to
test arguments about the onset of civil war that combine information about both
governments and rebels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promises to remake
the empirical study of civil wars. The de facto state dataset also has the
potential to remake the study of state making. Both official states and de facto
states strive to maintain and increase their political control over their
territories. Many theories assert that war is helpful to state makers because it
provides them with a justification to extract more resources from society, which
are then used to increase the government's political control. The ultimate
failure of political control occurs when a state maker is eliminated and ceases
to exist. However, official states, at least since the creation of the United
Nations, almost never meet this fate. Hence existing state making research that
considers only official states necessarily is incomplete: it includes no cases
of state making failure and so cannot determine whether war advances or detracts
from state making. De facto states, in contrast, frequently are eliminated. The
dataset of de facto states will finally allow analysis of both successes and
failures, and will permit the first ever critical test of the hypothesis that
war participation and war outcomes advance state making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has several broader implications.
Understanding the conditions under which civil wars erupt and the conditions
under which effective forms of governance can be established throughout a given
territory stand as pressing questions in international politics today. This
project sheds new light on those fundamental questions. In addition, the project
will help train the next generation of researchers by involving a team of
undergraduate research in every step of the project.