* 1123978
* Collaborative Research: Stable isotope investigation of Fe oxide reactivity and natural isotope fractionation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michelle Scherer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 259,844.00

Iron is well known to change its oxidation state, where, for example, iron metal
(Fe0) rapidly oxidizes to ?rust? in the form of Fe3+ oxides and hydroxides. The
reverse may occur, where, for example, microbial processes may reduce Fe3+ oxide
and hydroxide minerals to Fe2+ minerals or aqueous solutions. These changes,
termed ?redox? transformations, profoundly affect the reactivity of iron oxide
and hydroxide particles, which in turn may dramatically change the behavior of
elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus through changes in the
absorption properties. Redox transformations affect the reactivity of iron oxide
and hydroxide minerals, particularly in nanoparticles (defined as particles that
have diameters in the nanometer range ? one-billionth of a meter). It is now
recognized that nanoparticles are ubiquitous in the environment and represent
one of the major means by which chemical reactions
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work supported by this collaborative grant will
bring together researchers and students from geology and engineering, applying a
unique isotopic approach to understanding the reactivity of nanoparticulate iron
oxides and hydroxides. By studying the spectral properties and relative
abundance of the different isotopes of Fe (54Fe, 56Fe, and 57Fe), this work will
provide a fingerprint for changes in chemical reactivity of the minerals
goethite and magnetite, two very common iron minerals in the environment. The
work will study the impact of particle size and chemical composition on particle
reactivity. These results will in turn have direct application to studies of
paleoclimate, environmental remediation, agricultural practices, and water
quality.