* 1123291
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Democratic Accountability in International Relations:  Domestic Pressures and Constraints for Coercive Foreign Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Nehemia Geva, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Do citizens in democracies hold their leaders accountable for foreign policy
promises and actions? How and how much do citizen preferences and expectations
constrain the actions of national leaders in international crises? These
questions are of obvious importance in a democracy. Scholars and policy makers
alike have highlighted the role that democratic accountability mechanisms play
in constraining the foreign policies of democratic states. Yet no consensus
exists as to the specific role that constituents' preferences play when it comes
to fomenting or restraining the use of coercive foreign policies. Scholars have
often assumed the nature of public preferences and have devoted insufficient
attention to identifying empirically what domestic audiences expect for national
action are in times of international crises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to redress those shortcomings. The project proposes a model that
integrates two arguments about democratic accountability that are present in
extant research on international relations but have not yet been linked
together. The first school focuses on the extent to which a leader represents
constituents' substantive foreign policy preferences, and contends that when an
executive acts contrary to popular preferences, she will lose support. The
second school maintains that executives who back down after committing to a
course of foreign policy action are held accountable as constituents prefer
consistent leaders. This project proposes that the effects of both sets of
public preferences interact with each other. Citizens' preference for consistent
leaders who implement the foreign policy threats to which they publicly commit
can be very influential in determining popular support for the executive in
times of international crisis. This is not always the case, however, for
executive approval is not exclusively a product of executive statements and
actions. When voters learn about these statements and actions in a time of
international crisis, they also have a priori expectations of what types of
foreign policies their nation should pursue. Thus the researcher posits that,
against the received wisdom, executives might be advised to make public foreign
policy announcements in times of international conflict. If leaders stay silent
when constituents expect otherwise, they may lose vital support in a time of
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project empirically investigates its argument
by conducting experiments and cross-national analyses in two of the globe's most
prominent democracies, the United States and the United Kingdom. The use of
experiments probes the micro-foundations of individuals' reactions to executive
action (and inaction) in times of international conflict. The experiments are
complemented by cross-national statistical examination of military and economic
foreign policy actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has several broader
implications. This project enhances understanding of how domestic factors
influence the initiation of military interventions and the imposition of
economic sanctions. Comprehending these dynamics in public opinion can shed
light on when domestic audiences will support or oppose costly foreign policies
in times of international conflict. By advancing knowledge of the impact and
import of citizen opinion for foreign policy, the project enriches the general
understanding of how democracy works.