* 1123931
* ANTIBACTERIAL MINERAL MAPPING: A NEW ECONOMIC GEOLOGY
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2017
* Lynda Williams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2017
* USD 449,755.00

With strong evidence from exploratory research supporting that certain natural
clay minerals are effective antimicrobial agents, this research will examine the
geological environment controlling formation and stability of antibacterial
mineral deposits and further explore the antibacterial mechanism. The primary
goal is to delineate the scientific basis by which natural clay minerals are
able to kill bacteria and promote healing, therefore validating the use of
natural clays as an economical treatment for bacterial infections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A detailed field map of antibacterial minerals in one
deposit will be constructed to identify antibacterial zones. The mineralogy of
this deposit will be compared to other antibacterial clay samples worldwide,
with statistical analysis used to identify the principal components in common.
Antibacterial testing of the identified mineralogical/geochemical components
will be performed on Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria representative of
common infectious diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results could have broad-
reaching applications in topical antimicrobial dressings; wound care management,
personal care, and animal care markets. Using a variety of geochemical,
mineralogical and microbiological approaches to assess the mineral-microbe
interactions, our results will provide insights to the chemical conditions
controlling the mineral induced bactericide. Finally, we will use ultra-high
resolution (50nm) ion imaging (NanoSIMS) to show where biomolecules within a
single cell are being altered by bactericidal reactions. These results may lead
to new designs for controlling antibiotic-resistant infections and diseases for
which there are no known therapeutic agents.