* 1123226
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Implication of Threat and Threat Perception on Political Activity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* James Fowler, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Do individual differences alter the effects of the political environment on
turnout? Specifically, does a genetic sensitivity to threat condition the way
that exposure to political contention affects turnout? Recent work in the
genopolitics literature suggests taht the answer is "yes" and that fundamental
differences between us interact with our environmental exposures to affect our
propensity to vote. However, previous work has not tested the specific ways
through which exposure to contention effects turnout, due in part to the
assumption that - once demographics, political preferences, and political
interest levels have been controlled for - the environment should have a uniform
effect on people's decision. Consequently, little work has been tested which
individual differences might alter the effect of environmental influences on an
individual's decision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the
relationship between political contention and turnout and will provide a
political explanation for why genes have been shown to affect political
outcomes. This study theorizes that individual differences in people's
sensitivity to threat moderate the effects of living in a politically
contentious environment. Competitive elections provide the opportunity for being
exposed to contentious polictics. Some people may respond to the perceived
threat with increase anxiety, while others are relatively unaffected.
Differences in threat sensitivity and anxiety are in large part explained by
biological differences, and therefore suggest that is is these same biological
differences that predispose a person toward responding to political contention
with increased anxiety. Furthermore, for these people, experiencing anxiety
about politics will have the effect of suppressing their
turnout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This theory is tested using a laboratory
experiment that varies respondents' exposure to political contention and
measures their emotions based on their physiological repsonse to the experimetn
treatment. Data about genetic and psychological predispositions toward threat
sensitivity have already been measured for the experimental sample, which will
allow me to measure differences in response to the treatment based on
differences in threat sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research topic is
extremely relevant in today's contentious poltical environment. Political
polarization has intensified the consequences of people's emotional reactions to
political disagreement, and it is important for political scientists to identify
the causal mechanisms that relate political contention to political behavior.