* 1123885
* Explaining Low Fertility in Postindustrial Societies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mary Brinton, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 168,988.00

SES-1123885&lt;br/&gt;Mary C. Brinton&lt;br/&gt;Harvard
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Explaining Low Fertility in
Postindustrial Societies&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Very low fertility rates have
come to characterize a broad range of postindustrial societies from Europe to
East Asia, with the average number of children per woman dropping to as low as
1.2 in a number of countries. This comparative project addresses the question of
why some societies have experienced such a dramatic drop in fertility while
others have maintained fertility rates around 2.0, much closer to the level
necessary for the population to naturally replace itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Rates far below the level of population replacement portend a range of future
problems for the societies experiencing them. These problems include a shortage
of prime-age workers, slower economic growth, and increasing government
expenditures to support an expanding elderly population. In response to very low
fertility rates, many governments have developed workplace policies to
facilitate work-family balance, especially for women. But in many countries
including those in East Asia, these policies have done little to raise
fertility. The public policy importance of what demographers have come to call
"lowest-low fertility" calls for a concerted effort to understand the social,
economic, and cultural forces that have led to steep fertility declines in the
postindustrial world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project posits that in
societies with rigid cultural definitions of family and gender roles, large
numbers of young men and women delay marriage and childbearing when economic
conditions are depressed. This occurs because young men are unable to fulfill
the normative expectations of being the family breadwinner. Delayed marriage and
childbearing result in very low fertility rates. These forces are most evident
in the countries of Southern Europe and East Asia. Accordingly, the project will
conduct semi-structured in-depth interviews of urban men and women age 25-34 in
Spain and Japan, two countries that respectively represent these regions, and in
the U.S. as a comparison case. The principal hypotheses are: 1) the young men
most likely to postpone marriage and childbearing will be those who are
experiencing economic distress (unstable employment or unemployment) while
simultaneously holding highly conservative conceptions of family and gender
roles; 2) the young women most likely to postpone marriage and childbearing will
be those who are experiencing relative success in the labor market but who hold
highly conservative conceptions of women's proper role in the family; and 3)
these forces will be present to a much larger degree in Spain and Japan than in
the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will generate a rich understanding of young people's marriage and fertility
aspirations and the barriers they perceive to attaining these goals in two
societies experiencing very low fertility (Spain and Japan) and one society
maintaining moderate fertility. The project will provide deeper knowledge than
existing studies of low fertility based entirely on survey data. The knowledge
generated by the project will be disseminated to policymakers in low-fertility
postindustrial societies to inform public policies to facilitate family
formation.