* 1123021
* Firm Size and the Business Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Giuseppe Moscarini, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 182,880.00

This award funds research on the business cycle dynamics of the relationship
between employer size and job growth. The business cycle dynamics of firms of
different sizes and productivities are important for fundamental issues in
macroeconomics. For example, how real wages respond to aggregate shocks, whether
hiring frictions or credit frictions have a larger impact on firm growth, and
whether or not small businesses are indeed 'the engine of job creation' are all
issues that depend on these dynamic effects of the business cycle.&lt;br/&gt;The
PI and his team have already documented that employment in larger firms is more
cyclical than employment in small firms (both in the U.S. and in other developed
countries). They have developed a model that explains this observation that
depends on turnover frictions. The funds awarded here will be used to expand
this model to include a number of additional important determinants of firm
size. The team will then test the model using restricted use business
longitudinal microdata available through the Census Bureau. The empirical
analysis will also provide additional robustness checks of the original
empirical finding, will verify whether high paying firms (and not just larger
firms) have more cyclical employment, and will also use business cycle
indicators as a way to improve estimates of the entry of new
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings insights from labor economics to
bear on important questions in macroeconomics. The broader impacts are
substantial, especially because public policy on small business often starts
with the assumption that these businesses are the engine of job creation.
Finally, a number of graduate students will be trained in the methods necessary
to work with sensitive microdata at a secure data facility.