* 1123963
* Investigating Cell Adhesion During Heart Tube Formation in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sunita Kramer, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 586,607.00

Formation of vascular structures such as blood vessels involves a series of
complex cell shape changes. Blood vessels are essentially small tubes formed by
a monolayer of endothelial cells enclosing a central space or lumen. How do
groups of unorganized endothelial cells migrate to their proper location in the
developing embryo and then arrange themselves into a linear tube with a central
lumen? While experiments in cultured cells have led to a speculative model for
lumen formation, surprisingly the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible
for lumen formation in the developing organism remain relatively unknown. The
heart of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, provides a simple and elegant
genetic model to discover the molecules and mechanisms of vascular assembly and
lumen formation. During Drosophila heart tube development, the alignment of
cardiac cells at the dorsal midline of the embryo is the first of two important
steps in heart tube assembly. Following alignment, these cells migrate to the
dorsal midline to form a linear tube with a central lumen. Dr. Kramer has
established that the guidance molecule Slit and its receptors Robo and Robo2 are
required during both steps of heart tube assembly. During the first step, Slit,
Robo and Robo2 are required to maintain adhesion between cardiac cells during
their dorsal migration. During the second step, Dr. Kramer has found that Slit
and Robo are also required to negatively regulate E-Cadherin-mediated cell
adhesion between neighboring cardiac cells, allowing for the formation of a
lumen. However, the precise mechanism by which Slit and Robo are regulating cell
adhesion in the heart has yet to be determined. To address this problem, Dr.
Kramer will carefully analyze heart tube formation in embryos that are mutant
for these genes as well as use the power of Drosophila genetics to identify
other proteins that are functioning with Slit and Robo receptors during cell
adhesion. It is highly likely that these mechanisms are conserved and that the
outcomes of this work will shed light on lumen formation in vertebrate vascular
structures. The broader impacts of this work rest on the fact that the fruit fly
is a powerful and tractable model system not only for the study of vascular
development, but also as a teaching tool for training PhD students and for
introducing undergraduate students to basic science. Dr. Kramer has a strong
record of involving undergraduate and graduate students in her research and is
committed to teaching and training students from diverse backgrounds.