* 1123802
* The Response of Insects to Climate  Change in the Eocene through Oligocene of Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Dena Smith, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 09/30/2016
* USD 159,688.00

The Response of Insects to Climate Change in the Eocene through Oligocene of
Colorado&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dena Smith, University of Colorado,
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1123802&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use the fossil record to examine the effects of a dramatic climatic
cooling event that occurred during the Eocene through the earliest Oligocene, to
understand how insect communities respond to climate change. During the
approximately 23 million year time interval examined in this study, regional
temperatures are estimated to have decreased by approximately 15.5oC, while
marine temperatures are estimated to have declined by approximately 10oC. This
study will determine whether the timing and magnitude of insect response to
climate change is more similar to the response seen in the continental record of
plants and mammals (suggesting a lag in continental climate change) or in
keeping with changes seen in marine taxa (providing support for correlated
change in marine and continental systems). Specifically, PI will examine the
timing and magnitude of diversity change (levels of species richness) and
compositional change (levels of turnover). PI also will examine how the rate of
climate change affects insect community response and she will investigate which
characteristics of insects will affect their response. That is, how strongly do
ecological variables, such as dietary preference and climate tolerance affect
the sensitivity of an insect to climate changes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using
the fossil record to document the effects of climate change on organisms, we can
gain a better understanding of how recent and expected climate change will
affect individual taxa and their overall communities. Although the proposed
study focuses on insects, how these insects responded to climate change will be
more broadly applicable to our understanding of how the timing and magnitude of
species response of continental and marine organisms may differ. In addition,
this study illustrates the great value of collaboration between scientists and
amateurs. As such, a local website will be developed for professionals,
educators, citizen scientists and the general public. Included on the site will
be an interactive key to identify the most common fossil insect groups and
modules that will be used to enhance the University of Colorado?s teacher
training programs in paleontology. The site will also highlight the
contributions made by citizen scientists and will provide a forum for greater
collaboration. Engaging graduate and undergraduate students in field based
research and providing training in insect ecology and taxonomy, curation and
science education also will be important aspects of the proposed project.