* 1123733
* Mass-47 Paleothermometry in Deep Geologic Time: A Test for Episodes of Extreme Warmth in the Phanerozoic
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Kyger Lohmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2015
* USD 224,755.00

The role of atmospheric CO2 as a greenhouse gas, and its impact on today?s
global temperature, is well established. Based on models and geochemical
proxies, researchers propose that during Earth?s history, CO2 concentrations may
have been orders of magnitude higher than today?s levels. This coupled with
measurements of d18O carbonate minerals formed in shallow marine settings
representing 100?s of millions of years of Earth history, has been used as prime
evidence for an exceedingly hot Earth with ocean temperatures in excess of 50
Â°C. A fundamental assumption of these studies, however, is the constancy of the
d18O composition of the seawater. Rather than requiring an Earth with
unrealistically high surface temperatures,an alternative hypothesis is that the
composition of seawater has varied through the span of geologic time (billions
to millions of years) and that the d18O record of carbonate reflects such
changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The purpose of this study is to test this
hypothesis: Is the d18O marine carbonate record primarily controlled by
temperature, or alternatively, by first-order shifts in marine water
composition. The analytical approach will utilize a newly developed
paleothermometer which is based on the abundance of uniquely bounded isotopes of
13C and 18O (clumped isotopes) that are present in carbonate minerals
precipitated from water. Unlike the conventional d18O paleothermometer, the
clumped isotope measurement of temperature is independent of the water
composition, and thus, allows simultaneous calculation of both water temperature
and composition. A unique approach of this study is the use of crystalline
carbonate that forms beneath the freshwater table, and as such, records the mean
annual air temperature of a region. These carbonates are chemically and
mineralogically stable and should preserve a consistent and reliable record
which can be used to reconstruct past temperatures over the broad spectrum of
geologic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; If the findings of our research indicate
that exceeding high CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere are not directly
coupled to Earth surface temperature, this will have a significant impact by
modifying the reference frame of how we predict changes in Earth?s future
temperature based on computer simulations. Other researchers have suggested such
a decoupling of CO2 and temperature in deep geologic time and this study
provides an empirical test of this hypothesis. Resetting of this reference frame
for climate modelers would directly affect their estimates of the magnitude of
future climate change in response to the rising concentration of atmospheric
greenhouse gases caused by the continuing use of fossil fuel energy sources.