* 1123512
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute: A Systems Biology Approach to Understanding Mechanisms of Organismal Evolution; Montevideo, Uruguay; April 16-25, 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Ida Chow, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

1123512&lt;br/&gt;Levine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE), will take place during April 16-25, 2012 at the Universidad de la
República and the Institut Pasteur in Montevideo, Uruguay. Organized by Dr.
Michael S. Levine and Dr. Ida Chow from the Society for Developmental Biology
(SDB) in Bethesda, Maryland, the institute will focus on a systems biology
approach to understand the mechanisms of organismal evolution. This PASI is part
of a collaborative program between the SDB and the Latin American Society for
Developmental Biology (LASDB) to train junior scientists on integrating
bioinformatics and systems biology approaches with traditional experimentation
to further our understanding of evolutionary processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increased sophistication of computational methods,
whole-genome analysis, and high-resolution imaging technologies provide concrete
opportunities for cross-disciplinary approaches to elucidate the mechanisms of
Darwinian evolution. Using these cutting edge tools and innovative approaches on
different model and indigenous organisms, this PASI will contribute to the
training of future scientists in the Americas. Participants with different
backgrounds?from computer and mathematical sciences to biology and chemistry?who
are interested in evolutionary biology will be considered and the most qualified
will be selected, with care to maintain diversity on training, research themes
and background within the student population. Participants will stay on (April
26-29) to attend the 6th International Meeting of the LASDB, where they will be
able to present their own work to a larger international audience.