* 1123673
* Dissertation Research: Social Change, Media, and Well-Being: Insights from Intergenerational Comparisons in Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Beth Conklin, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 16,550.00

Jamie Shenton (Doctoral student, Vanderbilt University), under the guidance of
Dr. Beth A. Conklin, will investigate indigenous women's changing body images in
Mondaña, a Quichua community in the Ecuadorian Amazon. As a result of dramatic
changes in the 21st century, political and professional horizons for indigenous
women have widened promoting their empowerment. Access to a wide range of new
media and commercial influences have presented new physical role models. For
young Quichua women, these new forms of self-presentation compete with the more
"traditional" identities of older generations of women who define themselves
through domestic activities focused on producing crops, food, and children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through intensive interviews, participant observation, and
quantitative body image assessments, this research aims to document (1) how new
media and consumer options influence indigenous women's relations to their
bodies; and (2) how gender ideals and roles are changing as young Quichua women
in Mondaña respond to opportunities for education and careers on one hand, and
new models of femininity on the other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates theories of media influences and consumer culture as homogenizing
forces. However, anthropological research shows that people in developing
countries interpret media messages and foreign ideas to fit their own cultural
values and personal identities. This study aims to understand how Quichua women
interpret and pursue beauty images in cultural context. The significance of the
research lies in how body image concerns compete with or complement other values
and aspirations as young women - a critical source of human capital - make
educational, career and ultimately health choices that will shape the future of
their families and communities.