* 1123580
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Network Effects on Coordination and Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Yang Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 05/31/2013
* USD 8,700.00

In this project the Principal investigators will investigate the social network
effects on coordination and cooperation. While most existing work provides
insights on the influence of group size on coordination and cooperation, we
examine the role of group structure. First we will analyze a laboratory
experiment on a coordination game in which each player engages with an
exogenously connected ?local? subset of the player population, the pattern of
connections defining a social network. The main research question we will
address is How does the social network structure affect coordination behavior?
We identify sources of influence on coordination from both global network (the
density of overall network) and local network (the connectedness of
individuals). In our experiment, both full-coordination and no-coordination are
pooling equilibria in all laboratory networks, while in one case there is also a
separating equilibrium, where players coordinate only if they have an enough
number of local social links. In a pilot study we observe nearly complete
coordination in denser networks but less so in sparser networks. Via a
laboratory public goods game, we will study the impact of social network
architecture on cooperation. Our research foci are the fairness and social
welfare in equilibria as affected by network configurations. To analyze the data
collected from experiments, we shall apply various statistical techniques
including nonparametric methods and logit regressions (adjusted to individual
heterogeneity). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research
examines how the social network, which determines ?who plays the game with
whom?, affects the outcome of coordination and cooperation. Our results might
guide Internet service and platform providers in developing effective online
social networks to promote service and products, and assist policy makers in
seeking for efficient network layouts to facilitate the spread of goods or
activities that are socially beneficial. The products of the proposed study will
be made publicly available for research and educational uses at no cost.