* 1123483
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Financial Nationalism, Banking Systems, and Citizenship: The Case of Catalan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Alan Klima, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 16,000.00

University of California-Davis doctoral student Jorge Nunez, supervised by Dr.
Alan Klima, will undertake research on the relationship between culture,
nationalism, and banking system reform. The research will be conducted in the
industrial Catalonia region of Spain, which is appropriate because in 2010, with
the aim of solving liquidity problems derived from the 2008 global financial
crises, the Generalitat of Catalonia launched a public debt package sold
directly to citizens in the form of bonds. The project was named "Seny," which
means sanity and good judgment in Catalan and appeared to address Catalan
citizens active in a long-standing political struggle for Catalonia
independence. Despite various critiques coming from mass media, social movements
and political parties, the Generalitat's strategy was a successful financial
operation creating an over-demand twice the size of the initial offer. The
objective of this research is to study what made Catalan citizens wager on this
risky investment and what more general lessons this case might offer about
nationalism and debt reform in the global economy.

Jorge Nunez will conduct fieldwork in Barcelona, Tarragona, and Girona as well
as the French Catalan region. He will employ a combination of ethnographic
methods including in-depth interviews, focus groups and participant observation
in order to gather empirical data amongst key actors, such as public servants,
financial experts, and citizen investors.

This project will contribute to the understanding of emerging forms of financial
nationalism in the aftermath of the sovereign debt crisis in the Euro zone. By
investigating the financial system to shed light into the issue of nationalism
in Catalonia, this study hopes to produce new conceptual tools to look at the
cultural articulations of citizenship, nationalism and the banking system. This
research will also add empirical information about processes of financial
integration in an era of regional monetary unification. Funding this research
supports the education of a graduate student.