* 1123143
* Dissertation Research: Ingenuity, Infrastructure, and Energy Use in Postsocialist Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Michael McGovern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 3,001.00

Yale University doctoral candidate Michael Degani, supervised by Dr. Michael
McGovern, will undertake research on how urban residents in rapidly growing
cities in developing nations access basic services from unreliable state
institutions, and fashion daily life within material infrastructures defined by
shortage and instability. He will conduct a case study of the social and
technical arrangements of electricity access in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania's major
urban center. As cellphones, lights, and electronic media come to characterize
properly modern life in Dar es Salaam, the electricity needed to power these
technologies has become ever more expensive and unreliable. Two decades of
protracted neoliberal reform have weakened the national power utility, and
consumers suffer increased tariffs, aging physical infrastructure and extended
rationing. Though some contemplate solar power or other off-grid solutions,
others risk theft, piracy, or meter-tampering, often through collaborations with
part-time or retrenched state technicians, colloquially known as 'hatchets.'
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Degani will collect data from two sources: income-
generating activities of technicians and electricity consumption in three urban
neighborhoods. Technician activities will comprise financial logs contextualized
by life histories, participant-observation and in-depth case studies of specific
transactions. Data on electricity consumption will comprise month long energy
diaries, interviews and participant-observation among 10 households in three
neighborhoods with high, medium and low levels of electrical infrastructure.
These two types of data will allow him to analyze the strategies, meanings and
experience of electrification in both its distribution and
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to theorizing the
relationship between infrastructure systems, unregulated economies and the
production of urban space and time in a postsocialist setting. It will also
contribute to understanding how energy use is invested with cultural and
political meanings in a global context increasingly dominated by market models
of delivery. Funding this research also supports the education of a graduate
student