* 1123918
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Traditional kinship structures and European-derived diseases at Mission San Diego, California 1775-1845
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Carolyn Orbann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 9,362.00

Doctoral student Carolyn Orbann (University of Missouri), under the guidance of
Dr. Lisa Sattenspiel, will investigate the effects of traditional kinship
structures on disease-related morbidity and mortality in a population of
nineteenth century indigenous Californians at Mission Basilica San Diego de
Alcala. Research will focus on assessing the stability of traditional kin
structures within the mission and testing whether individuals with more kin at
the mission experienced different risks of infection and/or death during acute
infectious disease epidemics than did individuals with fewer kin. Research
questions will be addressed through family and lineage reconstruction and
development and analysis of an agent-based computer simulation model. Family and
lineage reconstruction will be accomplished using vital records from Mission San
Diego sacramental registers and historical and ethnographic information. The
model to be used in this study takes into account daily activities, social
contacts and age- and sex-structured behaviors. The model population is based on
Mission vital statistics data; model parameters are based on available
historical, ethnographic, and epidemiological information. Model results will be
compared with documented mortality patterns to shed light on the possible cause
of an observed mortality spike in the early 1800s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will result in an in-depth understanding of the impact of missionization
on an understudied population (the Kumeyaay) and will contribute to the wider
base of knowledge on the consequences of European colonization of North America.
While the cultural attributes of the Kumeyaay have been studied previously,
there have been few attempts to understand the direct impact of introduced
disease as a cause of population decline. This study also provides greater
knowledge of the roots of contemporary Kumeyaay and Latino populations in
Southern California. In addition, the model developed in this project can be
adapted for use in the study of disease in other kin-based populations with
limited access to Western medicine. Funding this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.