* 1123666
* Undergraduate Research Assistance: Data on Human Rights Violations.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Will Moore, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 23,685.00

This research addresses four overarching questions of clear importance in world
politics today. When state torture occurs, what agency of the government
tortures? What is the state response to allegations of torture? Who is tortured?
What types of torture are used? The project tackles all four questions, but is
focused particularly on the first two. The research seeks to map the impact of
political institutions on the practice of torture and especially upon the
elimination of torture as a practice. Building such a map requires that the
researchers identify the specific government agencies involved and begin to
explore the impact of both political institutions and specific policies upon the
elimination of torture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses Amnesty
International (AI) reports to collect data on the extent to which the military,
police officers, prison officials, and other government agencies ill-treat or
torture those in their custody. The project grew out of the investigator?s prior
research finding that democracies were more likely than autocratic governments
to eliminate the practice of torture only when there were no groups using
violence to challenge the government. The study also found that institutional
separation of powers made governments less likely to eliminate the practice of
torture. Although this work identified important linkages between political
institutions and the practice of torture, it was limited due to the crude data
available about the extent to which governments fail to meet their obligation
not to torture. In the investigator's prior NSF-funded work, more than 20
undergraduates and several graduate students read AI's publications for the
years 1995-2005 and coded data on a wide variety of variables about the extent
to which governments engaged in torture, investigated allegations of torture,
and punished those found guilty of torturing prisoners. The result is a large
database about the torture and ill-treatment practices of
governments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new project converts the raw data as
collected into user-friendly data that can be accessed on the Internet. The raw
data is being assembled into two formats, one of which is widely used throughout
the scholarly literature on conflict, cooperation, and human rights, and the
other of which is gaining increasing acceptance as a valuable alternative to the
standard bearer. Undergraduate research assistants will be hired to perform the
majority of these tasks. Florida State has an undergraduate research program
that identifies, recruits, and trains students to participate in faculty
research as preparation for pursuing honors theses and provides them with
background to apply effectively to graduate programs or pursue other
opportunities in which research plays a role. This project will thus contribute
to the development of the nation's scientific infrastructure by providing the
next generation of researchers with experience as undergraduates. The publicly
available, user-friendly database will serve as a source of information for a
variety of other analyses of interest to researchers and human rights advocates
alike.