* 1123377
* Collaborative Research: Political Integration of the Formative Period Rio Viejo State, Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Sarah Barber, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 92,471.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Barber and Joyce will direct two
years of interdisciplinary archaeological research in the lower Río Verde Valley
on the Pacific coast of Oaxaca, Mexico. The research team includes U.S.,
Mexican, and Native American scholars specializing in archaeology, geology, and
physical anthropology who together will examine the processes of early state
formation and collapse at the site of Río Viejo. The Río Viejo state was one of
more than a dozen interacting nascent states that developed in the highlands and
lowlands of Oaxaca between 400 B.C. and A.D. 250. Despite their contemporaneity
and proximity, however, these early states varied significantly in terms of
geographic extent, longevity, scale of urbanism, and their long-term historical
trajectories. Río Viejo was one of the largest of these states based on both
population at the political center and geographic area but was also one of the
shortest-lived, collapsing after only 150 years. It was also one of only two
known early states to develop in Oaxaca's coastal lowlands. The goal of the
project is to determine the form of rulership and the degree of political
integration for the Río Viejo state as means of explaining why some early states
endured and others did not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make valuable
intellectual contributions in terms of both data and theory. The data generated
by this project will provide the first robust description of political
organization for an early state on Mesoamerica's Pacific coast west of the
Soconusco and will inform broader debates in Mesoamerica and beyond on how
social factors influenced the historical trajectories of ancient states. With
its proximity to other important nascent states, such as Monte Albán in the
Valley of Oaxaca, the Río Viejo state was integral to broader social changes
like state formation and collapse that are of ongoing interest to Mesoamerican
archaeologists and social scientists more generally. Because the research
focuses on rulers and political integration, data are required from the Río
Viejo's administrative center located on its monumental central acropolis. The
project will greatly expand knowledge of the uses to which the acropolis was put
by: 1) identifying facilities associated with governance such as palaces or
assembly halls; 2) determining whether there was political oversight of economic
actions like production, redistribution, and market exchange; 3) determining the
degree to which the general population was involved in government-sponsored
rituals; and 4) quantifying the amount of labor needed to construct government
facilities. Fieldwork will include archaeological excavation and ground
penetrating radar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include the generation
of new data that will expand knowledge of early states. Taken together, Oaxaca's
macro-regional dataset of early states will offer unparalleled insight into
divergent political trajectories in a heterogeneous environment unlike that of
the more environmentally homogenous southern Maya lowlands or Mesopotamia. The
project will develop scientific resources in United States and Mexico by
training graduate and undergraduate students at three U.S. and two Mexican
universities while creating new international collaborations between U.S. and
Mexican scholars.