* 1123262
* Organizational Determinants of Compliance with Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2014
* Don Grant II, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 11/30/2014
* USD 108,839.00

SES - 1123262 &lt;br/&gt;Don S. Grant II&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organizational Determinants of Compliance with
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Coal
utility and oil refinery industries are thought to be responsible for nearly 40
percent of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the U.S. While industry-level
trends have been studied widely, we know little about the role of individual
facilities or plants in GHG emission trends. This project addresses three
research questions: Which coal-based power plants and oil refineries have the
highest emission levels and emit the most GHGs per job? Which sets of
organizational factors cause variation between GHG emissions at the plant level?
How can we explain differences in responsiveness of plants to regulations at the
state level?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, this project will
use a unique data set on individual facilities and their GHG discharges, to be
released by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The project will employ
multivariate techniques as well a fuzzy set analytic methods that can determine
which combinations of organizational factors are associated with differences in
emission outcomes. Consistent with research on environmental
disproportionalities and organizational configurations, the project tests four
hypotheses: 1) GHG emissions and emissions-to-job ratios are unevenly
distributed across facilities within the coal utility and oil refinery
industries, 2) Those facilities with extreme GHG emission levels and emissions-
to-jobs ratios share certain combinations of organizational characteristics, 3)
These organizational "profiles" exert significant effects on GHG emission levels
and emissions-to-jobs ratios even after controlling for other relevant factors,
and 4) The response of facilities to different kinds of state-level climate
change policies and regulations depends on their organizational
profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This innovative project is the first of its kind
and scope to study the causes of GHG emission outcomes at the facility or plant
level. Analyses rely on heretofore unavailable data on the organizational
sources of regulatory change and the effects of regulatory policies at the site
of production. The proposed project will also pioneer a new possibility for
secondary research connecting GHG emissions data with other information on the
characteristics of facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this study may be used by future scholars to
systematize their research and select the most causally relevant cases for
comparative case studies. Findings from this project may also inform future
environmental policies and regulations at state and federal levels, both with
regard to GHG emissions as well as other environmental pollutants. Findings may
also help federal officials decide which facilities are most likely to comply
with which national regulatory standards. Moreover, findings may be of interest
to industry, as it may become possible to target future regulatory initiatives
at specific subsets of plants rather than devising regulations to which all
plants in the coal and oil industries are subject. Finally, project results
could support industry initiatives to optimize self-regulation and environmental
performance of member facilities.