* 1123880
* Modeling Floodplain Dynamics:  Can the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta Keep Up with the 21st Century Sea Level Rise?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Irina Overeem, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 315,000.00

Modeling Floodplain Dynamics: Can the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta keep up with 21st
Century Sea Level Rise? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deltaic lowlands are vulnerable to
sea-level rise, but whether the floodplains will ultimately drown depends on a
balance of controls: sedimentation rate in the river and coastal floodplain
under the influence of river floods and storm surges, subsidence of the land,
and sea-level rise. We propose a computer modeling approach to get 0a grip on
the effect of climatic forcing on river floodplain and coastal lowlands
sedimentation rates. The Ganges-Brahmaputra Basin has been selected because its
floodplain sedimentation rates are well studied. Reconstructions show that
sedimentation was more than double 7000-4000 years ago when the Indian summer
monsoonal rains were more intense. Recently, this dataset has been expanded to
include sedimentation rates in the cyclone-affected parts of the tidal Ganges
delta. There is still a huge gap between the level of sophistication of climate
and atmospheric model output, and the ability of sedimentation models to take
such output and model delta and coastal change. The Community Surface Dynamics
Modeling System (CSDMS) Modeling Tool now offers software coupling technology
and we will use this new tool to link three existing models: a upstream river
sediment production model, a floodplain sedimentation model and a tidal-plain
coastal sedimentation model. The study aims at exploring the response of the
Ganges-Brahmaputra river system to a future sea-level rise and increase in
monsoonal intensity, flooding, and tropical cyclones that are currently
predicted in Community Climate System Model scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Ganges-Brahmaputra river and delta system of Bangladesh has featured in the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change studies as the prime example of
drowning lowlands under a globally rising sea level in the 21st century. 147
million people live in the delta in India and Bangladesh; it is one of the
poorest regions in the world. Ensemble climate model scenarios predict an 11%
enhanced monsoon resulting in increased flooding of the Ganges and Brahmaputra
Rivers. The models point to an enhanced monsoon intensity causing more cyclones
in the Bay of Bengal. An average of 20% of Bangladesh is seasonally flooded
under present-day conditions alone, and this area is projected to become
increasingly larger. Sediment is trapped in the both the river floodplain and
the coast due to flooding and storms. The interplay between rising sea level
versus increased river and storm surge flooding and increased sediment
accumulation has not been well studied. At 7000-4000 years ago the Ganges system
experienced an analogous scenario with sea level rise rates of 0.5 cm/yr, which
is similar to the high end of the predicted rate for the next century. At the
same time, the monsoonal regime was enhanced and the river sediment fluxes were
high. It is inferred from sediment cores that the two opposing forces balanced
and a stable coastline was maintained. The ancient delta system withstood a
20-30 m sea level rise. The proposed study integrates current understanding of
the Ganges-Brahmaputra System into a numerical modeling framework, and allows
the exploration of different controls for the analogue of the past. Theoretical
experiments will be used to illustrate the complex interplay of river and
coastal dynamics to the general public through the open-access Community Surface
Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) Educational Resources. A CSDMS clinic in 2012
is planned for (under)graduate students to discuss transdisciplinary aspects of
the vulnerability of deltas, and to run delta sedimentation model simulations
hands-on. The lectures and modeling excercises will all be made available for
teaching faculty worldwide.