* 1123268
* PC3: US-India Program for Pervasive Communications and Computing Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2011,12/31/2014
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2014
* USD 99,800.00

This project proposes to organize a series of two international workshopsthat
will bring together a relatively small (approximately 20) but focused and
diverse group of academic researchers from the US and India to discuss, develop,
and propose collaborative research projects in the area of pervasive computing
and communications. A major goal is to identify and develop bi-lateral
collaborative research projects, and then submit to the appropriate funding
agencies in the US and India. The first workshop will be organized in New Delhi,
India on March 10-11, 2011 and the second workshop will be held in Washington,
DC late June or early July, 2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two workshops and the
collaborative US-India research they will enable, will serve as an important
foundation for future collaborative international research activities in
information communication technologies (ICT). Pervasive computing and
communications touches on many fields of computing, including cyber-physical
systems (sensor networks; embedded systems; smart environments; sensor network
application areas including agriculture, water and weather), trustworthy
computing (systems security, homeland security, privacy), energy and
sustainability (smart grid, environmental monitoring, home monitoring); health-
care (personalized and smart health care technologies), and citizen science
(enabled by mobile smart phones with sensing, computing, and communication
capabilities). The workshops will serve as a testbed, where specific research
collaboration mechanisms can be tried. They will serve as an incubator,
providing an environment in which specific collaborations can take root and
begin to flourish. They will also serve as a training ground, for a diverse
future generation of internationally-focused ICT
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a time of increasing globalization and
inter-connectedness especially in areas of science and engineering such as
computing it is increasingly important that research activities and the training
of the next-generation of researchers also be international in scope. This
project will itself foster international collaboration through the workshops and
the subsequent collaborative research proposals generated by workshop
participants. Graduate and undergraduate students, in both the US and in India
would be involved in this collaborative research. More broadly, leveraging
lessons learned and successful collaborations begun, these workshops will serve
as foundation for more broadly-based international collaborations among
scientists and engineers in a global 21st century knowledge-based world in which
ICT plays an increasingly important role. Workshop reports will document
workshop findings and outcomes.