* 1123789
* Doctoral Dissertation Research In DRMS: An egocetric model of trust among strangers
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Joachim Krueger, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

This work adopts an interdisciplinary approach to examine trust, a topic with
far reaching consequences. Knowing when to trust others is an essential skill,
but little is known about the mental processes that lead to trust. This research
introduces a model to explain the decision making process underlying trust.
There are two critical factors a person considers when deciding to trust: the
potential outcomes (the costs and benefits of trusting) and the perspective of
the trusted party (how these people are likely to act if I trust them). The
central assumption of the model is that decision making is primarily egocentric:
people focus on the potential outcomes while perspective-taking plays a limited
or secondary role.

Two experiments examine both trusting behavior and the process of decision
making. Participants will play a series of economic trust games. The relevant
information in these games will be initially concealed and participants will
need to actively search in order to learn the consequences of their decisions.
The researchers record and analyze the order and duration in which people search
for different types of information. The first experiment will test if the
decision making process is egocentric; the second experiment will attempt to
reduce this egocentrism using a perspective-taking manipulation.