* 1123496
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Anti-Tobacco Policy and the Long Term Impacts of In-Utero Exposure to Cigarette Smoke
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* David Simon, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 06/30/2012
* USD 4,200.00

Numerous studies have shown that prenatal exposure to cigarette smoke harms
infant health, but is the damage to human capital permanent? We use cigarette
tax hikes and anti-tobacco campaigns to evaluate the long run effects of early
life exposure to anti-tobacco policy on child outcomes such as health and
education. We connect these results to the impact of these polices on parental
health behaviors such as smoking and drinking. In not considering how these
policies may improve child outcomes our current understanding may be
underestimating the benefits of anti-tobacco policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If one
could run a controlled experiment, one would randomly assign higher cigarette
prices and exposure to anti-tobacco media to a subset of families with a child
in-utero. Subsequently, one would have "treatment" and "control" groups and
could compare long term child outcomes between the two. In the absence of a
nationwide controlled experiment, we compare states which increased tobacco
taxes and launched tobacco media campaigns to those that did not as a natural
experiment. Between 1991 and 2003, there were 68 state excise tax hikes of 10
cents or more with an average tax hike of 33 cents per pack. In addition to tax
hikes, several states launched anti-tobacco campaigns. We make use of
proposition 99, passed in California in 1988, which directed revenue towards
anti-tobacco education, anti-tobacco media information drives, and encouraged
the creation of the state's clean "in-door" ordinances. To assess the impacts of
these polices on child outcomes we use health and child information from three
separate data sets: the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey, the American
Community Survey, and the National Health Interview Survey. Preliminary results
suggest large effects of in-utero exposure to excise taxes on lowering overall
education and health for children between the ages of 5-17, but non-significant
results on childhood asthma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first study to
connect the long term economic consequences of in-utero exposure to anti-tobacco
policy. Health economists have a long standing interest in how cigarette taxes
influence smoking and improve health and labor market outcomes. This study
offers additional evidence on how cigarette taxes affect health behavior with a
focus on the benefits gained by the smoker's child. Smoking during pregnancy is
a behavior associated with low-socio economic status mothers. Previous
literature shows that cigarette taxes impact low socioeconomic status parents
more. The analysis summarized here investigates if awareness policies regarding
the effects of tobacco can improve long term outcomes for low SES children by
changing the health behavior of their parents. To this end our study contributes
to our understanding of the intergenerational transmission of inequality. If
less in-utero exposure to cigarette smoke does improve a child's health and
education, then that child's social mobility would improve. Policies
specifically directed at stopping smoking during pregnancy could likewise help
improve a child's life chances and lower overall
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project potentially makes a broader
societal impact beyond contributing to understanding ways to ameliorate
intergenerational inequality. Policy makers must weigh the full welfare effects
of anti-tobacco policy. To do this, they need to account for both the costs and
benefits of the policy. If there exists undocumented health or educational gains
to the children of smokers, than anti-smoking policy could end up lowering
expenditures in ways that have not previously been expected. Given that America
faces both health-care reform and fiscal challenges, policy tools that improve
the health of children could be of great benefit to society as a whole.