* 1123001
* Preparing to Teach Mathematics with Technology: Expanding, Transforming, & Building Community [PTMT-ETC]
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Karen Hollebrands, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 687,735.00

This project is creating teaching materials, implementing new teaching
strategies, and developing undergraduate faculty expertise - all in service of
preparing prospective secondary and middle school mathematics teachers to use
technology effectively in their classrooms. Building on previous work to
integrate preservice teachers' learning of mathematics, technology, and pedagogy
in the areas of data analysis and probability (DAP) and geometry (GEO), the
project investigators are well-situated to develop materials focused on algebra.
Tools being used include graphing calculators, computer algebra systems,
spreadsheets, dynamic programs for geometry, and dynamic statistical packages.
The intellectual merit of this project lies in its recognition that while
prospective mathematics teachers may have some experience in K-12 or college-
level mathematics courses that employ reform-oriented pedagogy and use
technology, such use of technology in their own mathematical learning is often
insufficient to understand implications for teaching with these tools. Hence,
the investigators are putting into place a systematic program through which
preservice teachers can develop an understanding of teaching and learning that
goes beyond specific technology tools. Indeed, this model for developing teacher
knowledge has the potential to transform preservice teacher programs. The
project is exercising broader impacts by intentionally fostering a community of
faculty responsible for teaching preservice courses who are helping to test
materials and implement the approaches at a variety of different institutions.
Moreover, algebraic ideas are found throughout middle and high school
mathematics curriculum, and courses in algebra often serve as a gatekeeper for
many STEM-related careers. Thus improved algebra learning has downstream payoffs
for all students who are pursuing STEM fields of study.