* 1123729
* Models of Dynamic Choice
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Tomasz Strzalecki, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 272,935.00

This award funds research in economic decision theory. There are four distinct
projects. Each seeks to develop new methods for incorporating aspects of human
behavior into formal mathematical models of decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project builds on previous work by other
scholars (Kreps-Porteous and Epstein-Zin) that developed recursive utility
models. This project models the premium that an individual with preferences
represented by this kind of utility function would pay for the early resolution
of uncertainty; in other words, what fraction of his income would the individual
be willing to give up in order to learn his future consumption levels? This
premium can be used as a criterion for the choice of parameter values in
recursive utility models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project studies
boundedly optimizing decision amkers operating in otherwise standard competitive
financial markets with standard preferences. The new theory yields a number of
predictions: limited market participation, ex post consumption heterogeneity,
and high volatility of asset prices as compared to the
fundamentals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Three provides a novel axiomatization
of quasi-hyperbolic discounting. This model of preferences over time is
increasingly widely used in applications of behavioral economics. The proposed
axiomatization and the implied method of parameter measurement are useful for
experimental work. These methods make it possible to elicit short run discount
factors independent of utility functions. The goal is to develop a method that
will eliminate experimental confounds that are unavoidable with current
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Four studies a model of individual
decisions makers who do not fully recognize the extent to which their future
choices disregard their current preferences. The project proposes a method of
eliciting such inaccurate beliefs about the future. The goal is to explain such
behavior by studying how these failures of learning can persist in the long
run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of dynamic decisions are key to understanding
many economic phenomena, such as savings, investment, taxation, and growth. This
research will improve the toolbox available to model these phenomena. The result
will be new methods to analyze the effects of economic behavior and economic
policy. The methods will be useful not just to economists but also to decision
theorists and financial scholars.