* 1123227
* Political Economy with Time Inconsistent Voters
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Alessandro Lizzeri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 258,756.00

Behavioral economics presents a "paternalistic" rationale for government
intervention. As does traditional public economics, existing behavioral
economics literature assumes a benevolent government. The point of departure for
the proposed research is rather to argue that, just as for textbook public
policy analysis, it is useful to consider what happens when, instead of a
benevolent planner, the political process determines the design of policy. Will
politicians seeking election exploit/indulge the voters' behavioral distortions
away from rationality? Are such behavioral distortions amenable to aggregation
into collective action? What are the implications for the constitutional scope
of government activity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal mostly considers the
widely studied case of time inconsistency. Existing literature has presented
theories where consumers/agents are subject to problems of self-control, and has
shown that such problems can lead to procrastination (doing things too late),
preproperation (doing things too early) (O'Donoghue-Rabin 1999), insufficient
savings for retirement (Laibson et al. 1998), harmful obesity and addictions
(Gul-Pesendorfer 2007, O'Donoghue-Rabin 2000) and other
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These self-control problems also identify a
demand for commitment (rehab clinics, illiquid assets with costly withdrawal,
etc.) that cannot arise in the context of standard economic models. The proposal
asks: How does government policy respond to voters' time inconsistency? How does
government intervention affect and respond to the demand for commitment? As a
starting point the proposal assumes the simplest and most standard political
structure: competition among two office-seeking
candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the proposal suggests that
the presence of time inconsistent voters may lead to fiscal irresponsibility and
large public debt, highlighting a novel reason for constitutional restrictions
on government debt.&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the proposal is more abstract
and considers a taxonomy of interactions between the public and the private
sector to understand how the political system responds to a demand for
individual commitments. This seems fruitful because it is necessary to
distinguish between public commitments, such as pension systems (and lock-in of
401(k) accounts) or laws prohibiting consumption of substances that may lead to
failures of self-control, from private commitments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project so far suggests that the political process does not seem to respond
effectively to the demand for commitment and that centralized decision making
may undermine an individual's willingness to supply such commitment privately.
The project also suggests other possible avenues for exploration of the
interaction between the political process and voters' imperfect
rationality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By its nature, this research is
interdisciplinary since it uses tools from economics and political science to
study a political process populated by voters who suffer from biases whose study
is typically the domain of psychology. &lt;br/&gt;One broader impact of the
research is to achieve a better understanding of how the degree of voter
rationality, self-control, and sophistication affects the proper boundaries for
government activity.