* 1123850
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural, Economic, and Technological Contexts of End-of-Life Care
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Emily Martin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 7,435.00

New York University graduate student Dwaipayan Banerjee, under the supervision
of Dr. Emily Martin, will undertake research on how economic constraints,
religious beliefs, and variable medical practices affect end-of-life ethics and
care. His research will be conducted in India where the presence of three
different institutional forms of care make possible a comparative case study. In
recent years, the Indian Supreme Court has been inconsistent on the question of
whether the right to life in the constitution can be understood as the right to
die. Because of this context of legal uncertainty, doctors at private hospitals
in India suggest that they allow a higher rate of life-support use than almost
anywhere in the world. But in addition to private hospitals, India offers public
hospitals, where resources are more limited; and a new, less medicalized third
option of religious and secular hospice care. Thus India provides an appropriate
context for studying and creating general theory to understand how social,
economic, and cultural factors affect the changing landscape of end-of-life care
ethics and decision making.

The research will be carried out at some of these sites of care for the
terminally ill in Delhi. The researcher will compare private and public health
care facilities as well as religious and secular hospices, examining how these
varied contexts differently shape end-of-life situations. He will employ a
combination of appropriate social science research methods. These will include
interviews with doctors, retrospective interviews with patient families,
interviews with hospital and nursing staff, observations at hospice and
intensive-care sites, and archival research on the colonial and post-colonial
development of end-of-life law.

The importance of this research is that it will contribute to the social
scientific understanding of the relationship between religion, medicine, and the
cultural contexts through which understandings of human dignity, particularly at
the end of life, are shaped. Part of its contribution will be to reveal the
effects of religious and cultural differences on understandings of human
dignity, which is more discernible and available to observation during end-of-
life decisions. Findings from this research also will elucidate the effects of
everyday practices of care giving on the emergence of new moral and ethical
understandings. Funding this research also supports the training of a social
scientist.