* 1123040
* Web-based Tools for Developing and Accessing Sociological Theory
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Barry Markovsky, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 09/30/2014
* USD 191,808.00

SES - 1123040&lt;br/&gt;Barry Markovsky (P.I.)&lt;br/&gt;Jose Vidal
(co-P.I.)&lt;br/&gt;University of South Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Web-based
Tools for Developing and Accessing Sociological
Theory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project involves designing,
implementing and testing a web-based system for developing, improving and
disseminating sociological theories across all areas of the discipline. The
proposed "Wikitheoria" will provide a range of services via a set of user-
friendly tools, and a set of incentives to foster broad participation. At the
heart of the system is the concept of "modular theorizing," i.e., small,
explicit, inter-connectable theories that can be assembled in different ways for
different purposes. On the management side, the system will receive and store
original submissions, analyze logical and semantic structures of submitted
materials, organize, index and hyperlink text to maximize ease of use, display
and disseminate content, offer recommendations for improvements, and evaluate
usage patterns. From the user's perspective the system will provide tools to
help learn the interface, search intelligently for content in specific areas,
identify relevant materials from other substantive areas, collectively evaluate
and enhance submitted materials, cross-fertilize between sub-disciplines,
identify researchable claims, evaluate relevant findings from prior research,
theoretically inform empirical applications, promote use by non-sociologists,
supplement teaching, and more. The system will facilitate the development of
improved theories using proven incentives and knowledge aggregation methods. The
web interface and underlying processes will capitalize on what has already been
learned from the successes of other knowledge systems such as Wikipedia and
StackOverflow, and the lack of success of others such as Google Knol and Yahoo!
Answers. The modularized program will be developed on the Google App Engine, a
free hosting platform that allows application development and deployment on the
Google cloud of servers. The PIs use Google account services and other web
functions with which users are likely to be familiar already or else can acquire
with ease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By offering an infrastructure tool that
encourages theoretically-driven research, Wikitheoria will simultaneously
advance substantive knowledge and offer resources for those seeking to apply
that knowledge. The system will be relatively easy to use, and will inform
scholars and practitioners within and outside of sociology. The system's blind
evaluation system and openness to contributors eliminates any possible impact of
participants' demographic characteristics. Professional network, rank, status in
the discipline, race, gender, and geographic location play no part in
determining the relevance of any contribution. The project also offers some
unique opportunities for students and instructors to participate in the system
such as contributing theoretical material, using content in class, and posting
to discussion groups.