* 1123094
* Service-Oriented Paradigm Across Introductory Information Technology Curricula: An Expansion Study
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Billy Lim, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Erlinger
* 07/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Introduction of the Web has had a great impact on our daily lives. Web services
technology is expanding and has received significant attention in the software
industry under the broader umbrella of service-oriented architecture.
Interaction with web-based applications is expected to increase. However,
coverage of this topic is generally not provided in early computing courses.
This project is expanding a pilot effort that developed learning materials for
introductory programming courses (NSF DUE-0837056). Project objectives include
improving student learning in introductory courses and increasing faculty
adoption of the approach at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
are engaged by developing introductory programs that connect to web services
they are familiar with such as social networking sites, search engines, and
location-based applications. This is accomplished by providing simplified access
to the internet services. Course materials being developed include lecture
notes, lab activities, on-line tutorials, programming assignments, and testing
materials. Other project outcomes include a web repository for the freely
available materials. Empirical studies are designed to measure student
performance and engagement with the content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To encourage
faculty to adopt the approach, summer workshops are offered. There is a mini-
grant incentive for attendees to support local implementation. Participants
agree to attend two workshops and collect assessment results during the academic
year that contribute to the overall project. Faculty from twenty-four colleges
and universities are expected to participate during the three year project.