* 1123045
* School Matching, Mechanism Design, Networks and Advice:  An Experimental/Field Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Andrew Schotter, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2014
* USD 275,241.00

In recent years a number of school systems have used various schemes to match
students with schools. In these mechanisms students rank the schools they would
like to attend and then are placed into schools by a process that takes these
rankings into account along with the capacities of the schools and any special
priorities granted to some students. The resulting matches may be good or bad
depending on the behavior of the students (or their parents) in the matching
process (i.e., the strategic dissembling they employ.) Theoretical work done to
design matching mechanisms that mitigate (or eliminate) such strategic
dissembling assumes the matching process occurs once and is not repeated again.
As a practical matter, this isn't how school matching markets work. Instead, the
matching process is repeated prior to the beginning of each school year. Parents
who have participated in prior years may pass along advice to newcomers they
know regarding how to behave in these markets. Over time groups of people will
develop "traditional wisdom" as to how to behave. If this traditional wisdom
leads people to behave optimally then the outcome of the match is likely to be
consistent with the intentions of the mechanism designers. If, however, the
traditional wisdom reinforces bad behavior, the resulting allocations may be
sub-optimal. In the funded research the PI will conduct a series of experiments
to examine the impact of intergenerational advice and network structure (who
talks with who) on the performance of matching mechanisms. Matching markets
occur is a variety of situations from matching students to schools to interns to
hospitals. Many share the feature that the market reoccurs at specific intervals
with information on "how to play" the game being passed down over time.
Understanding how the resulting evolution of traditional wisdom and how the
structure of connections among market participants (e.g., which parents talk to
who) influences the outcome of matching market is crucial to designing matching
mechanisms with desirable properties.