* 1123642
* Cretaceous Vertebrates from Madagascar: A Window into the Biogeographic and Plate Tectonic History of Gondwana
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Joseph Sertich, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2015
* USD 234,774.00

Cretaceous Vertebrates from Madagascar: A Window into the Biogeographic and
Plate Tectonic History of Gondwana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National Science
Foundation Proposal EAR-1123642&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI David W.
Krause&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs Patrick M. O?Connor, Raymond R. Rogers, Joseph J. W.
Sertich, and Alan H. Turner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract?The latter half of the
Mesozoic Era witnessed profound changes in the configuration of landmasses that
comprised the southern supercontinent of Gondwana, with dramatic consequences
for the associated terrestrial and freshwater faunas of backboned (vertebrate)
animals. Madagascar lay near the center of Gondwana as it fragmented into its
component parts. This proposal seeks to continue a project primarily designed to
discover vertebrate fossils from the Cretaceous Period. To date, we have
quintupled the previously known species diversity of Late Cretaceous vertebrates
from the island and have discovered some of the most complete and spectacularly
preserved specimens of Late Cretaceous vertebrates from the southern hemisphere
and, indeed, the world. Many new taxa have been named, described, and analyzed.
But much remains to be done in the vast expanses of paleontologically and
geologically unexplored Cretaceous rocks of Madagascar. With continued work, we
are confident that Madagascar?s vertebrate fauna will become one of the best
known faunas of Cretaceous age from the southern hemisphere and one of the
primary standards against which other Gondwanan faunas of Cretaceous age are
compared. We propose to continue collecting terrestrial and freshwater
vertebrate fossils of latest Cretaceous age from two major field areas in the
Mahajanga Basin of northwestern Madagascar. We also propose to expand our
efforts into the Morondava Basin in western Madagascar, where a reconnaissance
expedition in 2010 yielded a spectacular find of a massive sauropod dinosaur and
the potential for many more specimens from strata older than those yielding
fossils in the Mahajanga Basin. Discoveries from these earlier horizons will
provide a deeper temporal context with which to address controversial
biogeographic and plate tectonic hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;As in the past, our work
will strive to involve energetic and promising young people who are
investigating a professional career in the sciences (high school and
undergraduate students), studying to become professional paleontologists and
geologists (graduate students), and just beginning their professional careers
(postdoctoral associates and entry-level professors/curators). In addition to
publishing in widely-distributed scientific journals, we will continue to make
our research more broadly known to the public by publishing articles in popular
magazines, contributing to displays in public museums, encouraging coverage in
print media, radio, and television, developing websites, and through speaking
engagements to both academic and lay audiences. Lastly, our establishment of the
Madagascar Ankizy Fund (www.ankizy.org; ?ankizy? means ?children? in the
Malagasy language), whose mission it is to build schools (four so far) and
provide healthcare (e.g., temporary clinics, clean-water wells, mosquito nets)
to remote areas of the island, has been very successful; our efforts in this
venture will continue.