* 1123296
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Kinship, Remittances and Redistribution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Benjamin Hanowell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 10,231.00

Remittances are the money and other goods transferred between migrants and their
communities of origin. Doctoral student Benjamin Hanowell, supervised by Dr.
Eric Alden Smith of the University of Washington, will undertake research to
investigate two previously unstudied aspects of remittance economies. First, how
do kinship, gender and age together shape remitters' decisions about how much
and to whom they remit? Second, how do kinship, gender and age interact with
recipient household redistribution patterns to further shape remitters'
decisions? These questions emerge from a fusion of anthropology with
evolutionary theory about kin-based sharing and economic theory about labor
migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the research questions, Mr. Hanowell
will conduct year long fieldwork in three villages of Saint David Parish, a
rural locale of Dominica, a small Caribbean island nation, where remittance
income is an important part of the local economy. Fieldwork will combine
structured and in-depth interviews with detailed field notes and archival
research. Interviews and field notes will provide information about individual
remittance relationships, household and individual wealth, household
composition, household conflicts, and village genealogy. Church vital records
and village censuses will be used to estimate age patterns of birth and death
over time. Statistical analysis will include: social network analysis to model
remittance relationships as a function of kinship and control variables; and
linear regression to compare observed remittances with predictions from
competing quantitative models of kin-based sharing. In-depth interviews and
ethnographic field notes will be coded for key themes and compared to
statistical results for an enriched understanding of remittance patterns in
Saint David Parish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance scientific
understanding of remittances, a major source of income for poor, rural people in
developing regions. It will also address several long-standing theoretical
issues about kin-based sharing. So doing, it will test the extent to which long
held notions of kinship and sharing in small-scale societies scale up to the
global context of remittances. Finally, it will help Dominica's government to
assess its long-term progress toward four United Nations Millennium Development
Goals: reducing child mortality, reducing maternal mortality, reducing teen
pregnancy, and understanding the special needs of small developing island
nations.