* 1123016
* Generating a Community for Undergraduate Research Through the Use of Comparative Microbial Genomics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Anne Rosenwald, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2015
* USD 477,223.00

Through faculty workshops and an open source website, called Genome Solver,
covering both effective teaching approaches and the use of biogenomics and
genomics tools for undergraduate research, the project is creating a framework
for faculty development that impacts student learning and has the potential to
add to our general knowledge about the human microbiome. It is a collaboration
between a number of entities, the PI and her group in the Department of Biology
at Georgetown, a group at Simmons College, the Georgetown Center for New Designs
in Learning (the developer of the Global Solver [http://globalsolver.org] upon
which Genome Solver is based) and the J. Craig Venter Institute (the site of the
faculty workshops and developer of the genomic tools).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is timely in its materials
and its approach to making those materials available. It is helping faculty keep
their courses current with new developments in the literature and in approaches
to teaching. In addition it is encouraging use of student laboratories as a
place for groups of students, faculty, and bioinformatics experts to collaborate
in research on important topics in the genetics of microbes affecting human
health and behavior. Ongoing research in these student laboratories has the
potential for being deposited in GenBank and prepared for publication in
refereed journals. Examples of the tools students are learning to use include
BLAST, ClustalW, and hidden Markov model approaches for protein domains.
Students start out with a computer-based analysis of genomic data and then use
this information to generate hypotheses that are then tested by wet lab
experiments to investigate an aspect of microbial physiology stemming from that
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Genome Solver is creating an
online community where students and experts across different institutions can
come together to discuss science and curricular ideas. Faculty from minority
serving institutions are part of the workshop recruitment and team and advisory
board to insure that this work will benefit a diversity of
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.