* 1123314
* Empirical Analysis of Auction Markets: Liquidity, Electricity and Information Structure
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jakub Kastl, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 218,141.00

The focus of this research is the analysis of strategic bidding behavior and
recovering information contained in bids in important auction markets:
liquidity, electricity and procurement auctions. The recent financial crisis has
underlined the importance of understanding the mechanics of the banking system
and especially the mechanisms used to allocate liquidity/short-term funds across
the system. The first research project analyzes a particular mechanism used to
allocate short-term funds: the European Central Bank's (ECB) weekly refinancing
auctions, the primary mechanism through which the ECB supplies liquidity to the
Euro-zone banking sector. We use detailed bank-level data and we model banks'
observed actions in these auctions in order to infer interest rates each bank
would have to pay in the over-the-counter interbank market to obtain a loan. One
of the main goals of this project is to demonstrate that interpreting bidding
data from liquidity auctions through an economic model allows the researcher to
gain insights into financial health of participating banks. The central banks
could thus be using these data to provide them with early warning signals about
financial situation of commercial banks and with information about bank-specific
interest rates prevailing on the opaque (over-the-counter) interbank
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project focuses on analyzing the impact
of the prices of emission permits on bidding behavior and subsequent electricity
generation in the deregulated Italian electricity market. It utilizes data from
day-ahead, balancing and dispatch auction markets together with information on
forward contracts and emission permit prices and allocations to investigate
whether higher permit prices lead to more electricity generation by clean energy
sources. This question is very important from policy perspective since the very
goal of emission permits is to re-allocate electricity generation to cleaner
energy sources. The Italian market is very well suited for this analysis since
fossil-fueled generators constitute the major source of electricity production
and there is significant variation in the emissions of CO2 among these
generators. The goal is thus to quantify, for a given price of coal, gas and
oil, at what emission permit prices we should expect to see shifts to cleaner
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third project proposes a novel method for
recovering bidders' beliefs about the extent of competition they face in an
auction from the observed bids. Most of the previous empirical auctions
literature makes various assumptions about bidders? knowledge about their
competition. These assumptions have often been criticized as being too
restrictive. The main goal of this methodological contribution is to provide a
novel approach how to circumvent making these assumptions and to provide a new
method for testing for collusion in important auction markets, such as
procurement auctions for highway construction or auctions of oil leases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include improved central bank operation,
new insight into how to encourage cleaner energy usage, and new methods for
research in auction markets.