* 1123252
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute on Frontiers in Casimir Physics; Ushuaia, Argentina; October 8-19, 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Ricardo Decca, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/2013
* USD 100,000.00

1123252&lt;br/&gt;Decca&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE), will take place during October 8-19, 2012 in Ushuaia, Argentina.
Organized by Dr. Ricardo S. Decca of the Department of Physics at Indiana
University in Bloomington, Indiana, the institute will focus on the science of
fluctuation-induced interactions, also known as Casimir Physics. The science of
Casimir interactions is a fast evolving interdisciplinary field of research with
topics ranging from quantum physics, condensed-matter, and nanotechnology, all
the way to chemistry and biology. Casimir interactions arise from the molding
that material boundaries impose on quantum or classical fluctuations of the
intervening media. The latest advances and innovations in analytical techniques,
numerical algorithms, and experimental measurement techniques will be discussed
at the PASI. Topics will include Casimir theory and experiments, quantum
friction, quantum plasmonics, and atom-surface Casimir
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objectives of this PASI are to
a) foster collaboration between institutions and researchers in the Americas, b)
facilitate student mobility between participating institutions, and c) promote
cross-fertilization between disciplines represented at the Institute. In
addition to the series of lectures, the institute will include a poster session
for the presentation of research results from junior participants, in order to
foster content-specific interactions. This exchange will include senior
scientists and junior researchers from the entire continent, and should plant
the seed for future collaborative research for the next generation. The PASI
will develop a webpage that will advertise the meeting and feature recruitment
and selection procedures, meeting objectives and topics, and links to related
activities, which will be posted prior to the meeting. After the conclusion of
the PASI, the webpage will serve as a repository of links to lecture and talk
notes, publications, seminars, and collaborative research arising from the PASI.