* 1123710
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Invasive Species and  the Amplification of Risk and Risk Perceptions among Active Stakeholder Groups
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Susan Jacobson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2013
* USD 12,135.00

Invasive species pose risks to people (e.g., economic, health) and wildlife
(e.g., competition, predation). They also pose ecological risks to the diversity
of communities and ecosystems. Little is currently known about public attitudes
about and tolerance for the risks associated with invasive animals. To address
this gap, this research studies the perceived risks associated with feral cats,
an invasive, charismatic species, numbering over 25 million in the U.S., and
strongly associated with people. The method used in the research is a
quantitative mail survey of stakeholders and the public in Florida. This study
advances the theoretical understanding of risk perceptions including the factors
contributing to perceptions of direct and ecological risk. The study compares
risk perceptions among stakeholders and between stakeholders and the public. The
results of this research will enhance management options to minimize the risk of
predation and competition for native and threatened wildlife; minimize the
potential spread of zoonotic diseases from feral cats to pets and people; and
reduce instances of nuisance behaviors: the fouling of yards and open space,
killing of birds or ornamental fish and damage to gardens. While this research
focuses on one species, the findings will provide insight into the relationship
between risk perceptions, tolerance, and attitudes that will influence the
management and conservation of other invasive domestic and wild species.