* 1123574
* EXP: Augmenting Household Technologies for Learning and Whole Family Participation: Heating and Cooling Control as an Exploratory Case
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Reed Stevens, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 02/29/2016
* USD 592,367.00

This project is exploring possibilities in promoting learning activities among
urban families in the informal setting of their homes. The investigation is in
the context of energy management. The PIs are building a tablet-based simulation
and supporting resource materials that are being integrated with smart
programmable thermostats in the homes of participating families. The software is
designed to promote curiosity about scientific issues related to home energy
management. The PIs are following the ensuing interactions of the family --
their discussions with each other and their interactions (individual and joint)
around the thermostat and the tablet-based software -- to understand family
behavior around energy management and the opportunities for promoting learning
activities, the challenges and possibilities of promoting science learning
around energy management as a family activity, how to design software for family
education around energy management and the ensuing learning, and what the
implications are for promoting family education in other disciplinary domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Informal learning, especially learning that happens
outside of formal institutions, is understudied. But learning happens regularly
in the everyday contexts in which people live. Understanding better the
possibilities for more systematically promoting learning in such environments
will open up new ways of helping people of all ages learn science relevant to
their lives and come to appreciate the role science plays in the world around
us. Focusing the effort specifically on energy management issues may also lead
to more sustainable energy use behaviors and greater understanding of local and
global energy and climate challenges, opening the way for more of the citizenry
to be informed about and become involved in policy considerations and debates.