* 1123570
* Terrestrial Age Constraints for the Dicynodon Assemblage Zone, South Africa: Implications for the Timing of the End-Permian Mass Extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Robert Gastaldo, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 125,000.00

Terrestrial Age Constraints for the Dicynodon Assemblage Zone, South Africa:
Implications for the&lt;br/&gt;Timing of the End-Permian Mass
Extinction&lt;br/&gt;Robert A. Gastaldo&lt;br/&gt;Colby
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep time records provide evidence for changes in
biodiversity and ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;disruption and recovery, and act as models
for understanding the potential changes now&lt;br/&gt;recognized affecting
Earth. The End Permian Mass Extinction Event is reported to
have&lt;br/&gt;impacted more than 90% of life in the oceans and up to 80% of
life on land, with the&lt;br/&gt;collapse occurring simultaneously at 252.2±0.2
million years ago. Recent work of the PI&lt;br/&gt;and collaborators
demonstrates that the paleontological records from the Karoo
Basin,&lt;br/&gt;South Africa, on which the idea of sudden collapse on land is
based, can not be used to&lt;br/&gt;identify a distinct event. Rather, criteria
used to assign an end-Permian age to the biological&lt;br/&gt;patterns are
inaccurate based on field relationships. The most reliable way to identify
the&lt;br/&gt;timing of this event is by using chronometric techniques based on
radiometric dating of&lt;br/&gt;single crystal zircons from volcanic ash
deposits. To date, this has not been possible&lt;br/&gt;because it was believed
that such deposits didn?t exist near the boundary.&lt;br/&gt;A fossilized forest
litter, located 70 m below the level where the extinction event
is&lt;br/&gt;reported, is buried and preserved by volcanic ash deposits in
Wapadsberg Pass, Eastern&lt;br/&gt;Cape Province. A pilot study of single
crystal zircons analyzed by isotope dilution thermal&lt;br/&gt;ionization mass
spectrometry (ID-TIMS) using the ET535 tracer (spike) solution, distributed
by&lt;br/&gt;the EARTHTIME initiative, resulted in a suite of ages indicating a
detrital source for the&lt;br/&gt;zircons. Ages range from the NeoProterozoic
(1038.78 ± 1.42 to 606.76 ± 1.0 Ma [3 grains]) to&lt;br/&gt;the early Mesozoic
(252.0 ± 0.5 to 251.8 ± .038 Ma [3 grains]). The project goals include
the&lt;br/&gt;acquisition of a larger suite of detrital zircon from several
stratigraphic horizons in&lt;br/&gt;Wapadsberg Pass and elsewhere that will be
age dated. These will be correlated with&lt;br/&gt;changes in sedimentary
environments in the collection sites to place an age constraint on&lt;br/&gt;the
biodiversity trends identified in the Karoo Basin. The project tests the
hypothesis that&lt;br/&gt;the ?Mother? of all Mass Extinctions was a phenomenon
restricted to the oceans, and&lt;br/&gt;changes in biodiversity trends on land
were decoupled from those documented elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;If turnover in
continental biodiversity did not happen simultaneously with the
patterns&lt;br/&gt;identified in the oceans, a new model for the greatest mass
extinction in Earth history will&lt;br/&gt;have to be developed.