* 1123341
* Metabolic Mechanisms of Intertemporal Choice, Delay Discounting, and Impulsiveness
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* XT Wang, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2016
* USD 294,634.00

In this project the Principal Investigators will examine metabolic mechanisms
underlying intertemporal choice, delay (future) discounting, and impulsiveness
within an interdisciplinary framework of evolutionary psychology and life-
history theory. People discount the future or delayed rewards when they value
present goods over future goods and when they prefer a smaller and sooner (SS)
reward to a larger and later (LL) reward in making intertemporal choices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has revealed a novel link between
fluctuating blood glucose levels and delay discounting. The study showed that a
sugar drink reduced delay discounting, making the LL options more attractive
whereas a diet drink increased delay discounting, making the SS options more
preferable. This observation is consistent with the hypothesis that glucose is a
cognitive resource and with the hypothesis that blood glucose level is a signal
of energy budget status. The funded research will examine how bodily changes in
glucose levels, along with variations in steroid hormones and seasonal changes
in metabolic rates, affect delay discounting and impulsiveness of decision
makers to determine which of these hypotheses better accounts for the effects of
blood glucose on delay discounting. Additional experiments will examine
tradeoffs between present-orientation for survival and future-orientation for
mating and reproduction as a function of metabolic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has broad applied implications. The ability
to delay gratification has been shown to lead to less psychopathology, better
grades, less substance use, and more overall success in life. Thus, instilling
greater delay of gratification would lead to more productive and healthier
lives. By identifying metabolic conditions that increase or decrease delay
discounting and impulsiveness, we would be able to help design better
interventions for addictive and obsessive-compulsive behaviors. The knowledge
gained from the proposed studies should provide guidance for promoting positive
health behavior.