* 1123577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using a Prediction and Option Generation Paradigm to Understand and Improve Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Joel Suss, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hantula
* 06/30/2013
* USD 13,920.00

In this project the Principal Investigators will examine the effects of skill
and decision type on strategy use, and then examine whether skilled decision-
making strategies can be trained to become resilient under stress. In many
complex domains, as opposed to selecting between explicitly presented
alternatives, decision makers are first required to generate alternative
options. However, skilled performers use different option generation strategies
during perception and action, for instance, when predicting situational events
compared to when selecting personal responses. Current research suggests that
the accuracy and quality of prediction is positively related to the number of
decision alternatives generated, whereas the quality of response selection is
negatively related to the number of options generated. The goals of the proposed
research are to: (i) reconcile theoretical differences in explanations of
strategy use by examining the role of decision type (i.e., prediction, response)
and skill level on the adoption of each option generation strategy; (ii)
investigate the cognitive mechanisms used to support successful option
generation by examining the role of context, (iii) determine the extent to which
option generation performance can be improved through training, and (iv)
evaluate training transfer to high-stress tasks. The research will employ quasi-
experimental and experimental research methods. Using an option generation
paradigm, skilled and less-skilled individuals will predict the outcome of, and
generate responses to complex, dynamic law enforcement situations presented via
video-based and live role-player simulations. An expert model will then be
derived from the data and used to train option generation strategies of less-
skilled participants during prediction and response. &lt;br/&gt;In terms of
broader impacts, this research will help refine existing theoretical models of
decision-making in complex environments by articulating the skill-based
differences in strategies used when deciding upon a course of action versus how
a situation will unfold. The ability to predict the future state of the world
and to assess the relative merits and consequences of one?s own actions in that
context is a requisite skill for many challenging and/or life-threatening
domains, such as health care, military, and finance. Accordingly, the ability to
improve these skills has the potential to increase the effectiveness,
efficiency, and safety of operational environments, both for operators and for
citizens that may otherwise be negatively affected by poor decision-making. This
research will demonstrate how the analysis of skilled performance can be used to
develop critical-thinking-based training methods to improve complex decision-
making in stressful environments. The adoption of an evidence-based approach to
training decision-making skills will serve as a best-practice example of how to
create reproducible and scalable training programs that capture the strategies
employed by superior performers.