* 1123134
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Experimental Investigation of the Public Goods Agency Problem
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Justin Krieg, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,880.00

This award funds a doctoral dissertation that will examine how people make
contributions to public goods when they know that a manager will decide how
their contributions are used to benefit others. Previous research in behavioral
economics has used lab experiments to determine what factors encourage
individuals to contribute to efforts that provide public goods. In this previous
research, the experimental design meant that all individuals were certain that
their contributions would go directly to funding public goods. However, in many
real world situations, charity managers must make decisions about how to use
contributions. In this environment, charitable contributors may be concerned
that their donations will not be used to benefit others directly. In economic
terms, the manager is acting as an agent for the contributors, and there is a
chance that this agency relationship will result in inefficient outcomes.

The coPI will conduct four sets of experiments designed to test hypotheses about
how the agency relationship will affect voluntary contributions and public goods
provision. The first study investigates the effects of agency in the widely-used
voluntary contributions mechanism (VCM). The second study considers the rule of
information disclosure and competition between charities for contributions on
the effects of agency. The third study investigates whether donors have a
preferred level of uncooperative behavior and if this preferred level is related
to the nature of the uncooperative action. Finally, the fourth study employs a
provision point mechanism (PPM); this allows for a test of the impact of agency
in two different contribution mechanisms.

The research will employ undergraduate students and will have practical
implications for the management of charities and other nonprofit enterprises
that rely on contributions.