* 1123807
* How Network Structures Explain Creativity
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* David Stark, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 178,200.00

How Network Structures Explain Creativity

Collaboration in and across teams increasingly distinguishes production in
creative fields whether in academic research, business projects, civic activism,
or cultural production, including music, film, design, and new media. The
proposed research examines how working teams are expressions of larger,
informal, yet relatively stable, communities. The task is to develop a set of
network analytic tools to track how teams assemble, disassemble, and reassemble.
The field of social network analysis has identified several structural
properties that might contribute to successful group performance. Among these
are cohesion dense, reciprocal ties that promote trust within teams, a
prerequisite for productive collaboration and optimal implementation. The
counterpart concept is brokerage long-distance ties that span groups or
communities providing access to information and new ideas. To test the idea that
innovation requires familiarity and diversity, we identify a new structural
property on the landscape of network topographies: the structural fold, a
distinctive position where cohesive groups overlap. In exploring this structural
property, we additionally identify group lineages to reveal patterns of
historical contiguity defining groups over time. Development of these analytic
tools will allow us to assess whether (and under what conditions) innovative
success is promoted by relative group stability or, alternatively, by group
disruption and reassembly across groups that are more (or perhaps less) distant
in historical network space.

To address these questions, we construct historical datasets on group formation
in three distinctive fields where teams are the elemental unit of creative
production: scientific collaboration (charting the evolution of the
interdisciplinary field of Network Science through the patterns of co-authorship
among some 26,000 researchers from 1981-2009), the video game industry
(comprising every commercially released video game and some 310,000 unique
individuals from 1972-2009), and jazz recordings (comprising approximately
40,000 jazz recording sessions and 400,000 musicians from 1930-1969).

Broader Impact: Creative fields increasingly support the strength and vitality
of our national economy and cultural identity. Musical production, whether
through performances, recordings, or music videos, is a major industry today
generating enormous revenues. Similarly, the video game industry, generating an
estimated $50 billion in 2011 global revenues, is emerging as a giant in the
field of cultural production with implications for education, the military, and
civic participation. Scientific research increasingly involves creative work
carried out not by individuals but by teams of dispersed collaborators. By
identifying the social sources of innovation, this study supports the creative
production that assures a robust economy and society.