* 1123943
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Reference Grammar of Paresi-Haliti (Arawak)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Ana Brandao, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 07/31/2012
* USD 7,378.00

The project will produce a reference grammar of Paresi, an endangered Southern
Arawak language spoken by approximately 2000 people in the State of Mato Grosso
(Brazil). The goals are to advance the linguistic understanding of Paresi and to
document the Paresi language and culture by organizing an archive with audio,
video and annotated texts of naturally occurring discourse. The grammar will
contain a description of basic grammatical phenomena, with special attention to
the unusual typological features of the language, for example, Paresi nominal
classification system. The basis of the grammar will be the collection,
transcription and analyses of a variety of texts. The methods to be used include
the recording of natural conversation, observation of oral tradition with focus
on storytelling, and direct elicitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grammar will
serve as a reference for the production of materials for community language
programs. The project will produce a resource not only to the scientific
community but also to the Paresi communities by providing them with recordings
of their cultural heritage and written texts which will help them to develop
pedagogical materials. Speakers will be trained to document their rituals and
cultural activities in audio and video. This project will contribute to the
development of indigenous language study in Brazil and in United States. Due to
the endangered status of Paresi, it is of crucial importance that we provide a
descriptive grammar and corpus in order to systematically document the Paresi
language and aspects of Paresi culture. The project will contribute to our
understanding of the Arawak language family, for which few in-depth descriptions
are currently available.