* 1123990
* Identification and Inference of Strategic and Social Interaction Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Aureo De Paula, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/28/2014
* USD 169,957.00

The understanding of interactions not mediated via prices is important in many
economic phenomena. For example, a firm's decision to enter a market may be
affected by other firms' decisions. In the classroom, peer effects may affect
outcomes and decisions which may in turn play an important role later in life.
There are many other examples. Because of the interplay of decisions and
outcomes across actors, the empirical analysis of these phenomena is related to
the empirical analysis of individual outcomes and decisions but poses challenges
beyond those typically found in the analysis of individual decision making. This
research project investigates methodological aspects and substantive
applications in the empirical analysis of interaction
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main challenges arises as a given model
may be amenable to more than one set of predicted outcomes or behaviors (i.e.
"equilibria"). When this is the case it is not clear how to retrieve important
model components from observed data. In a first set of studies, the researcher
extends previous work where the investigator and a co-author study the
identification of interaction models where certain information is private to
participants (de Paula and Tang, 2011). Under typical assumptions in this
literature they showed that when multiple solutions are possible and different
data points correspond to potentially different solutions, whether someone is
incentivized or dissuaded from taking an action (when others do) can be inferred
even with a very loosely defined model. As a byproduct, the investigators are
also able to test for the existence of multiple solutions in the data. This is
important since multiplicity is problematic for many estimation techniques
currently available. The researcher extends that analysis in several
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, whereas the basic insight on the
detection of more than one solution remains applicable in dynamic games under
standard assumptions, the results on the retrieval of interaction effects is
affected since what a person does at present affects the environment in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;Second, even in the static environment originally
investigated, continuously distributed control variables such as prices or
income pose practical complications in estimation. Because different values for
those variables may induce a different number of solutions in the underlying
economy, typical nonparametric estimates of the interaction effect aggregate
over covariates that contaminate one's inference on the uniqueness of a solution
and, consequently, on the sign of interaction effects.&lt;br/&gt;Finally,
whereas in many applications one can easily label the relevant players (e.g.,
husband and wife, Wal-Mart and local stores), in other contexts the labels do
not naturally present themselves. The researcher also investigates how this
affects the inference of interaction effects and applies the methods to the
analysis of peer effects among college roommates, a topic that has been studied
extensively in recent years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a related project, the
researcher focuses on empirical models where people choose who to associate with
(i.e. "network formation games"). Recently, a lot of interest has developed
around network phenomena in Economics and the Social Sciences more generally. It
is common, for example, to find multiple equilibria in both environments.
Because a network formation model bears many similarities to models usually
studied in the empirical Industrial Organization literature, ideas and
techniques akin to those previously used in the analysis of that literature can
be adapted to the study of social networks. To demonstrate the methodology
developed in this research, an illustration using the AddHealth dataset is
presented. The techniques proposed in this research will provide an important
first step in the subsequent analysis of outcomes which are influenced by how
individuals connect to each other. Examples include educational outcomes and
information transmission.