* 1123650
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Economies of Representation and Economic Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Stuart Kirsch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2012
* USD 14,140.00

University of Michigan doctoral student Katherine Fultz, with the guidance of
Dr. Stuart Kirsch, will undertake anthropological research on socioeconomic
development and the representational economy, which is the production,
circulation, and reception of media objects having to do with development. The
project is designed to expand the traditional scope of media analysis to include
the Internet; digital forms, such as text messages, cell phones, digital
pictures; and informal texts and images, such as posters. While earlier studies
have focused on individual media genres, this project will bring them together
to address the multimedia nature of contemporary communications. Another
innovation of the project is that it will connect rather than isolate producer-
focused analyses and consumer-focused analyses and address a range of media
types in order to look at the broad spectrum of media engagements and genres
that comprise the representational economy affecting
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in Guatemala
using a local mining project as a case study. The researcher will collect data
on how community members in the primarily Maya municipalities of Sipakapa and
San Miguel Ixtahuacán, Guatemala, understand and reframe discourses about
development, environment, and indigenous rights, in relation to media that
sustain debate about economic development. By using a multiple-method approach,
grounded in a pair of communities intimately affected by a shared mining
project, the researcher will trace the relationships between external investment
and multiple development discourses, as they are understood and taken up by
local people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Guatemalan context speaks broadly to
issues of development in Latin America and around the world, and is exemplary of
the ways different stakeholders interact in transnational development contexts.
This project will examine how representational economies of development mediate
interactions between stakeholders. Because the Mayan languages spoken in the
communities include some that are endangered and poorly documented, the
researcher will collect archival quality recordings for deposit in appropriate
U.S. archives. Funding this project also supports the education of a social
scientist.