* 1123874
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linking comprehension costs to production patterns during the processing of mixed language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Rosa Guzzardo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Codeswitching, defined as the alternation of two languages within bilingual
discourse, is ubiquitous in many bilingual communities, including Spanish-
English bilingual communities in the U.S. The motivation for this project
derives from the fact that bilinguals' ability to codeswitch reveals important
aspects of language and human cognition that would not be readily apparent by
studying individuals who speak one language alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
codeswitching studies have focused on spoken production by means of naturalistic
data collection; however, the way in which bilinguals comprehend switches has
been largely unexplored. This is a significant gap because codeswitching is not
only a production phenomenon: when a speaker produces a codeswitched sentence,
the recipient of the message must also engage interpretive mechanisms that can
accommodate the mixing of two languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given this gap,
Rosa Guzzardo Tamargo, under the direction of Drs. Paola Dussias and Chip
Gerfen, will investigate the constraints that guide the comprehension of
codeswitched sentences. The hypothesis being tested, which derives from current
models of language comprehension, predicts that frequent switches in production
are easier for individuals to comprehend than less frequent switches. The
comprehension of two types of codeswitches will be examined: frequently
occurring codeswitches involving estar + verb (e.g., los niños están playing)
and infrequent codeswitches involving haber + verb (e.g., los niños habían
played). The approach to be used integrates reading comprehension tasks with
production tasks. Eye movements will be recorded while Spanish-English
bilinguals read codeswitched sentences. Production data from the same bilinguals
will also be collected to test the link between ease of comprehension and
production frequency. Results from these experiments will inform current debates
about the architecture of the human sentence processing mechanism and the link
between the production and comprehension systems. The planned studies will also
enhance the infrastructure for research by establishing opportunities for
collaboration between faculty members and students at two U.S. institutions.