* 1123059
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute:  Commutative Algebra and Its Interactions with Algebraic Geometry, Representation Theory, and Physics; Guanajuato, Mexico; May 14-25, 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Sarah Witherspoon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2013
* USD 99,970.00

1123059&lt;br/&gt;Iyengar &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced
Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department
of Energy (DOE), will take place May 14-25, 2012 at the Centro de Investigación
en Matemáticas (CIMAT) in Guanajuato, Mexico. Organized by Dr. Srikanth Iyengar
of the Department of Mathematics at the University of Nebraska and Dr. Sarah J.
Witherspoon of the Department of Mathematics at Texas A &amp; M University, in
collaboration with Dr. Ragnar-Olaf Buchweitz (Canada) and Dr. José Antonia de la
Peña (Mexico), the PASI will address issues in commutative algebra and its
interactions with algebraic geometry, representation theory, and theoretical
physics. The specific topics to be covered are: matrix factorizations and
maximal Cohen-Macaulay modules; cluster algebras and cluster categories;
cohomological theory of support varieties; and topological quantum field
theories and Frobenius algebras. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will
familiarize graduate students, postdocs, and early career faculty with emerging
applications of commutative algebra. It will also provide an opportunity for
building and fostering collaborations among researchers from various countries
in the Americas. The organizers will encourage participants to organize a
special session at an American Mathematical Society (AMS) meeting during the
three-year period following the institute. Furthermore, they will continue to
mentor those participants and those who become involved in the program at the
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute-Berkeley, California (MSRI) in
commutative algebra during the year 2012-2013. A wiki page will serve as a
platform for dissemination of notes from the lecturers, and for discussions on
problems and questions related to the lectures.