* 1123220
* MRI: Acquisition of an Online Banking System for Information Assurance Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Tu, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal #: 11-23220&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Xu, Dianxiang; Pauli, Joshua; Tu,
Michael&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Dakota State University&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Acq.: Online Banking System for Information Assurance
Research&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project from an EPSCoR
state, aiming to acquire hardware and software to create a banking testbed to
explore issues of computer security of banking systems, enhances the future of
security research for the global banking infrastructure. While online banking
makes it more convenient to manage financial activities, security threats are
becoming even greater because the money is stored on and moved around an
untrustworthy Internet environment with increasing use of mobile, wireless
devices. The proposed acquisition will enable various activities for promoting
information assurance research and education in the banking sector. The proposed
online banking system for South Dakota enables the following research projects
in security:&lt;br/&gt;- Threat modeling and verification, aiming at a rigorous
techniques with proof /disproof capability,&lt;br/&gt;- Security testing, aiming
at cost-effective, automated security testing with threat models,&lt;br/&gt;-
Forensic readiness, aiming at better investigation of intrusions and frauds,
and&lt;br/&gt;- Security requirements analysis, aiming at consistent and
testable specification.&lt;br/&gt;The work establishes a flexible research
instrument for a key element of the nation?s financial infrastructure. The
research enabled by the online banking system will lead to novel techniques for
the defense, in-depth, of online banking applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation increases DSU?s capacity to conduct
cutting-edge research on online banking security. The online banking system
expands critical infrastructure in the new National Center for the Protection of
the Financial Infrastructure. It also broadens the participation of students in
research by providing a rich variety of research topics for the NSF REU
(Research Experience for Undergraduate) Site in Information Assurance and
Security, which places emphasis on recruitment of minority students. In terms of
training the next generation workforce, far-reaching impacts are envisioned
through improvements to the information assurance curriculum. The proposed
system will be used to teach cyber security in computer classes at eight high
schools through collaboration with the NSF project ?GK-12 Fellows in Cyber
Security?. Two of these schools serve mainly Native-Americans. Finally, the
instrument enhances PhD production in an EPSCoR state and solidifies DSU?s
position in online banking research.