* 1123815
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Catalytic Atom-Economical Aromatic Substitution via Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Robert Flowers, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 405,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports Professor R. A.
Flowers from Lehigh University on an "International Collaboration in Chemistry"
project. The foreign investigator is Professor A. Gansäuer from Germany, whose
contribution to the collaborative project will be supported by the German
Science Foundation (DFG). The researchers will develop metal catalysts for the
functionalization of aromatic compounds via homolytic substitutions employing
carbon centered radicals. The formation of C-C bonds is of fundamental
importance and new developments will contribute to the sustainable synthesis of
organic compounds, in particular aromatic compounds. The German PI provides
expertise in the use of radical catalysis in organic synthesis, the US PI in
mechanistic studies of organic reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors
Flowers and Gansäuer will pursue a detailed understanding of catalytic
titanocene based radical reactions to provide efficient and selective approaches
for arene functionalization. Arenes are at the center of many chemical commodity
products such as styrene. One of the goals of this work is to furnish optically
enriched aryl-2-propanols, which form the building blocks for the synthesis of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS). The international team will
include undergraduate and graduate students who will receive multidisciplinary
training in techniques not typically covered in standard organic chemistry
laboratories.