* 1123454
* Collaborative Research: Biological and mineralogical controls over soil carbon cycling across multiple ecosystems: a focus on the priming effect
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Craig Rasmussen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2014
* USD 110,941.00

Carbon dioxide (CO2) is released to the atmosphere when humans burn oil, coal,
and gasoline, and is the major cause of global warming. Soils can store carbon
(C), helping counteract rising carbon dioxide, but the future of the soil C sink
is uncertain. Will it be converted to soil organic C, which can stay put for
thousands of years, or will soil microorganisms convert it back to CO2,
returning it to the atmosphere? This is a major uncertainty about the future C
sink on land. Recent work suggests a surprising response, called the priming
effect, in which adding C to soil boosts the metabolism of microorganisms,
causing them to produce even more CO2 than expected. Yet, this phenomenon is
variable and very poorly understood. Proposed mechanisms fail to explain what
conditions modulate the occurrence and magnitude of the priming response.
Preliminary data suggest that the soil mineral assemblage, reflecting the
chemical and geological properties of soil, interacts strongly with the soil
microbial community to influence the priming effect. This research will test the
idea that the priming response depends on interactions between the soil mineral
assemblage and the soil microbial community. Thus, this research lies at the
interface among geology, biology, and chemistry. The research will investigate
priming responses in nine soils, spanning a broad range of climatic and
environmental conditions. Laboratory experiments will evaluate how priming
responds to variation in the mineral assemblage, and samples from the
experiments will be tested for carbon cycling and microbial community
characteristics. The work will use state-of-the-art techniques, including in-
line isotope-ratio measurements using a cavity ring-down instrument, and new
stable isotope probing techniques paired with gene microarrays capable of
identifying microorganisms performing specific ecological functions. This
project emphasizes integrating research and teaching, will provide
interdisciplinary training for undergraduate students at institutions with
strong histories of minority enrollment. Students will gain experience with the
cutting-edge methods, and with a research field with strong implications for
policy decisions surrounding global climate change and carbon management.