* 1123510
* "Ensuring Legacy Data Access & Dissemination: Occupational Coding In The General Social Survey"
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,03/31/2016
* Michael Hout, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

SES - 1123510 Michael Hout, University of California, Berkeley, and National
Opinion Research Center/NORC Peter Marsden, Harvard University and National
Opinion Research Center/NORC

Ensuring Legacy Data Access & Dissemination: Occupational Codes in the General
Social Survey

Abstract In the past thirty years, changes in technology, business, and
government practice have substantially altered the American occupational
structure. Our project provides a foundation to understand the consequences of
new occupations on the current economy and contemporary society, and to preserve
unique data key to documenting these fundamental historical changes.
Specifically, this project modernizes the occupational and industry data in the
General Social Survey (GSS) from the 1970s to the present time.

The project has several goals. They dovetail recent key NSF recommendations that
encourage large infrastructure data sources such as the GSS to facilitate
increased data access and dissemination. This can be done by presenting data and
metadata according to a well-defined protocol, which will allow desirable modes
of data access, search, downloads, and documentation. The project also meets the
NSF challenge to retrofit historical or legacy data and metadata to become
machine readable. This will possibly open up vast amount of data for
dissemination and analysis once issues of confidentiality and disclosure are
resolved.

To accomplish this goal, this project will (1) retrieve GSS respondents?
detailed verbatim descriptions of their work activities, occupations, and
industries from the physical questionnaire manuscripts from early GSS waves, (2)
convert them into machine-readable form, (3) recode them to reflect 2010
occupation and 2007 industry categories developed by the U.S. Census, and (4)
attach external data such as socioeconomic scores and prestige assessments to
the recoded categories.

The intellectual merit of digitizing occupational information and recoding
occupational and industry categories in the process is that it enables
researchers to use the full potential of the occupation and industry information
recorded in the GSS over time. Doing so will enhance the value of the GSS as a
resource for comparative and contemporary research on social inequality,
mobility, and other fields and preserve its growing value as a historical
database describing trends in U.S. society over two generations. Ensuring the
longevity of such legacy data by converting hand-written text into machine-
readable text, the project also develops an archive of verbatim descriptions
that will allow future researchers to code them using other standards, including
U.S. Census standards that may become available in upcoming decades.

Broader Impacts The GSS is a public resource as well as a scientific one. Public
media, especially newspapers, make extensive use of the GSS. By improving the
quality of occupational and industry information in the GSS and ensuring that it
is coded in a consistent way over time, this project will help journalists and
citizens make sense of social trends and patterns. Also, high schools and
colleges make extensive use of the GSS as a teaching tool. Teachers and students
will get more out of these exercises from the new data products this project
will produce when data reflect contemporary distinctions among occupations and
industries as accurately and precisely as possible.