* 1123855
* The Linkage of Glacier Sliding and Hydrology on the Kennicott Glacier, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Robert Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2016
* USD 410,000.00

The linkage of glacier sliding and hydrology on the Kennicott Glacier,
Alaska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description. As shown in a SGER-funded
pilot study designed to promote Alaska?s Kennicott Glacier as a natural
laboratory, glaciers slide whenever their hydrologic system is insufficiently
developed to accommodate water inputs, either from melt or from a draining lake.
The conceptual model suggested in a paper from the SGER study is being cited
extensively to explain new observations in Greenland. The key to understanding
the sliding of a glacier is that the hydrologic system beneath a glacier is
always in a state of transience; water inputs vary widely, as do the hydraulic
efficiencies of the channelized and unchannelized portions of the hydrologic
system. The proposed research teams a geomorphologist with experience in both
glacial fieldwork and analysis of the hydrology-sliding connection, with a
hydrologist whose research includes the hydrology of faults and karst systems
that are both pertinent to the glacial hydrology?sliding problem. The team will
link fieldwork on Kennicott Glacier with numerical models to develop a rigorous
understanding of the evolving hydrologic system and the basal sliding that it
inspires. Task 1) Kennicott Glacier field experiment. This easily accessible
40-km long, 4-km wide glacier is ideal to study the connection between hydrology
and glacial motion. Its hydrologic system is perturbed diurnally, by a major
spring event each summer, and by an annual outburst flood. Several side-glacier
and small supra-glacial lakes serve as natural manometers to document seasonal
evolution of the drainage network, and passage of the outburst flood. The
research will document the diurnal, seasonal, and flood-related inputs and
outputs of water from the glacier, and the associated sliding response over two
full years. GPS-derived ice speeds will document the horizontal and vertical
displacement fields, which vary by several-fold on daily, seasonal and flood
timescales. These data sets will serve as a rigorous test case for models of the
hydrology-sliding link. Task 2) Numerical modeling of subglacial hydrology.
Inspired by both old and new data on the Kennicott Glacier, and a working 1D
hydro-sliding model, hydrologic models of differing complexity will be
developed. Network and grid-based 2D distributed numerical models will have
dynamic aperture geometry and hydraulic properties that allow transitions from
distributed ?linked cavity? to ?conduit-like? behaviors resulting from
temporally and spatially variable melt inputs. The models will predict spatial
and temporal patterns of horizontal and vertical ice motion, and measurable
features of the hydrologic system, including solute concentrations at the
outlet. They will be immediately employed to diagnose the results from the 2006
pilot study, and will be refined as the full annual cycle is illuminated by the
field efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance. Glaciers transport
ice down their valleys both by deformation of the ice and by sliding against
their beds. Glacial research is motivated in part by the fact that the loss of
ice from glaciers and ice sheets profoundly impacts both sea level and water
resources in glaciated watersheds. While glaciologists understand the
deformation of ice, sliding remains poorly understood. In addition, as only by
sliding do glaciers erode the landscape over which they move, understanding of
glacial landscapes that dominate many national parks requires knowledge of how
sliding works. Variations in glacier sliding are clearly linked to the seasonal
and daily delivery of meltwater into the glacier, but the linkage between the
state of the water system in the glacier and this sliding remains unclear; no
physically-based model of sliding exists. Recent acceleration of sliding of
glacial outlets from the Greenland Ice Sheet has been shown to mimic the
seasonal sliding history observed on alpine glaciers, making alpine glaciers an
appropriate and less expensive laboratory to probe the hydrology-sliding
connection that may drive sea level rise from ice sheets. The proposed research
will make use of the spectacular natural laboratory of the Kennicott Glacier at
the entrance to Alaska?s Wrangell St. Elias National Park. The research will
generate a detailed data set of glacier sliding and of the evolving hydrologic
state of the glacier that will guide the development of theoretical models of
sliding. Numerical models in this research take advantage of the analogy between
the ice-rock contact at the bed of a glacier and the rock-rock contact across a
fault. In both cases, the interface is rough, with patchy contacts and gaps; and
in both cases, sliding at this interface is promoted by high water pressures.
Models constructed in this study will capture the full complexity of the
evolving subglacial hydrologic system, including rapid inputs of water from the
surface and from draining lakes that promote sliding, and feedbacks that serve
to regulate the sliding.