* 1123411
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Children's Learning with Physical and Social Tools
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Catherine Haden, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 224,800.00

The decrease in the number of US students interested in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) has received considerable attention in
recent years. The National Science Foundation refers to this as the STEM
education problem. This research explores one way to address the STEM problem,
by studying how children develop interest and skill in STEM, even at a young
age. The work will focus on the fact that many early STEM experiences for
children are designed to encourage learning through hands-on activities, such as
making models of buildings or other structures. Although children can learn a
great deal by working on their own through these hands-on activities, their
learning can be improved when they are engaged in conversations with their
parents during these activities. With support from the National Science
Foundation, Catherine Haden, Ph.D., of Loyola University Chicago and David
Uttal, Ph.D., of Northwestern University will examine how parent-child
conversational interactions during hands-on activities impact children's STEM
learning. The researchers will also determine whether parent-child conversations
and hands-on activities help children remember what they have learned and apply
it to new situations. The research will take place in a special exhibit within
the Chicago Children's Museum that was designed specifically to advance STEM
learning. The exhibit focuses on building construction and includes hands-on
activities that may promote early understanding of simple engineering
principles, such as bracing, as well as more general principles associated with
the scientific method. Across two studies, a total of 640 children, ages 4, 6,
and 8 will observed building skyscrapers with their parents. It is hypothesized
that specific kinds of conversations (such as those that involve What, How, and
Why questions) will be linked to more hands-on activity, as well as more
learning of engineering principles and a better understanding of the scientific
method. An important test of this hypothesis is seeing how and when parents'
conversations and children's hands-on learning during the first construction
project results in better construction of a second structure (tower or bridge).
It is also predicted that parents' talk and children's understanding will differ
by age of the child. In Study 2, the researchers will attempt to teach parents
the best ways to help their children's STEM learning, based on the findings of
Study 1. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to understanding and
improving young children's STEM education and learning. For young children, the
learning of mathematics, science, and elementary principles of engineering is
intertwined. Early exposure to fun, creative and meaningful engineering
experiences may boost interest and the eventual pursuit of engineering and
technology education paths by students. Exhibits stimulating building
construction, for example, have the potential to connect children with the joys
and challenges of the scientific process (building a building that will stand on
its own), as well as the relevance of engineering to their everyday lives. The
research will recommend methods that parents and other educators can use with
young children in STEM learning situations to foster early understanding of the
scientific method, develop knowledge of STEM-related concepts, and potentially
increase interest in future science education and career options.