* 1123962
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reciprocity, Collective Action, and Political Inequalities in Post-Disaster Resettlements in Andean Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Linda Whiteford, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 9,159.00

Doctoral student Albert J. Faas (University of South Florida), with the guidance
of Dr. Linda M. Whiteford, will undertake research on how processes of disaster,
displacement, and resettlement affect and are affected by both traditions of
collective action and unequal local power structures. Particular attention will
be paid to possible links between informal exchange relationships and post-event
survival. Understanding the micro-processes of disaster response and recovery is
critical to the future design and implementation of effective disaster
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in highland
Ecuador where relocation because of active volanoes offers an ideal opportunity
to examine these processes. The researcher will focus in part on traditional
communal labor groups (called "mingas"). Preliminary research has suggested that
there is a tension between cooperative, mutual support practices and unequal
power relations in disaster-induced resettlement communities. This dynamic,
which can be presumed to exist in other post-disaster contexts as well, may
affect resettled individuals' access to disaster relief and development
resources. The researcher will collect qualitative and quantitative data to
address two overarching research questions: (1) To what extent are cultural
practices of reciprocity eroded in the disaster and resettlement process? (2) To
what extent are cultural practices of reciprocity leveraged to exert influence
over the distribution of resources in the disaster and resettlement process?
Data will be gathered through unstructured and semi-structured interviews with
90 participants and key informants, the examination of public records of
attendance at key events, and participant observation at public meetings and in
daily life. The first goal is to determine whether or not reciprocity and
communal labor continue after resettlement. The second goal is to determine if
different ways of participating in reciprocity and communal labor are associated
with different degrees of influence in collective decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because in the aftermath
of both natural and manmade disasters quick but economical relief responses are
essential. Understanding how to work with rather than against existing cultural
practices will make such efforts both more effective and more efficient.
Findings from the research will contribute to the growing body of multi-scale
and inter-scalar theory of disaster cultures. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.