* 1123847
* Collaborative Research: Defining controls on incisional avulsions in alluvial basins
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Doug Edmonds, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 10/31/2012
* USD 112,307.00

Collaborative Research: Defining controls on incisional avulsions in alluvial
basins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River avulsion occurs when water is diverted out of
a river and creates a new channel on the surrounding floodplain. The associated
flooding can be catastrophic for people living along rivers, but hazard
mitigation is difficult because models cannot predict the timing, location, or
style of river avulsion. Incisional avulsion occurs when a new river channel is
established through erosion rather than deposition, and, although it is common
in some river systems, this avulsion style is particularly poorly understood.
The goal of this study is to define the sedimentologic and hydrodynamic
conditions associated with incisional avulsions. Using combined modeling and
field approaches the PIs will evaluate how characteristics such as floodplain
topography, slope, ground cover, and overbank deposition control avulsion styles
and test the hypothesis that incisional avulsions occur in steep fluvial systems
with topographically rough, unvegetated, well-drained floodplains that lack
abundant overbank suspended-sediment supply. Modeling work will be conducted
with Delft3D, a physics-based numerical model that solves the equations for
water flow and sediment transport, and field-data collection will focus on
ancient strata where channel and floodplain characteristics can be measured for
large numbers of paleoavulsion deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from
this project will help improve prediction of avulsion flood hazards and will
enhance understanding of the relationships between channel avulsion and
floodplain erosion and deposition. Avulsion is also a primary control on the
distribution of fluvial hydrocarbon, groundwater, and CO2-storage reservoirs.
Better understanding of avulsion processes gained through this research will aid
subsurface predictions of reservoir quality and location. Broader impacts of
this work also include development of a self-paced, web-based education module
about rivers and avulsions. In collaboration with the Geoscience Outreach
Foundation the PIs will design a Rivers from Above curriculum comprising guided
tours of rivers and avulsions using Google Earth and Google Maps. Rivers from
Above will focus on river forms and patterns, river avulsion, and avulsion
impacts on society. The PIs will work with the outreach offices at Penn State
and Boston College to develop, pilot test, and evaluate module activities in
Pittsburgh- and Boston-area schools, targeting underserved communities in each
region. Finally, this proposal will also support the education and training of
several graduate and undergraduate students and the early careers of two junior
faculty members.