* 1123236
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Vote Choice and Representation in Challenging Electoral Environments
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Saul Cunow, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Hundreds of millions of voters around the world select representatives in
systems which allow them to choose from dozens or hundreds of candidates and
dozens of political parties. Work in political science, psychology, and consumer
choice highlights the pernicious effects of large choice sets on our ability to
make satisfactory choices. This study seeks to expetnd the findings to the
electoral arena and develop and test a new theory about the trade-off between
representation and the ability of voters to select representatives. Scholars and
designers of electoral systems often seek to improve the representativeness of
the pool of candidates by increasing the number of seats in each district,
lowering barriers to entry, and creating institutions that encourage
personalistic campaigns. However, if these institutions succeed at increasing
the number of options with which voters are presented, they may also have
perverse effects on the ability of voters to make satisfactory choices, the
quality of representation and accountability, and democratic stability.
Excessively large choice sets may prevent voters from making satisfactory
choices, decrease their feelings of political efficacy, and lead them to become
dissatisfied with democratic institutions. These problems can be compounded in
systems where political parties, an important source of information, are weak
and less effective signals of candidate quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test for a relationship between the size of voters' choice sets and
their ability and willingness to make satisfactory choices, their satisfaction
with their choices, and their support for democracy. It will also test for the
ability of political parties to mitigate some of the effects of large choice
sets, even in democratic systems with weaker political parties and personalistic
campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This theroey about vote choice will be tested
using a series of experiments conducted in two Brazilian cities: Sao Paulo and
Recife. These experiments will improve on existent work on correct voting by
expeanding it beyond U.S. elections and testing for a causal relationship
between electoral institutions and the ability of voters to make satisfactory
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better understanding the relationship between the
choices with which voters are presented in elections and the ability of voters
to make satisfactory choices can have profound implications for the quality of
representation and the stability of new democracies. Electoral institutions,
political campaigns, and media coverage of elections may need to be better
designed to provide voters with a more manageable choice set. Furthermore, the
results from this project will shed more light on the value of investing in
strengthening political parties as a means of improving representation and
voters' poltiical efficacy.