* 1123993
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Social Transfer Programs on Cognitive, Social, and Economic Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Tania Barham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 04/30/2015
* USD 231,415.00

Over the past decade, conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs aimed at reducing
short- and long-term poverty via transfers conditional on health service and
school attendance have been implemented in more than 30 countries worldwide,
including the US. Many more similar programs are being planned or piloted. The
primary objective of these programs is to generate a sustained decrease in
poverty in some of the most disadvantaged regions in their respective countries.
Their basic premise is that a major cause of the intergenerational transmission
of poverty is the inability of poor households to invest in the human capital of
their children. Supply-side interventions, which increase the availability and
quality of education and health-care services, for example, are often
ineffective in resolving this problem, since the resource constraints facing
poor households preclude them from incurring the private costs associated with
utilizing these services. CCTs address this problem by targeting transfers to
the poorest communities and households, and making the cash transfers
conditional, among other things, on beneficiary children attending school and
receiving regular preventive health-care. When households fail to fulfill those
obligations, they lose their eligibility. By targeting the transfers to poor
households, the program alleviates short-term poverty. By linking the transfers
to investments in human capital, the program aims to address long-term poverty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the widespread popularity of CCTs in both
developing and developed countries, and the substantial short-term effects they
have had on education and health outcomes, there is only limited evidence of
their medium- to long-term effects on the human capital and labor market
outcomes they target to break the intergenerational transmission of poverty.
Moreover, it is not well understood whether gains from such interventions are
higher if children benefit at earlier rather than later ages. It is crucial to
investigate these questions since evidence on early childhood nutrition and
health interventions is mixed as to whether their benefits continue or fade out.
Moreover, concerns about low quality schooling and labor market imperfections in
many countries where CCTs are implemented make it unclear whether educational
gains from these programs actually result in improved learning and labor market
outcomes. To date, medium-term evidence is based on research on the CCT program
in Mexico and is relatively inconclusive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will determine the effects of the Nicaraguan Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT)
program, 10 years after its start. To evaluate the program rigorously, treatment
and control localities were randomly assigned to become eligible for program
benefits in 2000 and 2003, respectively. The monetary benefits were provided in
each of the experimental groups for only 3 years. The study will take advantage
of this experimental design to shed light on a number of specific research
questions related to the knowledge gaps described above. First, we will examine
whether being eligible for the intervention during school years when drop out is
most common resulted in differences in schooling, academic achievement,
cognitive ability, and labor market outcomes. Second, we will determine if there
are differences in cognitive ability and educational achievement between
children that were under age 2 when their households were eligible for the
program compared to children whose households were eligible only after their
second year of life. Third, we will investigate whether the program might have
affected important reproductive health indicators. Fourth, we will use quasi-
experimental methods to examine the absolute 10-year effect of the program on
these same outcomes. To answer these questions rigorously, and in particular to
limit selection biases that are common in panel studies, the study design pays
special attention to reducing panel attrition through extensive tracking of
migrants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings will be of great interest to
academics examining the longer term effects of heath, education and nutrition
programs as well as social transfer policies in the US and developing countries.
Given the widespread popularity of CCT type programs and lack of evidence on
medium-term results, the findings also will be of significant policy interest to
many national governments, to international development agencies such as the
World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), and to organizations and
agencies interested in early child development and in the long-term effects of
improved health and nutrition.