* 1123758
* Developing a Model of Jury Decision Making: The Influence of Group Dynamic Variables on Story Construction
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Lora Levett, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Past researchers have identified models of individual juror decision making, and
others have identified variables that influence the decision making processes of
groups. However, to date, there is no unified model of jury decision making that
accounts for both of these areas of research. This project will be the first to
integrate research on group processes with research on the story model of jury
decision making (the most widely accepted model of juror decision making) to
begin the process of creating a comprehensive model of jury decision making.
Mock jurors will view a re-enacted trial and then deliberate to a verdict.
Deliberations will be coded for logistics, content, complexity, and whether
juries create unified stories (and how many stories they discuss). After
deliberation, jurors will individually answer several questions about the story
they developed during trial and deliberation. The investigator will use these
qualitative and quantitative measures to examine whether the story model
translates to the group decision and why jurors change their decisions about
evidence, witnesses, or verdict during deliberation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide opportunities for students to participate in social science
in an integration of teaching, training, learning, and research. In addition,
results of this research will be disseminated broadly to outlets likely to reach
scientists in order to further scientific research. It will also be disseminated
to attorneys, judges, police officers, and community members to expand
understanding of the jury decision making process as well as what can be done to
improve the quality of the jury's decision. The results of this research will
provide valuable information about the deliberation process, and will begin the
development of a unified theory of jury decision making that integrates what we
know about the individual juror's decision making process with the group
decision making process.