* 1123569
* EXP: Exploring the Virtual World of Contextualized English Language Acquisition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Mary Beth Ogulewicz, Springfield Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Kolodner
* 01/31/2014
* USD 387,170.00

The PIs are aiming to investigate how virtual world 3D technology can be used to
address the limited opportunities adult immigrants and refugees have for
exploring and practicing their English in authentic settings without the risk of
seeming inarticulate. In partnership with WonderBuilders, Inc., Springfield
Technical Community College is creating the 3D virtual environment to integrated
into ELS (English as a Second Language) classes at the College. Using Open
Wonderland, the PIs are creating a complete virtual campus in which students
learning English can interact in virtual campus settings without being
embarassed about their language capabilities. College students and personnel are
also participating in the on-line community along with the English-language
learners. Research is investigating development of confidence and improved
competencies and experiences of engagement when the opportunity is given to
practice and apply newly-learned grammar and vocabulary in real-world contexts.
In addition to hypotheses about language learning, the PIs hypothesize that if
engagement is in the context of campus activities, these students, who often
hold full-time jobs and have families to take care of, will have more
opportunities to engage in the life of the college community, therefore feeling
and being more connected, and therefore being more apt to continue with their
language learning and then to successfully matriculate and graduate.

This project addresses two educational challenges. First, helping adult
immigrants and refugees learn English, prepare for, and matriculate in higher
education is a national challenge. This project is creating a model for such
learning and advancement. Second, there is much hype about the use of games and
3D virtual environments for promoting learning but not much research on the real
possibilities of doing this and how to use such software effectively for
education. This project is contributing to understanding of how to use 3D
virtual technology effectively to promote learning.