* 1123899
* Evaluating the Returns to Rural Banking: Village and Household Evidence from Southern India
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Rohini Pande, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 269,119.00

Evaluating the Returns to Rural Banking:&lt;br/&gt;Village and Household
Evidence from Southern
India&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development policy in
all regions of the world has a strong focus on providing financial services to
the poor, motivated by the belief that financial inclusion enables the poor to
develop income-generating activities and improves their ability to cope with
shocks. Prominent among these programs is microfinance; there are currently an
estimated 130-190 million microfinance borrowers worldwide and outstanding loans
exceeded $43 billion in 2008. A large open question in the development
literature and in policy circles is the degree to which microfinance has
fulfilled its promise of helping households pull themselves out of poverty and
take advantage of economic opportunities. A related question is what changes to
the design of microfinance can maximize its scale and influence. The proposed
research, seeks to examine the consequences for rural households in India of
alleviating barriers to financial services through the common microfinance model
pioneered by the Grameen Bank.&lt;br/&gt;This question is not only a core topic
in economic development theory, but is also of current policy importance since
the value of microfinance as a tool for poverty alleviation has recently been
called into question in light of recent empirical evidence from urban
microfinance evaluations and the emerging crisis in the Indian microfinance
sector. Rumors of over-indebtedness led to government regulation in the state of
Andhra Pradesh which caused wide-scale default and fueled concerns about both
the impact and viability of lending to the poor. More generally, practitioners
are beginning to question whether debt can be used as an effective anti-poverty
measure given the vulnerability of the poor to exploitation by under-regulated
lenders. Given the size of the sector, the nascent state of regulation in much
of the world, and the politicization of the debate over the efficacy of
microfinance, it is critical that we gain a more nuanced understanding of the
impact of microfinance programs and disentangle the separate roles of product
design and individual and social characteristics in influencing
impact.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project seeks to fill critical gaps in
our understanding of the impact of microfinance on the welfare of the poor in
developing countries. The project consists of four related analyses, each of
which exploits a large-scale randomized controlled experiment in the southern
Indian state of Tamil Nadu. Over four years, bank branches offering
comprehensive financial services including the classic microfinance joint
liability loan product will be opened in 160 rural sites, covering a rural
population of 800,000. A randomly selected half of these will be built over the
first two years and expansion in the remaining 80 locations will be delayed for
at least two years. Randomized rollout will allow estimation of the causal
impact of financial services since the presence of a branch will be uncorrelated
with village and household characteristics. The project will assess the impact
of improved rural financial access using a combination of detailed household
surveys conducted before and two years after the first bank branch opens, social
network mapping, a field based lottery and biomarkers. &lt;br/&gt;The first
study examines whether access to credit increases household income in a rural
setting. While experimental studies on microfinance have occurred in urban
areas, the relative isolation of rural communities and more stable levels of
social capital suggest that results in a rural setting may be different. This
project will collect data on household income and consumption, income-generating
activities, and ability of households to respond to shocks.&lt;br/&gt;The second
study uses unique biomarkers and survey data to determine the impact of
financial inclusion on physical and mental health, contributing to urgent policy
debates on how microfinance impacts mental distress and non-financial components
of poverty. The project?s goal is to collect data on nutrition, food security,
health expenditures, physiological indicators of stress through cortisol
measurements in hair samples, and psychological stress measures. &lt;br/&gt;The
third study examines the impact of access to banking services on the structure
of social networks and provision of informal insurance. Since microfinance
typically requires formation of loan groups and regular group meetings for
repayment, the project will measure the impact of microfinance on the breadth
and depth of clients? networks and inter-household transfer
activity.&lt;br/&gt;The final analysis studies the impact of banking services on
the adoption of agricultural technologies in rural settings. The project will
measure impact by collecting data on choice of crops and seeds, farming
techniques, and input usage.&lt;br/&gt;Through this set of analyses, this study
aims to provide causal experimental evidence of the impact of increased access
to finance on a variety of important and under-studied outcomes. While a few
experimental studies have been conducted on microfinance programs, these focus
on urban areas. Meanwhile, not only is microfinance activity worldwide more
heavily targeted to rural areas, but there is reason to believe that results
will be different in rural areas. Existing studies have also failed to
thoroughly study impact on broader, non-financial measures of poverty such as
health or mental distress. &lt;br/&gt;With the amount of public and private
resources invested in expanding financial access to the poor, it is critical to
thoroughly investigate the impact of microfinance on poverty. An in-depth
understanding of the impact of comprehensive financial services will inform
policy on financial inclusion both in India and globally. Dissemination of the
research findings and associated datasets will help policymakers evaluate the
benefits and cost-effectiveness of extending microfinance services to rural
areas. Moreover, it will fill critical gaps in research necessary for the
academic and policy discussion on the merits of microfinance to move forward.