* 1123960
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Counterinsurgent Militias and the Dynamics of Civil Wars
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Elisabeth Wood, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Counterinsurgent militias--third actors in civil wars other than state or rebel
armies--have played a strong part in many civil wars, including in Mozambique
(1976-1992) and Sierra Leone (1991-2002). Counterinsurgent militias have been
among the main perpetrators of violence against civilians. Yet we lack
systematic understanding of how militias emerge and evolve as civil war unfolds.
This project introduces a new definition and typology of counterinsurgent
militias and uses an analytic framework emphasizing the social interactions
between militias, rebel groups, state forces, and civilians to study militia
emergence, organizational form and evolution. The research proposes that militia
emergence is influenced by the type of security threat that exists and the
presence or absence of the state in threatened communities. Militia organization
is shaped by the breadth of its social base and the degree of its autonomy from
political elites on the national level. The project seeks to explain change in
the organizational form of a militia over time with reference to its success to
pacify territories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds on ethnographic and
archival data that will be collected during twelve months of fieldwork in
Mozambique and Sierra Leone to further elaborate the initial theory and test it
against alternative explanations. The research design includes cross-national,
sub-national and within-case comparisons of counterinsurgent militias in the
civil wars in Mozambique between the government Frente de Libertação de
Moçambique, Frelimo, and the rebel army Resistência Nacional Moçambicana,
Renamo, and in Sierra Leone between the government and the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enhances scientific understanding
in three ways. First, the study of civil wars has been overly state-centric due
to the classic image of civil wars as driven by insurgencies seeking to capture
state power. This project examines a decisive actor neglected in previous
comparative research on civil war. Second, many studies work with a static
conception of armed groups in civil war and lack an understanding of
organizational change. By focusing on counterinsurgent militias, actors whose
organizational forms vary considerably in the course of a civil war, this
project can theorize organizational change of armed groups. Third, this project
has implications for understanding the dynamics of civil war on the micro level
such as the membership base, patterns of violence, and level of territorial
control of different armed organizations. It also affects our understanding of
the dynamics on the macro level?the duration and outcome of civil wars. For
instance, militias can increase or decrease the level of violence, depending on
whether they succeed against rebel groups or attract retaliation. Also, they may
lengthen civil wars by increasing the number of actors with a stake in the
conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this research makes several broader
contributions. Enhancing our understanding of the phenomenon of counterinsurgent
militias can help prevent, manage, and resolve violent conflict and promote
stability and development when civil wars come to an end. A better understanding
of why and when some militias turn to violence against civilians can inform
policies for peacekeeping forces and mediators in civil wars. A better
understanding of the conditions of the impact of militias on security after the
end civil wars can guide the search for workable peace agreements and
comprehensive demobilization efforts. The project will include workshops with
researchers and policy analysts in Mozambique, Sierra Leone, and the US to
enhance knowledge about militias and to inform policies for conflict management
and resolution.