* 1123332
* Research on Faculty Change: Adoption of Practices that Support Gender Diversity in Undergraduate Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,10/31/2016
* Lecia Barker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 10/31/2016
* USD 442,542.00

Despite widespread development and dissemination of research-based practices
that can reverse the gender imbalance in computer science, typical teaching
practices make computing less inviting to women than to men and lead to women's
greater attrition. Women's participation in computing is lower than it is in
nearly every other STEM discipline and unique in its downward
trend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a triangulated study to identify the
conditions that influence computer science (CS) faculty members' adoption of
practices that improve gender diversity in CS. Data are being collected using
observation, interview, and survey methods. The analysis includes qualitative
data interpretation and statistical regression methods. After piloting, the
national survey is planning over three hundred responses. Findings are expected
to advance knowledge about faculty adoption of effective teaching practices,
faculty adoption of gender inclusive practices, and diffusion of innovative
teaching practices. The PIs and consultants are contributors to the National
Center for Women &amp; Information Technology (NCWIT). An advisory board of
scientists with extensive experience will ensure that all facets of the research
are of the highest quality. Active dissemination of results is designed to
inform scholars, policy makers and practitioners.