* 1123114
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Group Marginality, Internal Differences, and Status Negotiations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Lina Fruzzetti, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 10,300.00

Brown University doctoral student Bhawani Buswala, supervised by Dr. Lina
Fruzzetti, will undertake anthropological research on the everyday negotiations
of status order by low-status groups. This research is important because it will
contribute to the social scientific understanding of how marginalized groups
relate to dominant structures and how internal differences within these groups
affect these relationships.

To explore these issues effectively, the research will be carried out in a
particularly marked context of institutionalized low status, that of so-called
"untouchables" in India. Indian law abolished untouchability long ago, yet many
untouchables continue to experience material and symbolic discrimination. The
researcher will undertake 12 months of ethnographic fieldwork with untouchable
butcher (Khatik) caste people in the Indian state of Rajasthan. Although
butchers challenge their low social position, they also invoke dominant values
to explain their dislike of their own work. This research will examine this
simultaneous acceptance and rejection of caste values; collect data on the
particular exclusions and inclusions faced by Khatik women; and explore the
interaction between Khatik and other untouchable castes. Data will be gathered
through participant observation and semi-structured informal interviews on three
aspects of the lived experience of caste: (1) butchers' material and symbolic
conceptualization of their caste occupation; (2) gender differentiation within
this occupation; and (3) butcher interaction with Chamars, another untouchable
caste.

This research will provide new data for understanding the reproduction of
inequality in society. This data can inform public policies to counter caste
practices. Funding this research also supports the education of a graduate
student.