* 1123890
* Multisensory Underpinnings of Lexical Comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Lakshmi Gogate, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 06/30/2013
* USD 127,757.00

Infants learn about words and the actions or objects to which the words refer in
a multi-sensory world. Caregivers steer their infants into this multi-sensory
world by highlighting word-object or -action relations. For example, during
interactive play, mothers name objects and actions to their 5- to 8-month-olds
by using spoken words and moving objects simultaneously. Infants of this age
also show heightened perception of these simultaneous word-object presentations.
They learn word-object relations best, in natural and laboratory settings, if
the spoken words and object motions occur at the same time and in the same
space. These findings suggest that infants' ability to put words and objects or
actions together emerge from their auditory-visual perceptual abilities. At
present, however, we do not know how infants transition developmentally from
general auditory-visual perception to more language specific abilities. We do
not know for example, how infants might learn the relations between the word
"woof-woof" and a dog, and later, the word "dog" and the dog. In addition, we
know little about the optimal temporal or spatial window within which words and
objects or actions must occur for young infants to learn their relations, or how
these timing and spatial windows might change with development from 6- to 9
months. Neither do we know how infants' perceptual learning of word-object or
action relations in the laboratory is related to their vocabulary development in
natural settings. The proposed experiments address these questions concerning
the origins of word comprehension in humans, and provide an unprecedented
opportunity to bridge an existing gap in the infant language development,
perception and cognition literature. The findings are of direct relevance to
developmental psychology. They promise to link the early auditory-visual
perceptual abilities of infants prior to 6 months to the early word learning and
referential abilities seen in older infants at the end of the first year and
beyond. Further, this research will use multiple methods for examining this
link. It will combine traditional methods such as infant-controlled habituation
and standardized language assessment, with a relatively novel technique such as
eye-tracking to examine group and individual differences in infant word
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained from the present research,
on best practice during naming, will be useful to parents, and to clinicians and
educators who work with infants and young children. This knowledge could inform
early intervention practices for infants with sensory and language delays. As a
case in point, knowledge of the time and space windows within which typically
developing infants learn to put words and objects together, and the relation of
this learning in the lab to infants' language in natural setting will inform
clinicians and educators about how infants typically learn. This information can
be compared with the time and space windows for word learning in at-risk
populations, to diagnose and provide interventions in cases with vocabulary
delays. Furthermore, the geographical location of the present project will
enable the study of minority groups that are generally under-represented in
infancy research. In addition, this research project will provide an excellent
training opportunity for undergraduate students, and a post doc to participate
in all its facets, paving their way to become future scientists. In the future,
it will foster cross-disciplinary research in the fields of computer science and
psychology. For example, the eye-tracker measures gathered will be used for the
future design of sensory-oriented computational models of word learning and
language development. Such models will, in turn, make predictions for future
infant word learning experiments and further our understanding of the
developmental process in humans.