* 1123793
* Collaborative Research: A Reaction Kinetics Database for Modeling Biogeochemical Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Xianzeng Niu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2012
* USD 18,428.00

Understanding how quickly environmental reactions take place is the goal of
EarthKin, a&lt;br/&gt;geochemical database focusing on the rates of geochemical
reactions. EarthKin&lt;br/&gt;scientists from University of Maine, Penn State,
Columbia, and Saint Francis University&lt;br/&gt;will compile existing reaction
rates into a one-stop database that will allow access to&lt;br/&gt;researchers
working on a diverse range of projects ranging from removing
carbon&lt;br/&gt;dioxide from the atmosphere and permanently storing it beneath
the ground to cleaning&lt;br/&gt;up contaminated environmental sites. When
completed EarthKin will be available to&lt;br/&gt;scientists free via the web at
www.earthchem.org. Not only will we compile existing&lt;br/&gt;data, but we will
also encourage new researchers to become involved by uploading
their&lt;br/&gt;new results into the database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances in geoinformatics (the subdiscipline of developing
technological&lt;br/&gt;and computation tools to facilitate information
dissemination in the geosciences) have&lt;br/&gt;drastically increased access
that researchers have to geological information. Many&lt;br/&gt;recent endeavors
have focused on online publishing of large data sets in order to
make&lt;br/&gt;data available to the wider community. EarthKin is especially
interesting in that it is one&lt;br/&gt;of the first attempts to include
experimental data in a web-based data management&lt;br/&gt;platform. To do this,
we will need to build new tools and data structures that will
allow&lt;br/&gt;the existing EarthChem platform to incorporate a new type of
data.