* 1123649
* Collaborative Research: Combining Methods from Geochemistry and Molecular Biology to Predict the Functions of Microbial Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Everett Shock, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2014
* USD 229,941.00

Combining geochemical data with microbial ecological data makes it possible to
predict the distribution of microbial populations and the processes that they
catalyze in nature. In this research we will focus on the contrasting microbial
processes of methane production (e.g., methanogenesis) and methane consumption
(e.g., methanotrophy) as a framework for evaluating the linkages between
geochemical predictions and the distribution, diversity, and activity of
organisms that catalyze these processes. The overarching rationale for targeting
these biological processes is that the combined activities of methanogenesis and
methanotrophy largely control the flux of the potent greenhouse gas methane to
our atmosphere, the extent of which may significantly impact global climate.
Defining the constraints on the distribution of microbial populations catalyzing
these two processes in nature can significantly advance our understanding of the
impact that a perturbation to their environment would have on their respective
activities and the consequence that this may have on the global carbon cycle.
Existing geochemical predictions from hydrothermal ecosystems in Yellowstone
National Park, Wyoming indicate that the occurrence of populations catalyzing
methane production should be highly proscribed, but that aerobic and anaerobic
methanotrophy should be widespread and that populations engaged in these
activities should display significant genetic diversity as a function of the
spring fluid composition. The thermodynamic predictions will be used to guide
experiments aimed to interpret data on the distribution of methanogens and
methanotrophs and their respective activities. The integration of geochemical
data and biological data will be achieved using newly developed ecological
modeling tools. These models will provide a more comprehensive understanding of
the extent to which the distribution, diversity, and activity of functional
groups of microorganisms reflect the physical and chemical characteristics of
their environment. Defining the extent to which such relationships exist using
this framework has critical implications for our understanding of the
constraints which led to extant biodiversity and will enable predictions of how
changes in environmental conditions will affect the functioning of those
microbial ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;This unified research goal will engage students
in hands on interdisciplinary research where they will merge the traditionally
independent disciplines of geochemistry and microbial ecology. This goal will be
met through the coordination of geochemical and microbiological analyses in
field research settings as well as through coordinated laboratory
experimentation at both Arizona State University and Montana State University.
In addition, workshops will be held with the specific focus of training students
in merging knowledge from these disciplines. Given this exciting area of
scientific exploration and discovery, the proposed work will also result in
several tangible opportunities for education and outreach, most of which are
built on our previous experience and commitment to educational programs for
various audiences. This includes field-and classroom-based efforts aimed at
advancing scientific knowledge to other sectors of the public including K-12
students, undergraduate and graduate students, and high school and community
college educators. This project also will help promote research on the
geochemistry, energetics, and microbial ecology of terrestrial hot springs and
active serpentinizing systems through networking among scientists worldwide.