* 1123965
* EXP: Collaborative Research: Using Smartphone-Based Participatory Simulations to Engage Children in Scientific Thinking
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Michael Bailey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This project is investigating the potential that the combination of mobile
devices and cloud computing offers to engage middle school children in
scientific exploration using the same simulations and other tools that
scientists employ to decompose, visualize, and understand complex systems, e.g.
the spread of infectious disease or the sourcing, production, and use of energy
across the globe. Drawing on Learner-centered Design (LCD) guidelines and
research on motivation and learning, the project team is developing the
Participatory Simulations Software Factory (PSimSF) which would produce
Participatory Simulations (PSims) for various science processes that run on a
broad range of mobile devices. The investigators posit that personal
participation in the simulation, where a broad range of visualizations are
employed, increases student engagement - with greater time on task and real-time
conversation amongst the students, which in turn increases student achievement.
The intellectual merit of the project rests in its team's combination of
expertise and experience in working with emergent technologies, cutting-edge
science methodology, and inquiry-based learning. Moreover, in creating and
testing a number of prototype PSims, the project is helping the larger
educational community to understand better what is the potential for these new
technologies to support active, project-based learning. Finally, the mobile
learning environment with its multi-player, game-like interactions builds on the
characteristics of today's digital natives. The broader impacts of the project
lie in the freely distributed PSims that the project is creating along with
grade-level appropriate curriculum materials. The project is also aiming to make
the work scalable and sustainable, with a specific focus on potential
commercialization.