* 1123500
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Contracts, Intimacy Restrictions and Emotional Labor - How Law Matters When Managing Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Lauren Edelman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 06/30/2012
* USD 13,152.00

Drawing upon the literatures on law and emotions, law and gender, and law and
society, this research examines how parties to surrogacy agreements, their
lawyers, and fertility groups attempt to shape and manage the emotional aspects
of relationships through contractual language and in the broader exchange
relationships that surround contract formation. To examine how law matters in
structuring the emotional aspects of social interactions, this project focuses
on several more specific questions: (1) how contractual language reflects
efforts to manage emotions; (2) how parties to surrogacy contracts derive the
terms of their agreements, including compensation, role assignment, and
"intimacy restrictions" intended to manage feelings; and (3) the relative roles
of both formal contract provisions and other social norms in managing surrogacy
relationships. The research plan involves a multi-method empirical approach that
combines content analyses of a sample of surrogacy contracts with semi-
structured interviews across the United States of parties to these agreements,
attorneys who draft them, and fertility agencies that coordinate matches between
parents and surrogate mothers.

The results of this research could have important implications for policymakers
regarding family formation using assisted reproductive technology, and for the
judiciary as they address contract disputes regarding motherhood and the
establishment of parental rights.