* 1123170
* Collaborative Research: Maplets for Calculus (M4C)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Edwin Dickey, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2016
* USD 205,585.00

The Collaborative Research Proposal: Maplets for Calculus is a student oriented
electronic study guide collection of over one hundred applets for precalculus,
single and multivariable calculus. These highly pedagogical applets balance the
development of understanding and technical skills by posing questions, guiding
the student through the solution process, checking intermediate results, and
providing timely hints. Instructors use the applets as lecture demonstrations,
as a source for quiz questions, or in a lab setting where students can talk to
each other about solving them. Users access an endless supply of randomly
generated questions or enter their own problems. The applets enhance
comprehension through many 2-D and 3-D graphics and animations. Students have
been instrumental throughout the development of this project: initial
development of many applets was done by Honors calculus students; the web
interface for the project was designed by a high school student; and the
adaptation to mobile devices is done by a staff of undergraduates. A Ph.D.
student in secondary education is studying the use of Maplets for Calculus with
high school students in precalculus and calculus courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the initial CCLI project the number of applets grew
from 70 to 129, and the collection is growing to over 200 under the current TUES
funding. User ratings have been incorporated for each applet, and surveys are
being developed and administered at several universities to assess the
effectiveness of the applets. The results from ratings and surveys are being
used to improve the effectiveness of the applets, and the applets are being
adapted to mobile devices, incorporating them into on-line texts and translating
them into other languages. General software tools and techniques for creating
the interface for mobile devices will remain in the public domain, whereas the
pedagogical materials must be purchased as individual or site licenses at
MYMathApps.com. Dissemination efforts, including publications, presentations,
workshops and sales, will ensure sustainability.