* 1123914
* Doctoral Dissertation Research In Economics: Compulsory versus Voluntary Voting: An Experimental Study
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* John Duffy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 11,300.00

This award funds a doctoral dissertation that will use laboratory experiments to
study the consequences of compulsory voting mechanisms on voting behavior.
Voting may be voluntary or compulsory. For instance, voting may be compulsory
(no abstention) or voluntary (abstention allowed) in small committees or in jury
deliberations. In U.S. federal district courts, juror abstention from voting on
a verdict in a criminal matter is not allowed while juror abstention is allowed
in certain U.S. state courts; for example in civil cases where unanimity is not
required. There are also differences in voting rules for larger-scale, national
elections. Argentina, Australia and Belgium are among several nations where
voting (more accurately, showing up to vote) in national elections is compelled
by law. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coPI plans a laboratory experiment to study
the consequences of compulsory or voluntary voting mechanisms on voting behavior
using the set-up of the Condorcet jury model. In that setting, individual voters
all share a common interest, for instance, to acquit the innocent or to convict
the guilty, but prior to any voting, each individual receives noisy private
information regarding the true binary state of nature, e.g., whether the accused
is innocent or guilty. The jury's (electorate's) choice is determined by
majority rule. He studies two different voting mechanisms: (1) compulsory
voting, where all voters are required to vote, and (2) voluntary voting, where
each voter may first independently choose whether to abstain or to vote. In the
latter case, we also consider whether voting is costly or not. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Game theory predicts that under either voting mechanism rational
(i.e. strategic) voters will employ mixed strategies in equilibrium (under
certain conditions). In the mixed strategy equilibrium of the compulsory voting
mechanism, rational voters should sometimes vote strategically, i.e., against
their private signal regarding the true state of nature, and otherwise vote
sincerely, i.e., in accordance with their private signal. Such behavior can be
rationalized by the recognition that other voters may have different signals and
in small groups, there is some chance that an individual voter?s choice is
pivotal to the outcome; these pivotality concerns can outweigh the value of the
private signal, creating incentives to vote strategically. By contrast, in the
mixed strategy equilibrium of the voluntary voting mechanism, rational voters
resolve pivotality issues by playing a mixed strategy not with respect to the
sincerity of their vote but with respect to their decision to vote or to abstain
from voting; under the voluntary mechanism, all those who choose to vote are
predicted to vote sincerely, according to their private signal. Voter
participation rates under the voluntary mechanism are all endogenously
determined. Participation decisions are further affected if there are costs to
voting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory study funded by this award
investigates all of these behavioral predictions. The study uses a 2x2 design
where the treatment variables are whether 1) voting is compulsory or voluntary
and 2) (in the voluntary treatment) whether voting is costly or not.
Experimental methods are well-suited to testing these theoretical predictions as
the laboratory environment enables precise control over the voting mechanisms,
the states of nature, private signals, group sizes and voting costs;
environmental features that are difficult (if not impossible) to control in the
field. The experimental findings from this first-ever study comparing compulsory
and voluntary voting mechanisms will yield us a better understanding of voting
behavior under these two mechanisms and may also provide some rationale as to
why both mechanisms are used.