* 1123982
* PASI2012 - Exploring the Terascale and Beyond; Buenos Aires, Argentina; March 5-16, 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Marcela Carena, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2012
* USD 99,980.00

1123982 Sheaff

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place March 5-16, 2012 at
the Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA) in Buenos Aires, Argentina. Organized by
Dr. Marleigh Sheaff of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Dr. Marcela Carena
of the University of Chicago, and Dr. Daniel Chung of the University of
Michigan, the institute will focus on the exploration of the Terascale, covering
topics in particle physics, cosmology, and astrophysics. The program will give
students a broad picture of the three frontiers along which particle physics
must advance to solve some of the crucial mysteries of our universe such as: the
origin of mass, the nature of the dark matter, the generation of the matter-
antimatter asymmetry, and the possible unification of forces. The three
frontiers have been identified as the Energy Frontier, the Intensity Frontier
and the Cosmic Frontier. The PASI will also explore how current and planned
future experiments in physics will advance our understanding of these frontiers.

Participation of young U.S. physicists along with their peers from a number of
other countries in the Americas will provide them with international experience
early-on in their careers. This will help them prepare for the large global
collaborations that involve people from very diverse backgrounds, which have now
become frequent in these areas. The organizers will develop and widely advertise
web pages to disseminate the materials presented at the institute to the wider
community.