* 1123351
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Felony Sentencing in Nevada  and Heuristic Information Use in Legal Decision-making
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Veronica Dahir, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 6,489.00

The heuristic-systematic model of information processing (HSM, Chaiken,
Liberman, & Eagly, 1989) posits that the way in which information is handled has
consequences for how and what information is used to make decisions. According
to this social psychological decision-making theory, information may be
processed in an effortful, systematic way, in a more simplistic, heuristic
fashion, or via a combination of both types of processing. The less effortful
heuristic approach is assumed to be the default style of processing. Under
certain conditions, however, people may be sufficiently motivated to expend
additional effort and process information systematically. These motivations
include: 1) Accuracy: characterized by an even-handed and objective evaluation
of information; 2) Defense: information use is selective in support of existing
beliefs, attitudes, and other personal attributes; and 3) Impression: the use of
information is guided by a desire to express only socially acceptable positions.
This dissertation research will apply this robust theory to legal decision-
making in one specific context: felony sentencing. HSM will be used to examine
dispositional outcomes (prison vs. probation), and the discretion judges
exercise when determining how long an offender will remain behind bars (in the
case of a prison sentence). Whether judges employ systematic or heuristic modes
of processing (or both) will be empirically evaluated based on their motivations
(described above), available heuristics, and patterns of information use,
following the structure suggested by the HSM. The judicial motivations central
to the empirical application of this theory will be explored through a survey of
Nevada judges. The results of the survey will be associated with actual
sentencing decisions rendered by those same judges in 2010 and offender
information available in the pre-sentence investigation report.

The findings of this study will aid our understanding of the factors that lead
to felony sentencing decisions. The study will involve a collaboration between
the researchers and the legal community, and the results will be disseminated to
both academic and professional outlets. In addition, the findings may be used in
the training of judges and other actors within the legal system.