* 1123214
* Dissertation Research: Translating Diagnoses Across Cultures: Expertise, Autism, and Therapeutics of the Self in Morocco
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Lesley Sharp, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 14,510.00

Doctoral student Brendan Hart (Columbia University), with the guidance of Dr.
Lesley Sharp, will conduct research on the relationship between clinical
classifications and the socio-cultural and institutional contexts of their
application. To pursue these topics, the researcher will undertake a
theoretically-driven, fine-grained case study of the introduction and reworking
of the category autism in Morocco. Autism is particularly appropriate for an
anthropological study because it speaks directly to domains of communication,
sociality, and behavior in the realm of culturally specific selfhood. The autism
label is not yet widely known or commonly used in Morocco. But some parents and
professionals are currently working to change that by training a new cadre of
experts, raising awareness, and building an infrastructure to identify and
educate children as autistic. This study investigates these efforts, their
consequences, and the broader social and cultural understanding and engagement
with autism.

The research will be conducted in Rabat and Taroudant. It will involve
participant observation in homes, classrooms, clinical consulations, and sites
of religious healing; semi-structured interviews with experts and activists;
life histories with parents of affected children; and analysis of multimedia
materials (including home videos). Analyzing and comparing data across sites and
over time will allow the researcher to address the study's core questions: How
and to what extent are experts and activists making autism a salient category in
Morocco? How does the autism label, and its meanings, definitions, uses, and
enactments, change and respond to complex processes initiated by its
introduction within ordinary everyday contexts of Moroccan social life?

Rich with multiple, competing types of therapeutic expertise, which include
vernacular and revivalist Islamic cures as well as psychoanalysis,
biopsychiatry, and behaviorism, Morocco presents an important setting for
contributing to debates about how diverse systems of thought and practice
concerning the idea of "the self" are increasingly coming into contact and
conflict with one another amidst processes of globalization. The research will
provide important comparative materials for scholars studying autism and other
psychiatric categories cross-culturally. Funding this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.