* 1123231
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Effects of Appearance on Information Search and Evaluation
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Richard Lau, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 12/31/2013
* USD 8,000.00

This project seeks to determine how first impressions based on physical
appearance influence subsequent political learning and decision-making. Extant
research has found that appearance heuristics, or assumptions about someone's
abilities, character or personality traits based on his or her appearance, are
commonly used "information shortcuts" employed to simplify the process of making
a decision. Evidence from existing studies suggests that the use of cues in
candidate evaluation is common. What remains unclear, however, is what happens
between initial impressions and final decisions. Appearance-based trait
inferences are one-time appraisals often made early in the process, but modern
campaigns last for months and individuals receive extensive information. What is
the relationship between early perceptions and the type and amount of
information that individuals later choose to learn and incorporate into their
evaluations and decisions? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be the first to
consider how aappearance influences the process of learning and information
search over a longer horizon. To achieve its goal, the project will conduct a
series of three experiments using the Dynamic Process Tracing Environment
(DTPE), a web-based computer program that allows researchers to mimic the
constant flow of information and thus to track the content, sequence and amount
of information accessed by subjects. As such, DTPE provides a unique opportunity
to examine the entire process--from first exposure until she is eventually asked
to make a choice. The three experiments in this study ask subjects to
participate in simulated campaigns in which they must gather information about
mock candidates. Different aspects of candidate appearance are systematically
varied, and analyses will explore the effects of these manipulations on the
relationship between appearance, the information that subjects search for, a
subject's ultimate evaluations, and a subject's final choice. This study will
address the ways in which stereotypes based on race and gender, and perceptions
of traits like competence based on "snap judgments" of someone's facial
features, interact to influence overall evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project also makes broader contributions. The electoral process is central to
any democracy. As American society becomes increasingly diverse, it is
increasingly important that we understand the implications of cues based on
physical appearance.