* 1123546
* Understanding Decisions and Outcomes in the College and Early Post-College Periods
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ralph Stinebrickner, Berea College
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 208,482.00

While spending on higher education represents a substantial portion of
government expenditures and while the importance of the early portion of
individuals' working lives has been well-recognized, policymakers are currently
faced with the task of designing effective policies with only an incomplete
understanding of many important issues related to the college and early post-
college periods. This project combines the collection of state-of-the-art survey
(and administrative) data with innovative analyses to provide new evidence about
many of these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What takes place during the college
portion of one's lifetime has traditionally been somewhat of a black box in
which students are observed entering with certain observable background
characteristics and are eventually seen leaving having made a variety of
decisions and having realized a number of related outcomes. Similarly, what
takes place during the early portion of one's post-college lifetime has also
traditionally been somewhat mysterious. While recent research has stressed the
importance of looking inside the college and early post-college black boxes,
evidence about the college period and the early post-college period has remained
at best incomplete. This is the case, in large part, because standard
longitudinal surveys are often not well-positioned to provide data that allow
issues of interest to be studied at their most fundamental
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This reality motivates the survey component of the
current project which, building on previous research funded by the National
Science Foundation, involves the continued collection of a longitudinal survey
(the Berea Panel Study) that is unequaled in its depth and detail. The survey
efforts pay careful attention to recent advances in survey methodology, and, at
the culmination of the three-year project period, two cohorts of college
students will have been followed very closely from the time they entered college
until past the age of thirty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a feasibility
standpoint, the importance of collecting person-specific information that is
substantially more detailed than what is available from other existing data
sources necessitates the focus on a single institution (Berea College). However,
while this influences the exact extent to which the conclusions can be
generalized, it seems reasonable to believe that the basic elements that go into
the decisions of students in the collected sample will be generally similar to
those that go into the decisions of individuals from similar backgrounds who
enroll at other schools. Thus, the innovative nature of the survey collection
efforts has the potential to provide policymakers with a much improved
understanding of the workings of the higher education process and the early
post-college period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At its most general level, the goal of
the data collection in the project is to allow analyses which provide new
understandings of how earnings/wages are determined at different stages of the
early post-college period. This, in turn, requires one to
understand:&lt;br/&gt;1) what determines a person's stock of human capital
(i.e., his skills and abilities) at the time he/she leaves college and at
different points in the early post-college period?&lt;br/&gt;and&lt;br/&gt;2)
how do individuals make decisions that determine how much and what type of human
capital is accumulated?&lt;br/&gt;Then the need for an ambitious data collection
effort comes from the fact that virtually all decisions and outcomes in the
college and early post-college periods are of relevance for understanding these
two questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important decisions and outcomes that
ultimately influence earnings take place during college. While much previous
research has related decisions and outcomes during college to a set of
observable background characteristics of students, it is much more difficult to
understand the underlying processes by which decisions are made or outcomes are
produced. This is the case, in large part, because a particular decision or
outcome may be influenced by a rather large and potentially complicated set of
factors. As such, an important feature of the data collection is that, paying
close attention to economic theory, the survey instruments were designed to
collect information about comprehensive sets of factors that could influence a
variety of college decisions/outcomes. These decisions/outcomes include those
related to: educational attainment/drop-out, college major, college grade
performance, study effort, peer effects, and social
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other important decisions and outcomes that
potentially influence earnings after individuals leave college and enter the
workforce, include decisions/outcomes related to:&lt;br/&gt;1) job search and
job changing behavior, 2) marriage and fertility, 3) time away from the labor
market, 4) the type of jobs held or skills accumulated while on the job. The
depth of the Berea Panel Study data allows an examination of these
decisions/outcomes, in general, and for different subgroups of the population.
For example, of particular importance will be the ability of the survey to
provide new evidence about the underlying reasons for differences in earnings by
gender.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the substantive contribution of
providing new evidence about the college and early post-college periods, the
project will likely motivate/guide future data collection and analyses involving
nationally representative samples. Generally, this is the case because the
project illustrates the value of collecting detailed longitudinal data with the
analyses of very specific models and issues in mind. As one of many specific
examples of the broader impacts of the project?s survey efforts, while the
interest in expectations data has increased substantially in recent years, much
remains unknown about the full potential of using such data in economic
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Berea Panel Study was perhaps the first
longitudinal survey to have a strong focus on the elicitation of expectations
data, and the analyses in the project will examine a variety of potential uses
for this type of data that would not be possible to examine using other data
sources. Moreover, because the longitudinal collection of expectations data
allows one to directly measure revisions to expectations, the project will might
provide the best direct evidence about the importance of learning per se in
determining outcomes in education and the early portion of one's working life.