* 1123759
* Continuous-time games with asynchronous moves: Theory and applications
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Attila Ambrus, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 266,089.00

This award funds new research in the theory of repeated strategic interactions,
also known as the theory of repeated games. This branch of game theory has
proven to be enormously influential both in economics and other social sciences.
Past research has been transformative in its effect on, in the way we think
about cooperation among individuals in a society, repeated competition in
markets, or international governance, among other important topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current method for modeling this kind of repeated
interaction applies best to situations in which participants in each period make
simultaneous choices. However, in many real world situations of long-term
interaction, participants take actions one at a time, such that the exact time
of these actions exhibit some randomness. The investigator develops a new method
for modeling such situations, aiming to obtain general theoretical insights and
to applying the model in specific economic and social contexts. These
applications range through many different topics, such as legislative
bargaining, online auctions and oligopoly competition. The new methodological
tools will offer ways to address research questions that are too difficult to
answer using more standard models and pave the way for new research directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award funds three distinct research projects. Project
One: The research team investigates dynamic games in which players can only
modify their actions at discrete random times, while they accumulate payoffs
continuously according to the currently specified actions in a stage game. The
researchers show that these games exhibit important differences relative to
standard simultaneous move repeated games, both on finite and infinite time
horizons. For example, with fixed finite horizon, there can be equilibria
implying cooperation for most of the time horizon, even when the stage game has
a unique noncooperative Nash equilibrium. The team provides an example of an
infinite horizon game in which repetition of any of the static equilibria of the
stage game is not an equilibrium of the dynamic game, and all stationary subgame
perfect equilibria (sspe) involve nontrivial dynamics. The team has established
the general existence of sspe (for any discount rate), and are characterizing of
the limit set of all sspe payoffs as players become&lt;br/&gt;infinitely
patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Two adapts the framework to investigates
second-price online auctions like ebay, when bidders do not participate
continuously at the auction, but instead receive random discrete opportunities
to place or modify bids. The team shows that even when valuations are private
and bidders can leave proxy bids, these games have many different equilibria on
weakly undominated strategies, besides truthful bidding. These equilibria can
involve gradual bidding, and waiting till the end of the auction to start
placing bids. These results are consistent with the behavior we observe in a
variety of online auctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Three continues the
PI's previous work on continuous-time random recognition multilateral
bargaining. The team is extending the analysis to bargaining over spatial policy
outcomes, an important application of which is legislative bargaining when there
cannot be monetary transfers among legislators. Their primary focus is
identifying how the expected policy depends on the status quo outcome and the
recognition probabilities of players, when the time horizon for negotiations is
long. In another part of the project they are using the equal arrivals
specification of their coalitional bargaining model to propose a
noncooperatively founded cooperative solution
concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include the use of these new
methods by scholars across the social science disciplines, better understanding
of the properties of online auctions, and the training of several graduate
students in these new research methods.