* 1123949
* Doctoral Dissertation: Language Interaction in Child Bilingual Speech: an Acoustic Study of Diphthongs
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Vincent Chanethom, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2013
* USD 9,933.00

In the course of acquiring their first language, children develop a set of
phonemes specific to that language. Learning two languages simultaneously
requires the acquisition of two sets of phonemes. Do bilingual children keep
these two sets of phonemes separate from each other, or do the phonemes of the
two languages interfere with one another during any stages of language
development? If there is interaction between the two systems, what is the nature
of that interaction and how does it differ from that found in adult bilinguals?
To address these questions, the current project examines how the two phonetic
systems of bilingual children interact by comparing French-English bilingual
children to age-matched monolingual children of both languages and adult French-
English bilinguals. The study focuses on the acquisition of diphthongs, which
are complex vowel segments that have not received much attention in the
literature. Previous studies on the production of monophthong vowels have shown
effects of language interaction in bilingual children, as evidenced by
overlapping phonetic properties, which were significantly different from what
was found for monolingual speakers. The results of this study will indicate
whether the previously established findings on the acquisition of monophthong
vowels can be generalized to that of the diphthongs. Additionally, by examining
the acquisition of diphthongs, this project also addresses significant
methodological issues on how to best capture the dynamic properties of complex
segments by using the Smoothing Spline ANOVA, which is a relatively novel method
for comparing differences in vowel production. This project will determine
whether or not this technique is adequate for capturing diphthongs' dynamicity
and whether or not it will produce more precise results than previous
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the current project will be
relevant to parents of bilingual children, and to various associations working
with bilingual children that may be curious about the progression of children's
dual language acquisition. The results may also be relevant to clinical
applications such as speech-language pathology. Given the phonetic complexity of
diphthongs, the current study may reveal that they are generally more difficult
to acquire than monophthong vowels. Thus, children may show speech delays
involving the production of diphthongs. The results of the current study may
become useful to clinicians for the construction of baseline data regarding the
production of diphthongs. Speech therapists may then refer to this baseline,
particularly when trying to differentiate between real clinical speech problems
and potential byproducts of bilingualism, which may otherwise be interpreted as
speech impairment.