* 1123595
* Topics in the Organization of Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Asher Wolinsky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 251,391.00

This award funds four different projects in economic theory. The first part
proposes to study the basic decision problem of optimal evaluation of a multi-
attribute object whose attributes are not all readily observable and have to be
discovered at a cost. As an example, one may think of the purchase decision of a
fairly complex good (say, a computer). Typically, a prospective buyer cannot
easily assess the importance and meaning of all the different attributes. The
process of researching them is costly and often the final decision is made
without evaluating all the attributes. This is obviously a fundamental decision
problem. It is reminiscent of the classical search problem (think of the
decision maker as sampling the different attributes), but it differs from that
problem in the specification of the payoff (here the payoff depends on all
attributes whereas in the search problem it depends only on the item that was
selected). For this reason, the familiar analysis of the classical search
problem cannot be used here and this problem requires new analysis. As a first
step, the PI will seek to understand how optimal evaluation process depends on
the nature of the uncertainty concerning the different attributes and the nature
of the discovery costs. While the analysis of this problem is an interesting
exercise in its own right, its main importance is in the implications that it
might have in broader economic scenarios. The second part of this proposal would
indeed attempt to explore such implications. It proposes to embed this sort of
decision concerning a multi-attribute object in the context of market models and
investigate the resulting equilibrium outcomes. The intellectual merit of these
two parts is in identifying a very natural and fundamental problem that seems
relevant for many situations, might be amenable to analysis but has not been
analyzed directly before. The understandings achieved by the proposed analysis
would generate insights into the behavior of prospective buyers and presentation
of products by sellers in markets for fairly complex goods. Naturally, such
insights could inform the regulation of such markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
third part proposes to analyze a common values trading environment in which a
privately informed principal samples at a cost imperfectly informed bidders. The
objective is to focus on a class of realistic situations that commonly arise in
the procurement of services (say, a renovation of a building) and sale of assets
(say, a sale of a company). In these situations the auctioneer (the procurer of
the service or the seller of an asset as may be the case) possesses private
information about the value of the transaction (be it information about the cost
of performing the service in question or about the value of the object being
sold) and the solicitation of bids might be costly. We have in mind primarily
informal scenarios that combine features of auctions and search, though the
issues under consideration may be present in some formal auctions as well. The
main contribution of this analysis is in gaining understanding of the manner in
which information is aggregated in a class of realistic trading scenarios that
have not been analyzed. The insights emerging from this analysis may also
contribute to practical thinking about market design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fourth part explores models of contest over the control of a firm with widely
dispersed ownership. The main focus is on the implications of allowing the sale
of votes separately from shares. The main objectives are to provide a complete
game theoretic model for this important class of problems and obtain new
insights concerning the efficiency consequences of various restrictions on the
form of tender offers particularly with respect to the separation of votes from
shares. The contributions of this part are both methodological-- developing the
complete analytical framework for this important class of models-- and
substantive--understanding the consequences of trading votes separately from
shares. The potential practical implications of this research are immediately
obvious since it addresses directly issues that might be relevant for the
regulation of financial markets.