* 1123505
* Emergent Forms of Relatedness: Complex family forms, policing and incarceration in a poor urban neighborhood of Santiago, Chile
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,11/30/2014
* Clara Han, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2014
* USD 121,995.00

Dr. Clara Han, Johns Hopkins University, will conduct ethnographic research on
the changing contours of kinship networks and norms in relation to the
incarceration process and neighborhood-level policing in a poor urban
neighborhood in Santiago, Chile. By conducting longitudinal fieldwork in a poor
urban neighborhood where intensive policing has led to high rates of
incarceration, this study will document: 1) how kinship networks and moral
obligations are taking shape in relation to incarceration; 2) how and to what
extent criminal procedure takes into account kinship obligations in sentencing;
3) how neighborhood social and ecclesiastical organizations morally and
materially provide possibilities for new vertical and lateral kinship relations
(for example, parenting, grandparenting, and siblingship) and how the varying
realization of these relations reshape the neighborhood as an actual social
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will employ a range of ethnographic
fieldwork methods, including participant-observation in diverse neighborhood
organizations, life histories and kinship charts, and longitudinal interviews of
women with incarcerated kin. Primary field research will be supplemented by
observations of public court hearings in the criminal court that serves this
neighborhood, archival research on legal disputes regarding kinship care for
children of incarcerated kin as well as the wider processes of legal and penal
reform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this study will complement macro-
level quantitative studies on the social effects of incarceration on families
and neighborhoods by contributing an understanding of the practices and ideas of
kinship from the perspective of those who live in neighborhoods with high rates
of incarceration. Given the contemporary policy debates on penal reform due to
increasing prison populations across the Americas, this research can offer a
timely contribution to these debates by illuminating alternative responses to
poverty-related violence and insecurity, responses generated and imagined by
neighborhoods themselves.