* 1123460
* Collaborative Research: The interplay of production and perception in sound changes affecting US English
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2016
* Valerie Fridland, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 10/31/2016
* USD 56,193.00

Does the dialect you speak determine how you hear the speech around you? With
National Science Foundation support, Dr. Tyler Kendall and Dr. Valerie Fridland
will conduct twenty-four months of linguistic research investigating how vowel
perception is affected by dialect experience. Utilizing web-based perception
experiments to gain participation from across the U.S., and recording speech
from a subset of these participating subjects, the project will investigate what
links exist between the perception and production of vowel categories (e.g.,
"ee" and "ih") and how these categories are mediated by variation at the level
of the community and the individual. In particular, the research will examine
whether distinctive regional vowel changes that affect three main dialects of
American English (Northern, Southern and Western) are contributing to greater
diversity in speech processing, in addition to speech production, and whether
the degree to which individuals show such vowel changes themselves affects their
speech processing in relation to their community norms. To gain a better
understanding of the impact of social influences on speech perception, this
research will investigate whether listeners' categorization of vowels is also
affected by their expectations regarding learned social distinctions among
speakers, such as regional affiliation or gender.

Increasing evidence suggests that socially derived linguistic variation provides
more than simply clues to social identity, and, in fact, plays a pivotal role in
the actual processing and decoding of the speech signal itself. Research in this
area should prove to have applied benefits such as informing educational
approaches to non-native language/dialect populations and also to the
development of voice recognition technologies. Further, comparative examination
of the productive and perceptual range of speakers affected by different dialect
experiences will inform both speech and hearing science and sociolinguistic
research, contributing to basic theories about the nature of speech processing
and of sound change.