* 1123980
* Collaborative Research: The Hominid Sites And Paleolakes Drilling Project: Acquiring a High Resolution Paleoenvironmental Context of Human Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Anders Noren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 382,960.00

Understanding whether and how Earth system processes impacted human evolution is
a challenge that generates broad interest among scientists and the general
public. A recent NRC report noted how understanding of the environmental
dynamics underpinning human evolution is ripe for major advances. This grant
brings together scientists with a breadth of expertise, and this team will
expand the paleoenvironmental data set upon which hypotheses about the
relationship between environment and human origins must be based. The team will
recover cores from long drill cores from five carefully selected ancient lake
beds in Ethiopia and Kenya. These sites cover several important intervals of the
late Neogene and Quaternary, close to key paleoanthropological sites, that will
provide important new environmental information about the locales inhabited by
ancient hominins. Funding requested here will support operational costs related
to drilling and the initial core descriptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to produce high-quality paleoenvironmental data from deposits
close to key anthropological sites. Drilling allows the collection of unaltered
samples from the same beds producing the hominin fossils, These near-pristine
samples contain geochemical proxy data that can be used to decipher the region's
environmental history. The team will correlate these drill cores to nearby
marine records and to nearby outcrop records containing hominin and other
vertebrate fossils, and to artifact assemblages by using tephras, paleomagnetism
and other direct dating techniques. Drill cores from distal ancient lake beds
avoid outcrop sample problems such as weathering, lacunae, and discontinuous
expression of paleoenvironmental variables, while allowing examination of
seasonal-scale environmental variability in varved intervals. The project will
collect ~2400m of cores from nine bore holes at the North Awash and Chew Bahir
Basins in Ethiopia, and the West Turkana, Baringo and Magadi Basins in Kenya.
These areas have yielded some of the most important fossil hominin and artifact
sites in the world, directly stimulating much of the current debate about human
evolution and environmental dynamics. All sites contain long, continuous climate
records spanning much of the last 4 million years, and are areas which are
demonstrably sensitive to a range of environmental forcing mechanisms. The cores
will be ideal for generating quantitative paleotemperature, paleoprecipitation,
and other environmental reconstructions critical for understanding the
environmental dynamics that early hominins experienced. These data will also
provide a strong empirical base for evaluating both large and mesoscale models
of African paleoclimate, and models linking climate, orography, hydrology and
vegetation resources critical for early hominin
survival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes training opportunities for
nine American and African students, including focused outreach efforts to
attract U.S. under-represented minority undergraduates through the University of
Arizona's Saguaro Program. Many Kenyan and Ethiopian scientists are centrally
involved in the project, and training and research opportunities will exist for
more junior African scientists at all stages of the project. Public outreach
activities will be carried out through three museum partners in the US and
Africa. In the past, the local communities have benefited from scientific
drilling activities by casing the boreholes so that they can be used as water
wells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core samples and data collected by this project will
be available to the general scientific community through the National Lacustrine
Core Laboratory, ICDP NGDC, and the Smithsonian's Human Origins Database. The
drilling operations will be co-funded by the International Continental Drilling
Programme.