* 1123136
* Broader Implementation of a New Process-Oriented Guided-Inquiry-Learning (POGIL) Curriculum for Experimental Psychology Labs at an Urban College &amp; Dissemination to Nearby Colle
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Barbara Rumain, Touro College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 587,161.00

This Type 2 project is expanding the use of the POGIL (Process-Oriented Guided
Inquiry Learning) approach in psychology to eight sites within the Touro College
system, a diverse multi-campus institution. Instructional materials for
experimental psychology labs based on the POGIL approach (developed with support
from a CCLI Phase 1 grant) are also being expanded. The pedagogical approach now
includes a version of a student preceptor model developed in a CCLI Phase 1
grant to St. Olaf College. Early results indicate that combining POGIL with
student preceptors boosts student learning. In order to disseminate this work,
workshops are being conducted on Touro College campuses and are planned for
nearby colleges in order to reach faculty from other institutions in the tri-
state (New York, New Jersey, Connecticut) area - especially those with
underserved populations. The workshops provide hands-on experience with the
POGIL materials. Feedback from faculty and students at other institutions is
serving to further refine and revise the new curricular materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In addition to testing and refining
the extant POGIL instructional materials and widening the community of users to
additional campuses, the current project is also developing a performance
assessment instrument in order to test the impact of the new instructional
materials on students' abilities to apply principles in experimental psychology
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The standardized set of
POGIL instructional materials are being disseminated for use at other
institutions, first locally within the Touro College system, then in the New
York tri-state area, and eventually nationally. They have the potential to be
used by many students at other colleges. The POGIL approach has proven to be
particularly effective for students from underrepresented groups.