* 1123895
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: A Systems Chemistry Approach to Self Assembly and Self Replication
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Donna Blackmond, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Donna G. Blackmond of the Scripps Research Institute is supported by
the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Office
of International Science and Engineering to work on a systems chemistry approach
to self assembly and self replication. The work will be conducted in
collaboration with Professor Ben L. Feringa of the University of Groningen, The
Netherlands. NSF will support the research of the US-based investigators and the
Netherlands Office for Scientific Research will support the research of the
collaborating Dutch investigators. The objectives of the proposed research are:
(1) to develop autocatalytic organic reactions of biological significance,
taking as a model the chemistry of the Soai reaction, which exhibits
autocatalytic behavior and amplification of chirality, and (2) to develop
supramolecular systems that combine self-assembly and autocatalysis to amplify
chirality through asymmetric self-replication. If successful, the project will
lead to new materials and devices and will provide new knowledge on the origin
of homochirality in amino acids and sugars. Understanding how the active
catalyst species assembles and propagates in autocatalytic systems may
eventually provide clues on the origin of life on earth. The students involved
in this research will benefit from close interaction with Dutch students working
on the project and from exposure to an international scientific research
experience.