* 1123536
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute: Computational Materials Science for Energy Generation and Conversion; Santiago, Chile; January 8-22nd, 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Richard Hennig, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

1123536&lt;br/&gt;Stewart&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced
Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department
of Energy (DOE), will take place during January, 2012 at the Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, in Santiago, Chile. Organized by Dr. Derek A.
Stewart and Prof. Richard Hennig from Cornell University, the institute will
focus on computational materials science for energy generation and conversion.
Through lectures, hands-on labs, and discussions, the workshop will introduce
graduate students and postdocs to powerful computational methods and state-of-
the-art simulation codes that can be used to predict macroscopic properties of
materials such as crystal structures, defect energies, electronic band
structure, vibrational properties, reaction pathways, electronic and thermal
transport, and photonic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the integration
of theory and computation across the scientific disciplines of materials
science, chemistry and physics, this PASI will provide an educational experience
that will prepare graduate students and postdocs for careers in computational
materials science. Special roundtable discussions will highlight critical areas
for future energy research and provide practical career advice for young
scientists. Other goals of this PASI include broadening the participation of
underrepresented minorities and building lasting links among young scientists in
the Americas. A website will be developed, with access to workshop
presentations, tutorial materials, and web-accessible videos of lectures and
tutorials.