* 1123823
* EXP: Students Authoring Intelligent Tutoring Systems for Constructing Models of Ill-Defined Dynamic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Daniel Childers, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 09/30/2015
* USD 549,871.00

The PIs, one expert in intelligent tutoring systems, and the other an expert on
ecosystems, are investigating the ways model construction can aid in the
understanding of complex dynamic systems, specifically ecosystems and systems
involved in sustaining life on our planet. The PIs are particularly interested
in understanding the affordances of model construction in promoting such
learning and the challenges in doing so, and they are doing that by having
undergraduates construct and explore models related to issues in sustainability
during an introductory sustainability course. Model construction and exploration
are done in the context of an intelligent tutoring system (called Lait).
Learners switch between constructing models themselves and using the models of
others as learning aids. Model constructors know they are constructing their
models for others to learn from, and as others are using those models to learn,
they may interact (online) with the model constructors to discuss the reasoning
behind designing the models. The tutoring system provides scaffolding for model
building and for model exploration, supports collaboration around modeling
issues and issues related to particular models, and runs the models that are
created. The goal is to promote understanding of the systems being modeled,
skill at model construction, and understanding of the epistemology of modeling.
The first year of research is taking place in the lab; research in later years
is taking place in classrooms, specifically in the introductory
interdisciplinary sustainability course, which enrolls 300 students per
semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems thinking is notoriously difficult and
notoriously difficult to learn. Thinking about sustainability is equally
complex, and the target domain here is sustainability. There is potential for
this work to shed light on how to better help people understand and think about
systems and about interactions between and interconnectedness of the systems
that sustain our lives on earth. In addition, the literature on learning
suggests that learners should learn more from constructing models and making
them work than from simply running the models of others as simulations. But up
to now, technology has not been up to making modeling by learners accessible.
Most research in the area of simulation and modeling to promote learning has
therefore focused on the roles of simulation in promoting learning. This project
is exploring ways of making systems modeling more accessible to those who are
not already competent programmers and will uncover some of the affordances of
modeling for promoting learning and the circumstances under which modeling can
promote learning about particular systems and learning to be a systems thinker.