* 1123547
* The Intergenerational Redistribution of Wealth and Welfare in Great Recessions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Dirk Krueger, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2014
* USD 269,550.00

NSF Proposal 1123547: Draft Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;"The Intergenerational
Redistribution of Wealth and Welfare in Great Recessions"&lt;br/&gt;By Dirk
Krueger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The economic downturn that started in the second
half of 2007 and continues today is the most severe recession since the great
depression of the 1930?s. A recent large literature investigates the causes and
aggregate consequences of this so-called great recession. This project in
contrast studies how the wealth and economic welfare losses from this severe
decline in aggregate economic activity are distributed across different age
cohorts in the population. &lt;br/&gt;The focus on the age dimension is
motivated by the empirical observation from household level data that labor
earnings and net worth (the value of all assets net of all debts) display a
distinct profile over the life cycle. Asset holdings are strongly concentrated
among older households whereas younger households possess very little net worth,
but can expect substantial future labor income. Since the price of assets such
as stocks and houses declined by about three times as much as labor incomes in
the great recession, the main hypothesis evaluated in this project is that the
wealth and welfare losses from the recent economic crisis are very unevenly
distributed across households of different ages, and are concentrated among the
elderly.&lt;br/&gt;In order to quantitatively investigate this hypothesis this
project develops a large scale overlapping generations (OLG) model with
aggregate risk, an endogenous household labor-leisure and portfolio choice as
well as government tax, debt and social security policies, and calibrates it to
pre-crisis life cycle labor income and asset profiles observed in 2007 Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF) data. It then generates, within the model, a decline of
aggregate economic activity of a magnitude observed between 2007 and 2009, and
first analyzes whether the model can generate a fall in asset prices three times
the size of output, as observed in the data. The project then uses the model to
measure how the welfare losses from the great recession are distributed across
different age cohorts, including future generations. Finally it employs the
developed model to study how the fiscal policy response to the great recession
(e.g. the direct and indirect purchase of assets by the government through the
Troubled Asset Relief Program, TARP) has shaped the age distribution of welfare
losses implied by the downturn, and how alternative strategies to finance the
cost of these policies (tax financing versus debt financing) would impact this
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;The intended broader impact resulting from the project
is (at least) twofold. First, and most directly, the developed model,
calibration and the numerical algorithm to solve the model will be made
publically available, and thus can be applied by any researcher interested in
studying the re-distributional consequences of other large economic shocks (such
as demographic shocks or natural catastrophes on a national scale) across
different generations. &lt;br/&gt;Second, the results derived from the analysis
of the actual and counterfactual hypothetical fiscal policy responses to the
great recession are not only informative about the desirability of these
policies in the current economic downturn, but can also provide guidance to the
research and public policy discussion about the redistributive consequences of
future fundamental fiscal policy reforms (including social security and Medicare
reforms) that might be enacted in response to large economic crises.