* 1123747
* Collaborative Research: Science of Broadening Participation -- From School to Work: A Longitudinal Study of Gender Stratification in Science and Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Susan Silbey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 58,641.00

SES-1123747 Susan Silbey Massachusetts Institute of Technology

SES-1123905 Brian Rubineau Cornell University

SES-1124169 Carroll Seron University of California-Irvine

Science of Broadening Participation -- From School to Work: A Longitudinal Study
of Gender Stratification in Science and Engineering

Abstract The United States and other advanced economies face unprecedented
challenges in technical areas such as energy, environment, and defense. Solving
these challenges requires a diverse, highly educated labor force, with
professional expertise in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). Contributing to the problem of under-production of STEM professionals in
the U.S. is the pronounced gender segregation in some STEM professions,
especially in engineering. As a consequence, we have a much smaller population
from which to develop the needed engineering expertise. This project seeks to
help us understand what causes continued gender segregation in STEM fields.

An earlier study conducted by the PIs surveyed and interviewed a group of men
and women for five years, beginning with the first year of their college
education. This panel included a disproportionate number of young men and women
planning to major in engineering, who had demonstrated exemplary achievement in
science and mathematics. Yet, after four years of engineering education, shortly
before college graduation and entry into the labor market, a significantly
smaller percentage of the women than the men planned to pursue careers in
engineering. Analyses showed that more women than men reported lower confidence
in their ability to have a career in engineering.

The current project revisits these men and women at the next career stage -- 5
years after their anticipated college graduation, and during their early years
in the labor market. At this time, the project will collect data that enables
researchers to compare the role of individual (confidence), organizational
(workplace-related), and social network factors to explain gender specific
career track decisions, especially regarding STEM fields. Methodologically, this
study expands a unique longitudinal dataset to explain the critical transition
from college and post-graduate training to the professional workforce. The
theoretical model used adjudicates among the most important contending
explanations for persistent gender stratification in professional employment by
testing social psychological theories of causal individual and gender
differences, organization-level processes, and social capital theories
concerning the efficacy of social networks.

Broader Impacts Findings from this research may help explain patterns of
attrition from and persistence in STEM fields, and engineering in particular.
This important issue is of interest to private- and public-sector employers,
current and future professionals, as well as institutions of higher education.
Moreover, persistent gender segregation in STEM could compromise the competitive
position of the United States in a global economy. Findings from this study may
also contribute to policy developments aimed at improving the nation's
scientific competitiveness.