* 1123147
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Emotional Minority: Testing a Theoretical Model of Minority Influence, Emotion Stereotypes, and Prejudice in a Jury Deliberation Context
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Jessica Salerno, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 12,878.00

Although the jury room can be an emotional place, little research has examined
the impact of jurors' emotions on the deliberation process. Three studies will
investigate how expressing emotion affects the potential for a single juror
arguing against the rest of the jury (i.e., a holdout) to influence the
majority, particularly holdouts from groups associated with emotion stereotypes
(e.g., the "angry Black man" stereotype). Stereotyped minorities are often
penalized for expressing emotions. In a holdout juror situation, however,
emotion stereotypes might present a unique opportunity for the holdout to
violate majority members' expectations, which sometimes enhances the credibility
of people who hold a minority opinion. This research will assess people's
gender- and race-based emotion stereotypes (Study 1), and will investigate the
implications of a holdout juror expressing these stereotypical emotions during
jury deliberation (Studies 2 and 3). Participants will engage in what appears to
be a computer-mediated discussion about a murder case with five other mock
jurors, but in reality is a pre-written fictional deliberation script. These
studies will test (a) whether participants are more or less persuaded by holdout
jurors who express their opinions with sadness, anger, or no emotion, and (b) if
these effects depend on whether the holdout is a man or a woman (for whom
sadness is stereotypical and anger is nonstereotypical), or a White versus Black
man (for whom anger is stereotypical and sadness is
nonstereotypical).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will increase
understanding about the effect of emotion expression on underrepresented groups?
credibility and potential to exert influence in emotionally charged settings
(e.g., juries, collaborator meetings, hiring committees, workplace groups). It
will also increase understanding of how historically underrepresented jurors can
decrease or enhance their credibility through expressing emotion on juries, and
ensure that the many efforts to promote diversity in jury selection are not
futile.