* 1123983
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Earthquake Anticipation in Istanbul
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Brinkley Messick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 10,145.00

Doctoral student Elizabeth Angell (Columbia University), supervised by Dr.
Brinkley Messick, will investigate how the expectation of a major natural
disaster affects human-landscape interactions. The research will be conducted
through a case study of Istanbul, Turkey, a megacity located in an active fault
zone with a history of devastating earthquakes. The research will examine the
experience and effects of earthquake anticipation in Istanbul, both as a
technopolitical project that seeks to mold landscapes, buildings, and bodies
into a state of preparedness, and as an affective relationship to time and space
generated through dwelling in a seismically active landscape.

The researcher will conduct thirteen months of ethnographic research in
Istanbul, employing participant-observation research and semi-structured
interviews in both expert and non-expert settings, gathering published and
archival documentary material, and surveying selected buildings and areas. The
research will ask how earthquake risk is produced as an object of knowledge by
experts like seismologists, engineers, and actuaries, but also through rumor,
superstition, and religious faith; document how anticipation is translated into
action; and explore how the social imagination of disaster affects everyday
experiences of life in Istanbul's seismic cityscape.

The research will expand the anthropological study of disaster by focusing
specifically on anticipation and its generative effects, and contributing to
theoretical conversations about anticipation, risk, and preparedness. The study
of urban life in an earthquake zone foregrounds the co-constitution of people
and landscape, by which is meant the role of different kinds of information and
practices in shaping social perception and experience of place. The project will
therefore integrate theoretical perspectives and methodological approaches from
landscape archaeology and geography, exploring their potential for the
interdisciplinary study of human-landscape interaction. Finally, the project
will contribute specifically to the anthropology of contemporary Turkey by
focusing attention on the topics of science, disaster, and the environment.
Supporting this research also contributes to the education of a social
scientist.