* 1123661
* Collaborative Proposal: StressTyp2: A Database for Word Accentual Patterns in the World's Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2017
* Hendrikus van der Hulst, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2017
* USD 286,898.00

Words and phrases in many languages exhibit distinct rhythmic patterns. These
rhythmic patterns are often referred to as "stress patterns" or "accent
patterns." Over the past several decades, both field linguists and theoretical
linguists have endeavored to understand the nature of these patterns in
individual languages and the range of variation that exists across languages.
The goal of this project is the construction and dissemination of a typological
database, to be called StressTyp2 (ST2), which documents and organizes these
patterns in the world's languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have three
specific tasks. First, they will merge the information in existing databases of
stress and accent patterns. Second, they will improve, verify and enrich the
dataset in a variety of ways and develop a web-based interface that makes the
information in ST2 available to researchers and citizens around the world, and
which meets or exceeds professional and scientific standards. The third goal of
this project is to adopt (and, where necessary, establish) best practices for
the collection, organization, dissemination and presentation of typological data
pertaining to sound patterns in natural language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
many issues in constructing cross-linguistic data resources. The PIs will focus
on the complex logical structure involved in a relational database which tracks
dozens of linguistic properties, developing standards for assessing the accuracy
or confidence of linguistic descriptions of lesser studied languages, and
statistical sampling techniques for evaluating how representative the
information in ST2 is of the world's languages and particular language
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will fund two public workshops on
word accent systems with domestic and international experts, which will both
educate and inspire attendees, which will include professors, graduate students
and undergraduate students. Additionally, undergraduate and graduate students
will receive significant amounts of training as research assistants in the
collection, verification, dissemination and analysis of linguistic data.