* 1124984
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Single-Molecule Imaging, Dynamics,and Electronics at Multivalent Host-Guest Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Paul Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry between US Investigators and their
Counterparts Abroad (ICC) project focuses on developing sophisticated
supramolecular assemblies and measurements to advance the state of the art in
this area of chemistry and nanoscience. Highly ordered cyclodextrin monolayers
with short tethers are assembled on metal substrates. These assemblies are used
for studies using high-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to
understand binding of hydrophobic guest molecules with unprecedented detail.
Single (supra)molecular studies enable both electronic and chemical
investigations of single-guest binding, as well as direct characterization of
multivalent binding and active guest molecule patterning and coupling. The Weiss
group at UCLA is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, with contribution from the
Office of International Science and Engineering. The Huskens group at the
University of Twente is supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO), the partnering international funding agency.

The process of molecular interfacial recognition is central to many important
technological and biological processes and phenomena. This work aims to gain a
deeper understanding of molecular interfacial recognition which might be
relevant for areas as diverse as solar energy conversion and electronics to
sensors and biomedical applications. In addition, multivalency is known to be a
critical component of activity in biological systems, in particular for cell
membrane recognition. Cyclodextrin monolayers function as excellent model
systems to address multivalency issues at such membranes. The strong interactive
and diverse research environments of this project provides a setting for
teaching, training and learning. The extended visits of students to partner
laboratories for collaborative work and training provide students with highly
valuable international experience.