* 1124665
* Collaborative Research: CDI Type-1: A Computer Framework for Modeling Complex Pattern Formation
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Habig, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The mechanisms living systems use to establish and maintain complex
3-dimensional shapes during embryonic development are poorly understood even
though molecular and cell biologists have generated mountains of data about
genes and their effects on organisms. Fundamental advances in controlling
biological form are stymied by the difficulty of obtaining shape information
through the analysis of gene networks such that it is currently difficult or
impossible for scientists to generate testable models of shape based on
experimental results from current biological research. These investigators will
apply state-of-the-art computational science and artificial intelligence to
create a novel suite of computational tools that will fundamentally integrate
numerous areas of biology and engineering to promote research into the
mechanisms used by organisms for establishing and maintaining their
3-dimensional shape. This "Bioinformatics of Shape" project will integrate
experimental data, a new mathematical language, a system for storing and mining
data, a modeling environment within which rule sets for regulatory mechanisms
can be simulated on computers, and an artificial intelligence module that will
help scientists discover and test novel ideas about how shape is generated
through genetics. The benefits to society of this new kind of collaboration
between computer scientists and biologists include the translation of molecular
and cell biological data into a new level of understanding that could have
implications for regenerative medicine, adaptive and self-repairing devices for
robotics and other engineering applications. The work will provide unique
training opportunities for students, establish a proof-of-principle for new
educational tools at the boundary between artificial intelligence and biology,
and facilitate data to knowledge production in a number of fields, such as
developmental biology, evolutionary biology, and the engineering of complex
adaptive systems.