* 1124495
* EXP: Using Technologies to Engage Learners in the Scientific Practices of Investigating Rich Behavioral and Ecological Questions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Joel Brown, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 549,467.00

This exploratory project, involving The University of Illinois at Chicago and
Northwestern University, investigates the use of sensor-based technologies and
general engineering approaches by fourth and fifth grade elementary students,
and the effects of that use on how the students formulate research questions in
environmental science and biological science and develop domain specific
knowledge and concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teachers, students, and
researchers are partnering with the research team to contribute to an iterative
process that ensures a diversity of inputs to the approach and design, as they
explore opportunities and challenges of using the sensing technologies while
learning science. Several research questions are considered in this process and
include: Which scientific characteristics are appropriate for elementary school
students to grapple with, and which do they struggle with on a conceptual level?
Which concepts or processes are more motivating for students? How can an already
rich bounty of software technologies for gathering, storing, visualizing, and
working with data in instrumented investigations of animal behavior be
leveraged? What kinds of new tools are needed to extend those capabilities? How
can activities be structured by educators to engage student interest and connect
classroom work to field investigations? How can educators and technologists
design instruction, materials, and learning technologies in ways that foster
students' abilities to formulate scientific questions, choose measures, and plan
effective investigations? What pragmatic and content area concerns need to be
addressed for teachers to support engineering-enhanced ecological research? The
research questions and analysis include observations of small group and
classroom discourse, student work products, and reflective grounded interviews
to investigate aspects of practice, operationalization of research questions,
and examination of research designs, evidence-based argumentation, and
explanatory processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For sensing technologies and their
impact on learning to be fully understood, there are design factors that must be
considered. This research is providing the field of learning sciences with some
much needed information on design factors that involve sensor-based technologies
and domain-based knowledge on scientific practices and engineering approaches to
student learning. This interdisciplinary project makes contributions to the
fields of learning technologies, engineering education, and biological sciences.