* 1124944
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Electron Delocalization in Polypeptide Structure and Stability
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Ronald Raines, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2014
* USD 360,000.00

With this International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes (CLP) program of the Division of Chemistry is supporting
collaborative work by Professor Ronald T. Raines of the University of Wisconsin-
Madison and Professor Derek N. Woolfson of the University of Bristol, to carry
out fundamental studies on protein structure and stability, with an eye toward
understanding secondary orbital interactions. Research in the Woolfson
laboratory in the UK is supported by the partnering agency, the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC). This award is being co-funded by the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).

Protein structures and assemblies are directed, stabilized, and governed by a
wide variety of non-covalent interactions. Recently, work from this
collaborative team suggested that a lesser-known force, based upon n-to-pi*
interactions, is widespread in protein structures, and likely plays roles in
stability and function. Building on this new finding, the proposed research has
two overarching objectives: (1) using bioinformatics to probe n-to-pi* and
analogous interactions in high-resolution polypeptide structures of the
available public databases, namely the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) and
the RCSB (Brookhaven) Protein Data Bank (PDB); and (2) using chemistry to
explore the possibility of stabilizing peptide and protein structures by
enhancing n-to-pi* interactions through backbone chemical modification. Outcomes
could include a better understanding of non-covalent forces in peptide and
protein structures, and a general means to stabilize those structures.

In addition to scientific broader impacts in potentially changing the way
chemists think about conformation and orbital interactions in peptides, there
are significant educational broader impacts. This NSF-EPSRC ICC award will
enable participating students and postdoctorates to experience international
collaborative research first hand with colleagues in the partnering laboratory.