* 1124694
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Mechanochemical Probes of Supramolecular Polymer Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 09/30/2014
* USD 425,000.00

In this International Collaboration in Chemistry between US Investigators and
their Counterparts Abroad (ICC) project funded by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division and the
Office of International Science and Engineering, Stephen Craig of Duke
University will develop a molecular chemical strategy to characterize and
understand the role of bond scission in the mechanical failure of polymers. This
work includes an international collaboration with Prof. Rint Sijbesma of the
Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands. Profs. Sijbesma's work will
be funded by De Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (NWO).
The approach is to synthesize polymers that contain dioxetane groups as
luminescent probes of chain scission and to characterize the solution phase
chain scission and photoemission from the polymers using a recently developed
ultrasound-based technique. Knowledge gained from these studies will then be
applied to understanding the roles bond scission events play in the mechanism of
the mechanical failure of bulk polymer samples as well as newer supramolecular
polymer networks. The broader impacts involve training graduate and
undergraduate students, adding an international dimension to the training and
education of these students, enhancing infrastructure for research and education
through establishing this bilateral international collaboration, incorporating
research concepts from this work into a high school outreach activity, and
broadly disseminating research results through presentations at conferences and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastics are found in many facets of everyday
life, including food packaging, structural materials for automotive and
aerospace transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. This work might
lead to new design principles to make stronger plastics which could be used to
manufacture high performance, lightweight products for a range of applications.