* 1124192
* Collaborative Research: Capturing the Elusive 37:4 Alkenone-predominating Lacustrine Haptophyte: Alkenone Biosynthesis, Genetics and Culture Manipulation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Linda Amaral Zettler, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 08/31/2014
* USD 109,000.00

Haptophyte algae are recently credited as the most abundant and diverse primary
producers in the world?s oceans, rendering their metabolic and carbon fixation
pathways issues of utmost importance. Alkenone lipids produced by haptophyte
algae of the order Isochrysidales occur ubiquitously in the world?s ocean and in
numerous lakes and are an invaluable tool for paleotemperature reconstructions.
However, the mismatch between cultured haptophytes and observed alkenone
distributions in sediments has hindered the use of alkenones as a
paleotemperature proxy in lakes. In order to confidently apply the alkenone
unsaturation for paleotemperature reconstructions in lakes, it is necessary to
fully understand the biology and biochemistry of the lacustrine alkenone-
producing haptophytes using a consortium of techniques including culturing,
lipid and molecular characterization. This proposal builds on our success in
obtaining the first stable enrichment culture for a lacustrine haptophyte alga
that produces predominantly C37:4 alkenones, the alkenone abundant in freshwater
and brackish environments. Systematic sampling of lake water and plankton and in
situ measurements of environmental parameters at Lake George, ND combined with
extensive manipulation of our haptophyte culture will permit identification of
the triggers for haptophyte algal blooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our study will
promote multidisciplinary collaboration (organic geochemistry, molecular
biology, phycology, paleoclimatology, limnology) to studying important
biological, geochemical and paleoclimatological problems, and allow cross-
discipline training of graduate and undergraduate students. Close interaction
with Brown University's existing NSF funded GK-12 program will bring high school
teachers to participate in field trips and laboratory research, and lectures
given at local schools, will broadly disseminate our research. Data generated
from this research will also be incorporated into organic geochemistry and
molecular biology courses targeted at the advanced undergraduate/graduate level
and help support a full-time graduate student focusing on lacustrine
haptophytes.