* 1124197
* Understanding the Effectiveness of Payment for Ecosystem Service Programs
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* David Lansing, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 08/31/2013
* USD 62,802.00

This project considers the effectiveness of Payments for Ecosystems Services
(PES) programs in Costa Rica. PES programs are a rapidly proliferating
conservation mechanism whereby landowners are paid for the "downstream"
ecological benefits of their forested land. These programs are increasingly
implemented worldwide, however, the conditions under which such payments produce
new forms of forest cover are poorly understood. Knowing the extent to which
payments for ecosystem services produces additional forest cover is critical for
gauging the effectiveness of this program as payments that go toward status quo
forms of land cover are an inefficient use of scarce conservation funds. Despite
the importance of this issue, there remains a paucity of empirical work
concerning the conditions under which ecosystem service payments actually
produce additional forest cover among specific social groups. For example,
little is known about the outcomes of PES among smallholding farmers that enroll
in this program. In addition, the social conditions of agricultural production
under which payments to smallholders can produce new forest cover remains poorly
understood. This project will address these issues by evaluating whether PES is
a viable mechanism for producing new forest cover among smallholding farmers in
Costa Rica. Data on household land-use change will be collected through the use
of participatory mapping exercises as well as interviews. In addition,
smallholders who receive PES, and a control group of non-PES smallholders, will
be asked to identify changes in their land using high-resolution remote sensing
images and aerial photos at three different times. Data from a land-use survey
will be used in order to analyze the extent to which PES has produced additional
forest cover. A household livelihoods survey will be concurrently undertaken in
which households are queried on their assets, expenditures, production, and
income. Data from the household survey will be used to conduct a cost-benefit
analysis in order to determine the types of land uses that have the most
potential for PES to convert into forest. Survey data will also be used to
construct regression models in order to identify the household characteristics
that are likely to produce forms of land-use with the most potential for PES-
induced forest conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new
insights into the effectiveness of PES by empirically evaluating whether PES
produces additional forest cover among smallholders. This research will also
advance knowledge about the future potential of PES by delineating the specific
on-the-ground conditions that allow for smallholder land uses that PES can
potentially convert into forest. This research also has resonance beyond PES-
specific scholarship as it will advance knowledge on tropical forest transitions
by explicitly studying the complex policy and institutional context that shapes
the land-use decisions of households. The project includes the participation of
both graduate and undergraduate students and findings will be disseminated in
the academic as well as the policy communities.