* 1124134
* Property Tax Experiment: Testing the Role of Wages, Incentives and Audit on Tax Inspectors' Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Asim Khwaja, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2017
* USD 475,450.00

A Property Tax Experiment: Testing the Role of Wages, Incentives and Audit on
Tax Inspectors' Behavior&lt;br/&gt;Adnan Q. Khan, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Benjamin
A. Olken&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;A central problem in raising
public sector efficiency is effectively incentivizing public servants to exert
effort and not resort to rent-seeking. While this issue is more salient in
developing countries, it is to some degree a concern everywhere, and is
particularly a concern in tax administration. While there is a substantial
theoretical literature on incentive theory for bureaucrats, there are few
carefully designed and evaluated empirical studies, particularly in the tax
sector. &lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to test the impact of various wage and
incentive schemes on the performance of tax officials, in collaboration with the
Excise and Taxation Department in Punjab, Pakistan. The study will focus on
evaluating a variety of wage and incentive schemes for tax inspectors ranging
from efficiency wages, incentive mechanisms that tie wages to revenue
collection, and incentive mechanisms that give rewards for accuracy and customer
satisfaction in addition to revenue collected. We focus on urban property tax,
both because this is an important yet relatively untapped revenue source and
because independent measures can reliably assess true tax liability.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will be implemented as a randomized experiment:
individual tax units, known as circles, will be randomly assigned to one of
three main schemes: an efficiency wage scheme, in which wages will be
approximately doubled; the incentive scheme, in which an average of 30 percent
of all tax revenues above a historical benchmark will be rebated to the tax
officials as an honorarium; and an incentive plus scheme, where in addition to
the revenue incentives, tax officials will be incentivized based on the accuracy
of their tax assessments and customer satisfaction. These different schemes
allow us to test not only whether incentives increase tax collections, but also
whether by explicitly incentivizing tax collectors on multiple dimensions the
government can increase collections while maintaining accuracy and customer
satisfaction. To the best of our knowledge, this represents the first
randomized, controlled trial on incentives for tax inspectors anywhere in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;By measuring multiple outcomes we can potentially separate low
effort from other channels, as well as disentangle the various mechanisms
through which incentives can matter, such as adding new properties to the tax
rolls, updating property valuations, issuing more tax bills, and greater effort
at ensuring payment. While we focus on one developing country and specific
interventions, the broader goal is to generate insights that are generalizable
to other settings throughout the world.