* 1124640
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documentation and Description of Khinalug Language
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2013
* Lyle Campbell, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 11/30/2013
* USD 11,990.00

This grant supports the fieldwork and research for Tamrika Khvtisiashvili's
doctoral dissertation on the grammar of Khinalug, an endangered Northeast
Caucasian language which is spoken primarily in a single village in the
mountains of Azerbaijan. Documentation of this endangered language will provide
new data from a language and a language family that are very poorly known,
situated in a geographically diverse and isolated area, data which contribute to
the scientific advancement of linguistic theory. The descriptive grammar of
Khinalug will contribute to linguistic scholarship in several ways, among them
an analysis of unusual structural traits that have not been studied and
materials for historical linguistics analysis, needed for the study of language
change, language contact, and investigation of controversial proposals of
genetic relationships. The research will be enhanced by and integrated with
training of native speakers in recording and transcription and in development of
teaching and literacy materials, which will in turn insure the long-range
sustainability of Khinalug language and culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
grammar will be based on linguistic analysis that is informed by current
linguistic theory and language typology. The phonology, morphology, and syntax
will be analyzed and presented in formats that are accessible to linguists
worldwide, to members of the local community, and to other scholars and
interested non-scientists. A number of members of the community will be involved
in actual research and in developing language maintenance/revitalization
materials for teaching and learning the language. Linguists will benefit by
having access to data and analysis valuable for further research in a number of
areas of linguistics; non-specialists and the public generally can benefit from
having access to historical and anthropological information about a little known
group with a long and fascinating history and their language.