* 1124124
* WORKSHOP: Cognitive, computational, and neural processing--Constraints on theories of language production -New York University - July 2012
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2013
* Adam Buchwald, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2013
* USD 23,189.00

Language production is a remarkably complex cognitive ability which requires the
successful integration of multiple levels of cognitive/neural processing.
Research on the mechanisms underlying language production is performed from a
variety of disciplinary perspectives, including psycholinguistics,
neurolinguistics, theoretical linguistics, computational linguistics, cognitive
neuropsychology, and communication sciences and disorders. However, a complete
understanding of language production requires situating our findings in a
broader context that addresses the constraints that are placed on theories of
language production by general cognitive, neural and computational processing
principles. This award provides support for a special workshop session
addressing cognitive, computational and neural constraints on theories of
language production. The session will be part of the July 2012 meeting of the
International Workshop on Language Production at New York University (NYU). The
special session will consist of presentations by five leading scientists whose
research on cognitive, neural and computational processes can directly constrain
theories of language production. Over the past seven years, the International
Workshop on Language Production has become the premier meeting focused solely on
language production, and is thus the ideal venue to hold a special session of
lectures and discussions addressing constraints on language production theories.
This special session will inform language production researchers about state-of-
the-art findings on the constraints on language production theories, which they
can incorporate into their research, and will also provide opportunities to form
collaborations between researchers who focus on language production with others
who focus on more general cognitive, neural and computational issues.