* 1124615
* Far Eastern Borderlands: Informal Networks and Space at the Margins of the Russian State
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,09/30/2014
* Tobias Holzlehner, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2014
* USD 179,838.00

In an increasingly globalized world, borderlands provide a very interesting
point of investigation of the direction and pace of socio-economic change. This
project is comparative ethnographic research of two post-Soviet border zones,
Chukotka in the North East and Primore in the southeastern region of Russia.
These two regions of the former Soviet Union are of particular interest because
the main populations are ethnic minority peoples marginalized both socially and
geographically by the majority social and political structure yet in the
contemporary geopolitical situation, they occupy the borders with two economic-
political super powers, China and the US. As part of his research, the PI will
investigate such issues as commodity flow, global mobilities, border space, and
informal economies and how these affect local social structures and cultural
identities of the people that occupy this porous borderland landscape. Using
multiple methodologies: participant observations, archival research, informal
interviews and surveys and a Google map-based geo-visualization tool to
facilitate an understanding of social pattern in physical space, the project
will be able to analyze individual informal networks and community social
networks, as well as spatially embedded economic practices, in both border zones
in greater depth.