* 1124827
* Collaborative CDI-Type II: Cyber Enabled Discovery System for Advanced Multidisciplinary Study of Humanitarian Logistics for Disaster Response
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* John Mitchell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,524,299.00

This research will develop a cyber-enabled discovery system, integrating state
of the art thinking and methodologies from computer, transportation,
mathematical, and social sciences, for management of logistics in humanitarian
responses to disasters. It will (1) create new paradigms of humanitarian
logistic models that explicitly consider two key aspects not studied by the
current techniques: non-hysteretic deprivation costs (lack of access to a given
good or service), and materiel convergence (physical movement of supplies and
equipment); (2) develop appropriate models to represent human suffering as a
deprivation cost; (3) develop analytical models to quantify and influence the
amount, type, and arrival patterns of donations; (4) gain insight into the links
between media framing of needs and materiel convergence; (5) define mechanisms
to modify donor behavior; and, (6) develop algorithms and heuristics to solve
these formulations. This will lead to models that correctly consider the impacts
of logistic decisions on the impacted populations, more effective delivery
strategies, more coordinated and effective relief flows, and less congestion at
entry points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is an ambitious and
transformative effort to build a holistic, quantitative understanding of how
humanitarian logistics should consider deprivation costs and emergent donor
response to disasters. This is based on state of the art economic, logistic, and
social science research into the impacts of delivery actions, media portrayal of
disaster events, and response needs. The core impact of this research will be
improved allocation and delivery of critical supplies during disaster response,
as well as better coordination with emergent distributed donor sites, leading to
improvement of the nation?s emergency response capabilities. The research team
will maximize the broader impacts through: (1) the integration of research into
undergraduate and graduate courses; (2) the involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students as research assistants; (3) the use of outreach events to
communicate research results to undergraduate and high school students and
stimulate them into research; (4) the recruitment of women and minority
students; and (5) the dissemination of project findings among professionals and
researchers with interest in humanitarian logistics and disaster response.