* 1124188
* Understanding the Determinants of Household Default Decisions in the Mortgage Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 347,811.00

Understanding Household Mortgage Default Decisions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
than five million homeowners lost their homes to foreclosure since 2007. Another
four million borrowers are currently more than sixty days delinquent on their
mortgage and face the very real possibility that they will be next to lose their
homes. Fifteen million homeowners, more than one in three with a mortgage, are
at risk of walking away from their mortgage because their homes are worth less
than what they owe to mortgage lenders. Foreclosures are painful not only to the
homeowners who go through them, but also to surrounding communities. As houses
go through foreclosure, they often fall into disrepair, surrounding property
values fall, crime may increase, and the overall community can
deteriorate.&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the importance of three
factors that impact the borrower's decision to default on a mortgage and thus
may affect the severity of the foreclosure crisis and the response of lenders
and policymakers to it:&lt;br/&gt;1. Mortgage modification programs and
strategic behavior: The extent to which mortgage modification programs induce
defaults among borrowers who were unlikely to default otherwise (?strategic
behavior?).&lt;br/&gt;2. Default contagion: The extent and the relative
importance of the different channels through which a mortgage default (or
foreclosure) by one homeowner affects the behavior of neighboring homeowners
during the housing crisis.&lt;br/&gt;3. The role of recourse laws: How laws
governing recourse affect the likelihood of borrower defaulting on a
mortgage.&lt;br/&gt;To study these factors, this project will acquire and
assemble a unique database that merges four data sources that have never
previously been combined: (i) monthly performance data on more than thirty
million privately securitized mortgages, (ii) monthly consumer credit reports
for borrowers with privately securitized mortgages, (iii) deeds records
identifying all mortgages and sales?and whether the borrower is an owner-
occupant or investor?in metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) in thirty-four
states, and (iv) HMDA data showing race, ethnicity, and income of almost all
mortgage applicants.&lt;br/&gt;Using these data, this project will provide new
evidence on a homeowner?s decision of whether to pay a mortgage during the
housing crisis, helping economists and policy makers better understand a
critical consumer financial decision with broad economic and social
implications.&lt;br/&gt;1. Mortgage modification programs and strategic
behavior&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify the extent of strategic behavior
generated by a recent modification program that extends benefits to borrowers
who have missed at least two months of mortgage payments. The program was
created in response to litigation brought by state attorneys general against
Countrywide Financial Corporation during the summer of 2008. As part of a
settlement announced publicly in October 2008, Countrywide agreed to implement a
mortgage modification program for Countrywide-serviced, subprime mortgages
throughout the United States. A centerpiece of the settlement was Countrywide's
commitment to offer expedited, unsolicited loan modifications to borrowers who
had missed two months of mortgage payments. The widespread scope of the
Countrywide program, and its requirement that a borrower be delinquent in order
to receive benefits, makes it a potentially useful experiment that could provide
insight into borrower behavior in response to other modification programs using
serious delinquency as eligibly requirement. Our results could also inform the
debate concerning the efficiency trade-off between mortgage modification
policies that extend help quickly by using simple but potentially manipulable
eligibility criteria such as a delinquency requirement and mortgage modification
polices that rely on more costly and rigorous screening of
borrowers.&lt;br/&gt;2. Default contagion&lt;br/&gt;When a homeowner defaults on
her mortgage, are his/her neighbors more likely to default on theirs? If so,
what are the channels through which a homeowner?s default decision influences
his/her neighbors? Do neighbors respond because they expect their own property
values to fall in the near future as a result of the homeowner's default (?price
effects?), or do neighbors respond because they reassess the moral,
psychological, or social costs of default after seeing a fellow homeowner
default (?social effects?)? Or is there a correlation in neighbors' default
decisions simply because they experience common economic shocks or share a
common propensity to default (?sorting effects?).&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
implements several different strategies to identify the relative importance of
these channels. For example, one strategy examines whether the effect of a
homeowner's default (or foreclosure) on neighbors' behavior depends on whether
the homeowners and neighbors share the same ethnicity or race. If the effect of
a homeowner's default differs between neighbors with the same race or ethnicity
and neighbors with different race or ethnicity, the difference could suggest
that social effects can be an important factor in explaining default decisions.
This strategy potentially neutralizes price and sorting effects because it
compares neighbors in the same community, but with different racial and ethnic
backgrounds. Of course, it is possible that a difference in response could be
due to sorting effects (like regional economic shocks) affecting racial or
ethnic groups differently. To control for sorting effects, the project takes
advantage of unique data on household credit to isolate so-called strategic
defaults; that is, defaults by borrowers who remain current on their credit
cards and student/car loans but stop making mortgage payments. Using deeds data
with specific street addresses, the project can also hold constant price effects
by comparing the behavior of neighbors in close geographic proximity and on the
same street or cul-de-sac with neighbors on different streets or on opposite
cul-de-sacs, where social connections may be less strong.&lt;br/&gt;3. The role
of recourse laws&lt;br/&gt;A state recourse law determines whether a homeowner
is personally liable for any mortgage balance that remains after a foreclosure
sale (a balance will remain only if the home is ?underwater,? i.e., the mortgage
debt exceeds the value of the home). If the homeowner can be made personally
liable, the mortgage is called ?recourse.? Otherwise, it is ?non-recourse.?
There is substantial inter-state and intra-state variation in recourse laws.
This project hypothesizes that recourse laws are the most binding?and affect
strategic default decisions?for ?underwater? homeowners who have substantial
non-housing assets that could be seized in the event that the mortgage bank sues
to collect the remaining balance after a foreclosure sale. Among these
homeowners, those with non-recourse mortgages may exhibit higher default rates
than those with recourse mortgages. This project will assess whether recourse
laws affect default decisions and, if they do, identify the characteristics of
borrowers who are responsive to these laws and assess whether these homeowners
represent a significant proportion of homeowners with a mortgage.