* 1124353
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Claiming Land: Institutions, Narratives, and Political Violence
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Scott Straus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 08/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

The forms of political violence during elections in Kenya range from intense
urban riots and large-scale campaigns of displacement, to village-level cattle
raids and property disputes. The dynamics of local-level violence generate the
central overarching question of this project: Why has there been such
significant variation in the incidence, intensity, and forms of political
violence across Kenya since the onset of multiparty elections? Recent
explanations of political violence focus on elections, state strength, ethnic
identity, and the feasibility of rebellion. By contrast, this project suggests
that variation in land tenure institutions is a crucial yet overlooked factor in
shaping the occurrence and dynamics of political violence. Land institutions
matter because they shape the politics of access, claim-making, and election-
time patronage and coercion.

This project explains the process of political violence as it unfolds at the
sub-national level. Two specific questions guide the research. First, there is
considerable variation in the types of land tenure relationships in Kenya--
across geographic regions, between different ethnic groups, and within
communities. Why do these diverse land tenure relationships provoke contentious
land claims in some cases, while in many others, tenure relationships remain
uncontested? Second, when and how do contentious claims to land become a
mobilizing tool for political violence?

Land narratives provide the causal mechanism linking variation in institutional
relationships with variation in violence. They are stories that individuals,
groups, and politicians use to talk about or frame issues of land and property,
offering a language of group identification and strategic discourse for making
claims to land. Narratives become contentious when two or more groups draw upon
competing claims to land ownership, access, or the right to belong in a
particular region or territory. Political actors use them as a tool to incite,
mobilize, and recruit people to participate in violence.

This project uses a micro-comparative study across a set of communities
displaying variation in the strength of land tenure arrangements, collective
narratives around land, and the incidence and forms of political violence. Based
on a five-stage research design, it relies on interviews, analyses of land and
human rights reports, a survey, and a national-level quantitative study
comparing land titling with the patterns of violence across all districts of
Kenya.

This research contributes to three overlapping literatures on political
violence, ethnic identities, and the politics of land and property in Africa.
First, by using land as an explanatory category, the project integrates the role
of institutions, collective perceptions of institutions, and the mediating role
of elites in mobilizing violence. Second, this project demonstrates how
institutions such as land rights can shape the political significance of ethnic
identities. Third, by looking at variation in land tenure relationships,
contentious narratives around land, and violence at the sub-national level, the
project aims to make larger claims about patterns of violence across a range of
conflict settings--from Cote d'Ivoire to Sri Lanka--where land claims,
resources, and identities are interwoven themes of conflict and violence.

The project has broader implications as well. A better understanding of the
origins of political violence can inform policies aiming to foster peace and
stability. The project can generate valuable insights for governments and
international organizations working to manage land-related conflicts.