* 1124418
* Enhancing Cyber-Infrastructure Usability Through Adaptive Middleware
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Vaidy Sunderam, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 385,710.00

This project addresses issues of cyber-infrastructure usability, a key
determinant of CI effectiveness in advancing science and technology. Strategies
to permit flexibility in mapping applications onto different resource classes
are the focus of this research. The approach adopted is based on the concept of
software adapters that express application requirements and interactions in
terms of the resource primitives available for a given execution, and
correspondingly, condition the target platform environments with middleware to
provide the functionality required by applications. The range of adaptations
vary, from simple macro substitutions, to substitution of libraries, to
programming paradigm transformations, to outsourcing execution of application
segments through externally provided software services. On the resource side,
conditioning may consist of soft-installation of needed libraries, setting
environment variables, staging executables and data, and deploying runtime
support software to assist application deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop (1) the concept of a virtual execution platform that
presents abstractions of application requirements and resource capabilities; (2)
mechanisms for determining adjustments that are required for the application-
platform combination for the given run; (3) adapters that provide different
levels of matching and techniques for assembling and composing them; and (4)
middleware for provisioning environmental infrastructure on target platforms to
ensure that all execution-dependent needs are staged and deployed. This
framework, termed ADAPT, is being designed to accommodate the major classes of S
&amp; E applications including parallel MPI programs, scientific scripts, and
workflows. Execution platforms will include common cyber-infrastructure
facilities such as IaaS and PaaS clouds, remotely accessed capability computers,
local (personal) and shared (grid-based) clusters and similar resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to provide insights into
commonalities in different programming models and resource types in CI settings,
and the developed middleware will permit greater flexibility in choosing CI
platforms for S &amp; E applications. By reconciling application and resource
diversity in CI, this project will contribute steps towards realizing the vision
of computing as a utility.