* 1124169
* Collaborative Research: Science of Broadening Participation -- From School to Work: A Longitudinal Study of Gender Stratification in Science and Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Carroll Seron, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 123,448.00

SES-1123747&lt;br/&gt;Susan Silbey &lt;br/&gt;Massachusetts Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1123905&lt;br/&gt;Brian Rubineau
&lt;br/&gt;Cornell University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1124169&lt;br/&gt;Carroll
Seron &lt;br/&gt;University of California-Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science of
Broadening Participation -- From School to Work: A Longitudinal Study of Gender
Stratification in Science and
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The United States and other
advanced economies face unprecedented challenges in technical areas such as
energy, environment, and defense. Solving these challenges requires a diverse,
highly educated labor force, with professional expertise in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Contributing to the problem of under-
production of STEM professionals in the U.S. is the pronounced gender
segregation in some STEM professions, especially in engineering. As a
consequence, we have a much smaller population from which to develop the needed
engineering expertise. This project seeks to help us understand what causes
continued gender segregation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An earlier
study conducted by the PIs surveyed and interviewed a group of men and women for
five years, beginning with the first year of their college education. This panel
included a disproportionate number of young men and women planning to major in
engineering, who had demonstrated exemplary achievement in science and
mathematics. Yet, after four years of engineering education, shortly before
college graduation and entry into the labor market, a significantly smaller
percentage of the women than the men planned to pursue careers in engineering.
Analyses showed that more women than men reported lower confidence in their
ability to have a career in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
project revisits these men and women at the next career stage -- 5 years after
their anticipated college graduation, and during their early years in the labor
market. At this time, the project will collect data that enables researchers to
compare the role of individual (confidence), organizational (workplace-related),
and social network factors to explain gender specific career track decisions,
especially regarding STEM fields. Methodologically, this study expands a unique
longitudinal dataset to explain the critical transition from college and post-
graduate training to the professional workforce. The theoretical model used
adjudicates among the most important contending explanations for persistent
gender stratification in professional employment by testing social psychological
theories of causal individual and gender differences, organization-level
processes, and social capital theories concerning the efficacy of social
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this
research may help explain patterns of attrition from and persistence in STEM
fields, and engineering in particular. This important issue is of interest to
private- and public-sector employers, current and future professionals, as well
as institutions of higher education. Moreover, persistent gender segregation in
STEM could compromise the competitive position of the United States in a global
economy. Findings from this study may also contribute to policy developments
aimed at improving the nation's scientific competitiveness.