* 1124576
* The Role of Dust on Snow and Other Aeolian Inputs in Soil Formation and Biogeochemical Cycling in Barren, Alpine Catchments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Natalie Mladenov, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2015
* USD 556,774.00

There is an urgency to improve our understanding of how biogeochemical cycling
and surface water quality in high-elevation catchments are responding to dust
and other aeolian deposition events. The combination of increasing temperatures
and dust emissions, melting glaciers, and surprisingly high amounts of microbial
activity in recently deglaciated soils represent a new connectivity between
geologic, biological, and hydrologic processes in barren, alpine catchments.
Dust deposition, known to supply barren, alpine areas with important base
cations, may also influence the soil cation exchange pool, soil pH, and export
of cations from the watershed and may be more important than bedrock weathering
in generating barren soils. Additionally, aeolian deposition is increasingly
being recognized as an important source of nutrients, such as carbon and
phosphorus, to high&amp;#8208;elevation ecosystems, and these inputs may drive
biological processes, such as those that enhance nitrification and influence
water quality. An overarching hypothesis that defines this project is that dust
and other atmospheric inputs are important pathways to soil formation and
biogeochemical processes, such as nitrification, in barren, alpine catchments.
This project will evaluate the provenance and chemical quality of aeolian
deposition and investigate the initial phases of weathering and biogeochemical
cycling in barren, high-elevation soils using novel spectroscopic techniques,
stable isotope and cation analyses, soil chemistry and mineralogy analyses, and
bioavailability experiments. Hypotheses will be tested in the Green Lakes Four
(GL4) catchment of the Colorado Front Range, where aeolian deposition, soil
microbial processes, and nitrification, which have been studied independently
over the last few decades, will be studied as interacting processes in an
interdisciplinary investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given unprecedented rates
of glacier melting worldwide, the improved representation of biogeochemical
processes that this research will produce is relevant for C- and P- limited
mountain catchments on a global scale. Given the global relevance of this
research, a subset of activities will be conducted at other Critical Zone
Observatory sites in the US as well as at international alpine sites. New
insights gained from investigating aeolian wet and dry deposition, microbial
community composition, rates of microbial processes, and stream and soil water
quality, and from conducting coupled snowmelt-biogeochemical modeling will
further improve the capability to forecast changes in the biogeochemical cycling
and hydrology of high-elevation watersheds with a changing climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support graduate students to participate
in interdisciplinary research that spans geochemical, biological, and hydrologic
studies. In addition, this project will engage high school students
participating in the St. Vrain Math, Engineering, and Science Achievement (MESA)
Program, which seeks to improve achievement by Latino students. MESA students
will develop their own summer research projects, mentored by the PIs and
graduate students and supported with stipends through this project. A larger
group of MESA students will also visit the CU campus annually during the
Institute for Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAAR) Open House, a day of lab
tours and field demonstrations for K-12 students hosted by INSTAAR.