* 1124538
* The Cognitive Neuroscience of Learning: Implications for Education
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Sonya Dougal, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This award will fund a symposium that will provide information and opportunities
for collaboration for the purpose of translating discoveries in developmental
cognitive neuroscience into classroom practices. This conference will bring
together cognitive neuroscientists, psychologists, experts in human development,
educational researchers, teachers, and parents to increase understanding of the
issues important for creating effective learning methods for both the typical
development of cognitive skills and for those with learning disabilities. The
conference agenda will address the following issues: 1) the early cognitive
developmental factors that prepare the brain for learning; 2) the most recent
advances in developmental cognitive neuroscience research to inform development
of novel teaching methods and remediation; 3) discoveries related to both
typical and atypical development within the topical areas of reading and
language, mathematical ability, and executive function and attention; 4) the
relationships between learning each of these "modular" skills and an underlying
neural system for learning and skill acquisition that crosses all domains; 5)
the unique social, emotional, and economic problems that are associated with
poor outcomes in school, and 6) strategies for translating new findings from the
laboratory into improved learning methods in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New discoveries in the field of developmental
cognitive neuroscience hold great promise for improving current teaching
methods. Yet there remains a significant gap between the scientific discoveries
that could improve our education system and the application of this knowledge.
This meeting will highlight cutting-edge developments in cognitive neuroscience
that could improve current teaching methods and will include a careful review of
the current obstacles to applying these methods in the classroom as well as the
related emotional, sociological and environmental factors. This meeting is also
expected to increase collaborations and communications among basic researchers
and educators and will include detailed and extensive dissemination for both the
scientific community and lay public.