* 1124719
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  New Approaches to Cyclodextrin-Based Organic Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Haskell Beckham, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2015
* USD 302,679.00

Professor Haskell Beckham of the Georgia Institute of Technology is supported by
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the
Division of Chemistry (with contribution from the Office of International
Science and Engineering) with an International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC)
grant to develop new efficient approaches to processable organic nanotubes based
on cyclodextrin building blocks. His collaborator in this work is Professor
Gerhard Wenz of Saarland University in Germany. Professor Wenz is being
supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation)
for his participation in this project. Together, Professors Beckham and Wenz are
leading an international team of researchers to develop novel template-directed
crosslinking strategies for derivatized cyclodextrins to prepare organic
cyclodextrin nanotubes (CyNTs) with controlled diameters, lengths, and
solubilities. Composition, structure, and size of templated intermediates and
CyNTs are being characterized by advanced nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
techniques. Translational and rotational dynamics of probe molecules in CyNTs
are being examined using solid-state and pulsed-field-gradient NMR. Transport of
small molecules in cyclodextrin nanotubes are being characterized to lay a
foundation for advanced applications of CyNTs. The U.S. graduate student will
spend five weeks each year in Germany to learn about novel synthetic
methodologies.

In contrast to carbon and inorganic nanotubes, widespread investigations of
organic nanotubes are not yet common because facile preparative routes to them
do not exist. Organic nanotubes prepared from cyclodextrins are particularly
promising because cyclodextrins are bio-renewable feedstocks and available
commercially in large quantities. In this project, new approaches to
cyclodextrin-based organic nanotubes are being developed to allow widespread
availability of these biocompatible, bio-renewable nanotubes, ultimately leading
to wide-scale basic studies and applications. It is envisioned that CyNTs can
form the basis of new technology platforms for use as biocompatible scaffolds
for tissue engineering (especially for incorporation of anisotropy and for
vascularization), for separation purposes, for frontier applications in
nanofluidics, as 1D matrices for polymerization (especially conducting
polymers), and for slow release of active compounds (e.g., drugs,
agrochemicals). The students working on the project will make annual, extended
exchange visits to the international partner laboratory for collaborative work
and training.