* 1124867
* Travel Support for Student Participation in the 42nd Annual Meeting of the APS Division of Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, Atlanta, GA
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Barry Walker, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides funds for student travel to the 42nd Annual Meeting of the
American Physical Society Division of Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics.
The travel awards ensure the training and education of the next generation of
scientists at this conference, widely accepted as the leading venue in the
United States for atomic, molecular and optical physics. The science addressed
includes control of quantum dynamics, cold atoms, dipolar quantum gases,
molecular structure and spectroscopy, positron-matter interactions,
antihydrogen, ultrafast and intense x-rays, single-atom optical interfacing,
dipolar gases, interacting Bose gases, Fermi gases and magnetism, quantum
measurement, strongly interacting cold gases, ultrafast molecular ionization and
high harmonic generation, advances in gaseous electronics, interactions between
hybrid quantum systems, fundamental symmetry tests, heavy particle collisions,
atom circuits, atomic structure and spectroscopy, attosecond spectroscopy,
fundamental symmetries and precision measurements, excitations in Bose and
spinor gases, few-body and molecular collisions, uitrafast molecular dynamics,
advances in quantum communication, cooling of atoms and molecules,
photoionization spectroscopy, atomic clocks, cold collisions and
photoassociation, recollision physics, quantum information methods, in-situ
imaging of ultracold atomic gases, magnetism in optical lattices, quantum
measurement and control of spin ensembles, ultracold molecules, degenerate
quantum gases and alkaline earth atoms, time resolved spectroscopy, atomic and
molecular photo-processes, progress in cavity opto-mechanics, few-body ultracold
systems, collision studies, low temperature plasmas and Rydberg atoms, intense
field physics, novel optical technologies and quantum information, synthetic
gauge fields in ultracold systems, dissipation in cold atom systems, matter wave
interferometry, nanoparticle structure and properties, and non-linear optics!