* 1124601
* NEB: Developing a Graphene Spin Computer: Materials, Nano-Devices, Modeling, and Circuits
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Lu Sham, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,750,000.00

This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond
competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at the National
Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research Initiative of the
Semiconductor Research Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
Abstract.****&lt;br/&gt;Recent breakthroughs by the PI/co-PIs on the efficient
injection and transport of spin in graphene at room temperature and the design
of novel magnetologic gates (MLG) and circuits enable a new paradigm for
computing that utilizes the electron spin to store and process information. In
this project, graphene-based MLG devices and circuits will be designed and
demonstrated through a concerted interdisciplinary effort that includes
experiment (materials/devices/circuits), theory, and circuit design and
simulation. A successful implementation of the MLG will lead to high-speed, low-
power information processing by enabling computing architectures that integrate
logic and memory to avoid the von Neumann bottleneck which hampers performance
in modern computers. The interdisciplinary team will work together to tackle the
three critical challenges for developing a functional MLG circuit: (1) to
understand and optimize the spin injection and transport in graphene, (2) to
develop a high-speed, low-power method of switching the FM electrodes that is
compatible with graphene, (3) to design and implement CMOS-compatible MLG
circuits. The program will promote diversity within the US technical workforce
and prepare valuable specialists for the US electronics and magnetic recording
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;As
silicon electronics approaches its physical limits, there is a need to explore
alternative technologies in order to develop faster computers that consume less
energy. This project will develop a new paradigm for computing that exploits the
magnetic poles (i.e. "spin") of electrons traveling inside a one-atom-thick
layer of carbon known as graphene (recipient of the 2010 Nobel Prize in
Physics). A long-term advantage will be to greatly accelerate computing
applications that involve large amounts of data, such as database searching,
data compression, and image recognition, which are important for homeland
security. Technically, this will be accomplished by developing a new electronic
device called a "magnetologic gate," which will serve as the building block for
circuits that combine the functions of microprocessors (for decision making) and
hard drives (for information storage) into a single chip. The team consists of
the physicists, material scientists, and electrical engineers who have pioneered
the key scientific breakthroughs that enable this future technology. The program
will promote diversity within the US technical workforce and prepare valuable
specialists for the US electronics and magnetic recording industries.