* 1124795
* Citizen Science uncovers Brooklyn Atlantis: An inter-disciplinary exploration of the dynamics of networks of humans and machines in peer production settings
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2016
* USD 560,000.00

This project lays the foundations for the analysis and design of peer production
systems consisting of socially interacting volunteers and machines that jointly
perform distributed tasks. The envisioned implementation targets the unique
scientific and societal domain offered by cyber-enabled citizen science
environmental control in the highly polluted Gowanus Canal in Brooklyn. The
proposed "Brooklyn Atlantis" citizen science system consists of an array of
mobile instrumented buoys for water monitoring with wireless capabilities,
controlled by volunteers using a web-based peer-production
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the integration of dynamical systems
theory, marine robotics, and technology-mediated social participation, the
project will develop: 1) a model for complex systems comprising networks of
humans and machines with a focus on technology-mediated social participation
systems; 2) design guidelines for peer production systems to enhance
participation in citizen science projects; and 3) a cyber-human infrastructure
for real time monitoring and hazard detection of the natural environment
combining mobile robotic sensor networks and human operated control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include: 1)
establishing a technology-based avenue for enhancing local community citizenry
and engagement; 2) developing citizen based environmental monitoring platforms
that could provide life-saving advantages; 3) leveraging interactive robotics,
environmental awareness, and citizen science to foster interest and engagement
in STEM fields among the general public and K-12 students; 4) fostering
multidisciplinary thinking among NYU-Poly students; 5) promoting the awareness
of citizen science capabilities among researchers; and 6) integrating research
components in outreach programs. This project has the potential of transforming
the field of dynamical systems through the integration of collective human
intelligence in the design and adaption of engineered architectures. Similarly,
it may transform thinking on social peer production systems to incorporate real-
time mobile interactive machines and task co-execution.