* 1124247
* NEB: Integrated Biological and Electronic Computation at the Nanoscale
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Todd Thorsen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,650,000.00

This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond
competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at the National
Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research Initiative of the
Semiconductor Research Corporation. In the last decade, the scaling of
electronics has slowed due to limitations in underlying technologies as
nanoscale dimensions are approached, including leakage, power dissipation,
lithography, interconnect, and noise. Thus, fundamentally new paradigms for
efficient and high-performance computation are needed to enable important
applications such as studying complex biological systems. The research objective
of this proposal is to breakthrough the scaling limits of conventional
electronics with a hybrid analog-digital computational platform that integrates
heterogeneous biological and nanoelectronic systems. The hypothesis that will be
explored is that heterogeneous integration of electronic computation and
biological computation is desirable since the former contributes precision,
programmability, and speed while the latter yields highly parallel and efficient
processing. These systems will be implemented in bio-inspired subthreshold
electronics and living cells using synthetic biology; they shall be integrated
with each other via microfluidics and biological
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential
to have broad impacts on a wide range of fields including computational science,
synthetic biology, electrical engineering, nanomaterials research, infectious
diseases, and biomedical science. Our experiments with novel forms of biological
processing will enhance the breadth of computational platforms and provide
insights into how biology achieves robust and efficient computation. Our
biological circuits will advance the field of synthetic biology via new devices
and architectures for engineering biological systems. By mimicking biological
networks with subthreshold electronics, we can discover new high-performance
electrical circuit designs. Our research into biologically synthesized and
organized nanowires will inform our understanding of how biological systems are
self-organized and shall enable new nanoelectronics, sustainable and
environmentally friendly nanomaterial synthesis, and self-healing structures in
the future. We will validate our computational platform on currently intractable
problems in biomedical research, including modeling, simulating, and
understanding how emergent properties, such as antibiotic resistance in bacteria
and yeast, arise from large-scale networks. This computational platform will
enable the unprecedented modeling of large-scale biological systems for
hypothesis-driven biomedical research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This project also
aims to advance education and outreach efforts in the highly interdisciplinary
disciplines involved in this research. This project shall create a new course,
"Molecular Circuits Engineering", to train undergraduates and graduates in both
computational and experimental techniques for molecular computation. The team
will also supervise students in the International Genetically Engineered
Machines (iGEM) competition to provide hands-on experimental training. A key
priority is to work with MIT and the MIT Center for Integrative Synthetic
Biology to actively recruit under-represented minorities and women into
computational, synthetic biology, and bio-inspired electronics research via the
Saturday Engineering Enrichment and Discovery Academy, the MIT Summer Research
Program, and the Society of Women Engineers.