* 1124658
* GOALI:  1 MHz, GaN-Based, Modular, Cascaded Z-Source Inverters for Scalable Grid-Interactive Photovoltaic (PV) Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Hui Li, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2015
* USD 294,139.00

The objective is to research a new generation of grid-connected PV
(photovoltaic) inverters to achieve high efficiency and MHz operation through a
collaborative university-industry project. The approach is to apply wide band-
gap power semiconductors in transformerless, cascaded, modular DC-AC inverters.
We will develop an advanced control strategy that is capable of system-level
fault monitoring and detection to maximize the PV output power, achieve reactive
power compensation and to reduce the ground leakage
current.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This research leverages the
recent technological advances in GaN power switching devices and looks beyond
the conventional single DC bus inverter topology. The buck-boost function and
shoot-through capability of the Z-source network in the proposed modular dc-ac
inverter can enable the inverter to obtain high efficiency, high performance and
high reliability operation at MHz system output switching frequencies. The
proposed research offers opportunities to discover and invent new concepts in
emerging power semiconductor devices and advanced converter topology/control in
grid-connected PV systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed
research will have a significant impact on PV inverter manufacturers by
providing novel electronic power converters with increased conversion efficiency
and increased reliability. Furthermore, this research will also impact the power
semiconductor industry by addressing the cross-disciplinary challenges of the
new generation of PV inverters. The research will be integrated into the power
courses at FAMU-FSU College of Engineering to meet an increasing workforce and
technology needs. Other education plans are to include student internships at
the partner company, involve female and minority students in the research,
provide outreach to high school students, and stimulate academia-industry
interactions.