* 1124733
* NEB: Charge-Density-Wave Computational Fabric: New State Variables and Alternative Material Implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* John Stickney, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,300,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020
and Beyond competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at
the National Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research
Initiative of the Semiconductor Research Corporation. Continuing evolution of
electronics beyond the limits of the conventional silicon technology requires
innovative approaches for solving the heat dissipation, speed and scaling
issues. Alternative state variables other than dissipative charge transfer hold
promise for drastic improvements in computational power. Collective states of
magnetization, spin waves, and exciton condensates are being considered, but, to
date, the performance results are modest. This project proposes a revolutionary
new approach for the collective states that carry electrical signals, do not
require magnetic fields, and can be realized at room temperature. The
alternative state variables will be implemented with charge-density waves. The
charge-density wave effects have been known for decades but never considered for
information processing. The intellectual merit of this project includes better
understanding of the material properties and physical processes of charge-
density wave materials in highly-scaled, low-dimension regimes that have not yet
been explored. The results of the project will lead to optimized device designs
for exploiting charge-density waves and accurate understanding of the
fundamental limits of the performance metrics. The intellectual merit also
includes performance evaluation of the low-noise topological insulator
interconnects proposed as part of new architectures. The project will result in
new knowledge of the properties of the charge-density wave materials obtained
with the help of optical microscopy, atomic-force microscopy, scanning electron
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, Raman spectroscopy and other
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed project will lead
to a revolutionary new technology for replacing or complementing conventional
silicon complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor technology. The phase, frequency
and amplitude of the collective current of the interfering charge waves will
encode information and allow for massive parallelism in information processing.
The possibility of using the phase for logic operations allows one to minimize
the required number of elements per circuit, reduce the power consumption, and
ease the scaling requirement. The charge-density wave devices will be
implemented with an alternative growth technique ? electrochemical atomic layer
deposition ? with demonstrated potential for synthesis of crystalline
atomically-thin layers of pertinent materials. The technique will allow the
research team to experiment with new chemistries and heterogeneous integration
of a variety of charge-density wave materials. The low-dissipation, massively
parallel information processing with the collective state variables can satisfy
the computational, communication, and sensor technology requirements for decades
to come. The successful project will (i) improve the economic competitiveness of
the United States; (ii) contribute to national security; and (iii) increase
participation of underrepresented minorities in science and engineering. The
project will result in improved student education and training at the University
of California ? Riverside, a minority serving institution with a large Hispanic
student population. The broader impact includes contributions to the development
of a synergetic interdisciplinary Materials Science and Education program, as
well as contributions to graduate and undergraduate training focused on
materials synthesis, at the University of Georgia.