* 1124514
* Carbon in karst: Investigating sources, transport mechanisms and isotopic fractionation to advance the interpretation of speleothem climate records
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Daniel Breecker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2015
* USD 223,903.00

The project will investigate the environmental controls on carbon isotopic
composition of speleothem in order to refine this tool for paleo-environmental
analysis. The transfer of carbon from vegetation to speleothem calcite is
mediated by multiple processes, many of which are poorly understood and some
heretofore unrecognized. Understanding of these processes can be significantly
improved though careful empirical examination of a well-characterized karst
setting. Project will study the sources, transport mechanisms and isotopic
fractionation of carbon in multiple caves of the karst system in central Texas.
Specific hypotheses to be tested are: 1) the carbon isotope composition of
dissolved inorganic carbon in cave drip water is strongly influenced by deeply
rooted plants (C3 trees) and only minimally by shallowly rooted plants (grasses
and herbs;, 2) CO2 is transported into these caves in both the gas and liquid
phases; 3) calcite precipitated in the caves is not in C isotope equilibrium
with water entering the caves and the kinetic isotope effects responsible for
this disequilibrium occurs primarily by degassing of CO2 from drip water rather
than by calcite precipitation; and 4) the magnitude of kinetic isotope effects
varies seasonally, can be quantified, and may thus provide new applications to
paleoclimatology. &lt;br/&gt;The most important impact of the proposed research
will be to provide a more useful tool for the speleothem and paleoclimate
research community. In addition, the research will support and train students
and results will be communicated to high school students and teachers through a
well-established educational program at the University of Texas Austin.