* 1124515
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  New First Principles Methods for Nonadiabatic Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Todd Martinez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2015
* USD 419,919.00

Todd Martinez of Stanford University is supported by the Chemical Theory, Models
and Computational Methods in the Chemistry Division to engage in collaborative
research with Dmitry Shalashilin of the University of Leeds in the UK. This is
an International Collaborations in Chemistry (ICC) proposal. Dr. Shalashilin's
research is supported by the EPSRC. The PIs and their research groups are
developing and applying new trajectory based methods for describing quantum
mechanical dynamics. These methods are compatible with ab initio molecular
dynamics methods, i.e. the potential energy surfaces and nonadiabatic couplings
can be computed on the fly with quantum chemical techniques. Two such methods
(multi-configurational Ehrenfest and multiple spawning) are being explored in
order to determine the advantages of each so that they may be combined in a way
which leverages their respective advantages. The new methodology that emerges
from this work will be implemented in the AIMS-MolPro code and made available to
a wide range of researchers. The PIs will investigate the use of graphical
processing units (GPUs) to accelerate the dynamics calculations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project provides a foundation for a new
generation of accurate first principles dynamics methods that can incorporate
quantum mechanical effects such as nonadiabatic surface crossing between
multiple electronic states and tunneling of light nuclei such as protons. Such
methods have a broad impact on chemistry, especially photochemistry. These
methods will also be useful for interpreting ultrafast time-resolved pump-probe
spectra. The project involves interchange (for short stays up to a month) of
students between Leeds and Stanford, thus providing the involved graduate
students with an expanded vista concerning the academic environment in each
country&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and Engineering
provides co-funding for this award.