* 1124482
* Collaborative Research: A field, laboratory and theoretical study of mixed bedrock-alluvial meandering rivers.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Gary Parker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2017
* USD 244,461.00

The focus of this project is the meandering of river channels, an iconic
phenomenon in geomorphology and a fundamental process of channel morphodynamics.
The goal is to advance our understanding of meander morphodynamics in eroding
channels enough to develop a general theoretical framework for channel meanders
in a variety of environments. A particular focus is the meandering of mixed
bedrock-alluvial channels and the role of sediment cover in the mediation of
patterns of channel erosion. Such processes are being studied through a
combination of field studies, laboratory experiments, numerical simulations and
theoretical analysis. Novel aspects of the research include: (i) the study of
micro-scale dissolutional meanders in the field and the laboratory as a proxy
for macro-scale abrasional meanders, and (ii) the development of meander
morphodynamic model whose channel cross-section is not fixed but rather evolves
according to a plug-in constitutive equation for erosion rate.

Meandering streams and rivers are a vital part of the natural landscape of the
United States and beyond. Over the centuries, many of these rivers have been
modified drastically and their crucial environmental role compromised.
Remediation of these rivers has become a priority in recent years as the
negative effects of such environmental damage have become clear. For remediation
to succeed, and for the assessment and management of meandering rivers to be
effective, a thorough understanding of channel morphodynamics is needed. The aim
of this project is to deepen such understanding and to pass on these advances to
the broad community of scientists and engineers interested in the topic.