* 1124283
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dynamic Analyses of Cognition and Mortality in the Oldest Old
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jack McArdle, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

Evidence is accumulating that cognitive abilities are inversely associated with
mortality, and this association seems to be present irrespective of study
population, cohort, and the cognitive tests used. Cognitive abilities are not
traditionally considered in epidemiology, however, and their additional value to
the prediction of mortality is not clear. On the other hand, cognitive decline
is viewed as one of the multifaceted aspects of the aging process, but few
studies have related characteristics in the changing process of cognition to
mortality. The examination of these problems largely has been impeded by
methodological difficulties. This project will examine several novel methods to
investigate the relations of cognition (in particular, episodic memory and
verbal ability) and mortality using longitudinal data in a national sample of
U.S. adults aged 70 years and older. These methods will be employed in a
progressive order and will include latent curve models, mixed-effects change
point models, joint growth and survival models, traditional survival analysis,
and recursive partitioning techniques (survival trees and random forests).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine cognitive change in the oldest
population cohort and relate it to mortality. The increasing proportion of this
group in the population is impacting many social and economic issues. The
substantive results from this project may be especially informative for policy
makers in considering hospice care plans. Methodologically, this project will
compare alternative approaches to analyzing longitudinal and survival data and
will employ exploratory data mining in survival analysis. The methodological
finding may have broad applications for many fields in the behavioral and health
sciences. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is
provided to enable a promising student to establish a strong, independent
research career.