* 1124609
* Vertical profiles, size distributions, and intermittency in aeolian sediment transport: Field measurements with a novel instrument
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Jack Gillies, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,769.00

Project Abstract: Vertical profiles, size distributions, and intermittency in
aeolian sediment transport: Field measurements with a novel
instrument&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In two separate field deployments, an instrument
that will be developed as part of this project will be used for the economical
measurement of the rate and magnitude of the movement of sand under the
influence of wind, a process referred to as eolian sand transport. The
instrument, nicknamed the SANTRI will utilize inexpensive optical sensors in
conjunction with wind sensors to measure the threshold winds required for the
movement of sand and the magnitude of the sand flux with time resolution on the
order of one second. Preliminary pilot tests indicate that in addition to
aggregate sand flux, these sensors can provide valuable grain size, and possibly
speed information. Compared to other instruments that are currently available,
including those that use optical sensors, the SANTRI would be much more
independent, requiring no external data capture, electrical power, or frequent
servicing. Deployment at a field site that has been established through an
existing NSF project will provide the information necessary to identify areas
for improvement. A second deployment at another selected field site will provide
a large dataset of sand movement under varying wind conditions. Results from
this latter effort can be used for testing of physical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Movement of sand by wind is the principal process
that suspends dust, the largest atmospheric aerosol constituent on a global
basis. Sand grains that are lofted by the shearing forces of the wind at the
soil surface can, upon subsequent impact on the soil, cause the ejection of
additional sand grains and much smaller, aerosol-sized dust particles. This
saltation process has been a central subject of windblown, or eolian, sediment
transport research since the first seminal writings on the topic appeared in the
scientific literature. Significant progress has been made in understanding how
saltation is initiated, the effect of vegetation and other surface roughness,
and the influence of soil parameters such as moisture. However, the ability to
accurately model the behavior of a specific soil under specific wind conditions
continues to be a primary challenge, one that is made more difficult by a
relative paucity of in-situ measurements, owing in part to the labor- and cost-
intensive nature of these measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
result in the development of a new, economical, and transformative instrument
that has the potential to open up new lines of inquiry and enable the collection
of field measurements to test established models that have been relying heavily
on laboratory wind tunnel experiments instead of real-world data. Through
improvement of models and more robust datasets, a more thorough understanding
can be obtained of local, regional, and global emissions of windblown dust,
which impacts climate, rate of snow melt, land degradation, and human health.