* 1124545
* Collaborative research: Testing Himalayan tectonic and erosional history via chronostratigraphic correlation between the Lesser Himalaya and Indian craton
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Ganqing Jiang, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 09/30/2015
* USD 55,459.00

Collaborative Research: Testing Himalayan tectonic and erosional history via
chronostratigraphic correlation between the Lesser Himalaya and Indian
craton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nigel Hughes, University of California, Riverside
EAR-1124303&lt;br/&gt;Shuhai Xiao, Virginia Tech EAR-1124026&lt;br/&gt;Paul
Myrow, Colorado College EAR-1124518&lt;br/&gt;Ganging Jiang, Univ. Nevada, Las
Vegas EAR-1124545&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will test the hypotheses that (1) the Paleoproterozoic, Mesoproterozoic,
Neoproterozoic, and Cambrian of all parts of the Himalaya are part of a
continuous passive margin succession and not part of an accreted terrane; (2)
that neodymium isotopic values (Ã¥Nd) of Himalayan rocks are primarily controlled
by depositional age, rather than by geographical source; and (3) that the
erosion of Neoproterozoic and Cambrian material from the northern or "inner"
part of the Lesser Himalaya (LH) requires that uplift in that region took place
several million years before currently accepted. Confirmation of these
hypotheses, which preliminary data suggests is likely, will be achieved by
detailed stratigraphic correlation between strata of the Himalayan region and
the Indian craton. If confirmed, our results will require that progressive
unroofing of a continuous margin succession took place, initially with erosion
of a thick succession of "outer" LH-age strata with a geochemical signature
identical to that of the Greater and Tethyan Himalaya. As a consequence, the
initiation of uplift of the LH took place significantly earlier in the Miocene
than currently invoked, thus significantly revising the Cenozoic uplift history
of the Himalayan region. Hence in addition to clarifying the pre-deformational
history of the northern Indian margin, this proposal will impact understanding
of Himalayan tectonics, uplift, and erosion. Furthermore, the fossils present in
these deposits are poorly known and detailed analysis may also provide novel
insights into early eukaryotic evolution.&lt;br/&gt;As the world's greatest
mountain chain the Himalaya has significant impact on a wide range of
environmental issues, ranging from the chemistry of ocean waters to the nature
of global climate. Accurate understanding of this influence requires knowledge
how global systems changed during the growth of these mighty mountains. This, in
turn, requires knowledge of conditions prior to the event that initiated
Himalayan uplift - the collision of the Indian subcontinent with Asia. This
project brings together scientists with a wide range of experience who will
jointly investigate the geological relationship between rocks that make up the
much of the Himalayan bedrock and those that occur within the heart of India
itself. This comparison will test the currently popular idea that much of the
Himalaya is 'exotic', meaning that it was not originally attached to the core
landmass of India. This idea is important because, if correct, it means that PIs
can 'fingerprint' the uplift and erosional history of the Himalaya based on when
?exotic? and, when truly Indian materials, first appeared in the record of
Himalayan uplift and erosion recorded in the rocks of the Bay of Bengal and
other areas. PIs initial studies suggest that the 'exotic' idea is incorrect,
and rests on a misunderstanding of the ages of formation of the original
Himalaya rocks. If PIs are right, it will suggest that the southern Himalaya
began uplift 5 million years before currently accepted, and will reconcile an
important global geochemical shift with the timing of Himalayan uplift. In
addition to training undergraduate and graduate students, this award also will
facilitate publication of children?s book on global environmental change in a
major Indian regional language, and its dissemination to village schools in
rural Bengal.