* 1124416
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Class or Race? The Rise of Affirmative Action in Brazil, 2001 - 2010
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Stanley Bailey, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 06/30/2012
* USD 12,105.00

This research project investigates the recent rise of affirmative action
policies within public, higher education in Brazil in order to explore the
institutional and social factors that contributed to the development and
successful deployment of these policies. Led by social movements, state actors,
advocacy organizations and academics, the Brazilian state has recently adopted
affirmative action policies and programs to combat racial inequality. This
action represented a rapid policy shift. The meaning of race and the categories
for the new policies are currently being created. This research project
investigates the dynamics of this political process by analyzing the factors
affecting the policy designs and the subsequent programs created to achieve the
goal of affirmative action in higher education. The research focuses on a
comparative analysis of five selected sites in Brazil. The research plan
involves interviews with key stakeholders and coding of selected court and
public documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Affirmative action policies remain an
area of active acacademic and public discussion. The consideration of these
policies, in a more comparative context, should facilitate a greater level of
understanding generally of the factors that shape the development and
implementation of public policy in this area.