* 1124608
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Empathy on Public Opinion on Immigration
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Subramanian Ramakrishnan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,989.00

This project studies the impact of empathy on individual information processing
and opinion formation on immigration policy. The researcher focuses on empathy
and immigration for three reasons. First, immigration as a policy area is
unresolved, is extremely salient, and influences the lives and quality of life
of millions of people. Second, much of public opinion on immigration is divided
along party lines, which presents a difficult test case for learning and opinion
change. If empathy affects the motivational, learning, and opinion change
processes on immigration opinion, its potential impact may be even greater in
policy arenas that are not as divisive. Third, this project fills major gaps in
scholarly work on emotion and immigration opinion. To date, scholarship has only
explored the effects of anxiety, threat, anger, and enthusiasm on political
opinions. This project advances knowledge by providing first-cut research into
the impact of empathy on immigration opinion. In addition, this research
explores how empathy affects not only immigration policy preferences but also
the considerations (e.g., beliefs about immigrants) that people draw upon to
form policy opinions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses three chief
research questions. How does empathy towards immigrants affect information
seeking, political learning, and opinion change? Are these effects moderated by
ethnicity and partisanship? How long and to what extent do these empathic
effects endure? To assess these questions, the researcher conducts an experiment
to measure the effects of increased feelings of empathy toward undocumented
immigrants on individual learning, reason giving, and immigration policy
opinion. The project uses real-world news articles to increase subject empathy
and survey self-report questions to provide a comprehensive understanding of the
effects of this understudied emotion on the issue of immigration. The
expectation is that that empathy motivates information-seeking behavior,
enhances the prospects for political learning, and ultimately changes even
hardened opinions such as those on immigration. It is also posited that the
effects of empathy depend on a person's race and partisanship. This project
innovates by using a survey to follow up on its experiments in order to estimate
whether the immediate impact of specific emotions on opinion are temporary or
has more lasting effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research makes several
broader contributions. The project sheds light on how citizens think about
divisive issues. Moreover, the project enhances understanding of the impact of
emotion on public opinion.