* 1124004
* How Neighborhoods Affect Educational Opportunities and Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Stefanie Deluca, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 07/31/2013
* USD 220,685.00

SES-1124004 Stefanie Deluca Johns Hopkins University

Abstract

How Neighborhoods Affect Educational Opportunities and Outcomes

In America, housing choice is school choice. Where families live determines the
quality of their children's educations. Most researchers and policy makers
separate housing and education when they are inextricably linked. This
connection has profound consequences for social inequality. Over 70% of minority
children attend high poverty, mostly segregated schools, and their test scores
lag far behind their white peers. Over half a century ago, mandated school
desegregation plans were implemented to address such inequality. Recent Supreme
Court decisions suggest that plans to integrate schools explicitly on the basis
of race are a thing of the past. How else can such disparities in access to
educational opportunities be remedied? One way to increase the chances that
minority children will attend higher quality schools alongside more affluent
peers is to give them a chance to live in the same communities. This study
capitalizes on a unique housing assistance program to explore whether and how
improvements in housing access translate into gains in educational opportunities
for poor minority children. Through a class action housing desegregation
lawsuit, over 3000 children relocated from Baltimore?s public housing
communities into mostly white, non-poor neighborhoods across the metropolitan
region from 2003-2011. Using a mixed methods approach, the study examines how a
radical improvement in neighborhood opportunity affects access to better school
opportunities, how families respond to the chance to relocate to these
communities and school districts, and how their children adjust to attendance at
their new schools. Using a quasi-experimental design, incorporating
administrative data, Census data, school data, and GIS analyses, the study will
measure the gains in educational access that come as a function of the housing
policy; in-depth interviews will identify how families respond to the policy
intervention, and how new schools and new communities affect opportunities to
learn and other social and developmental outcomes. Interviews and observations
with families and children will distinguish those who were able to successfully
relocate and engage in their new neighborhoods and schools from the families who
were unable to take advantage of the program. The structural barriers and
mechanisms that could prevent the program from effectively improving
neighborhood and school contexts for poor families will also be identified. This
study aims to answer the following questions:

Does increased housing opportunity provide access to high quality schools for
low income minority children?

How do children and youth confront and manage the transitions to higher quality
schools?

Which neighborhood and school mechanisms improve children's educational
experiences and outcomes?

Which family and child characteristics affect whether families participate in
the program and move to better neighborhoods and schools?

This study will advance our understanding of how segregation affects educational
inequality, and inform education and housing policy. We can assess whether
housing interventions can improve educational access for poor minority families
who reside in largely segregated urban areas. We can begin to understand how
poor parents approach neighborhood and school choice and identify how other
programs, such as school choice voucher programs and the No Child Left Behind
choice provisions, can work more effectively to provide students with access to
high quality schools. Our mixed methods findings will show how selection
processes work in the context of a changing opportunity structure. This allows
us to understand how poor families perceive the role of policies in their lives,
and what facilitates or prevents them from engaging in the increased
opportunities provided by policies. The findings will also have relevance for
national housing policy. As large scale public housing projects are demolished,
most families receiving subsidized housing must search for housing in the
private market. It is critical to understand how such changes affect the
educational options and outcomes of low income families with children. Unlike
the typical housing voucher program, this study will test the outcomes of
housing program where families are given assistance to find units in the private
rental market.