* 1124132
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Focal Social Actors and Tacit Coordination
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Susanne Abele, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hantula
* 07/31/2013
* USD 6,040.00

In this project the Principal Investigators will explore the potential impact of
social focal points on tacit coordination in small groups. Coordination of
actions is a common and important process in social and organizational life.
Successful coordination leads to efficient interactions and teamwork, while
failures in coordination can have detrimental impacts on both social
relationships as well as economic outcomes. Research on tacit coordination has
focused largely on structural focal points, or solutions to a coordination
problem which are suggested through the situation itself or the particular
behavioral options available to individuals. This project will extend such
thinking to include social focal points, which come from differential
uniqueness, conspicuousness, or prominence among the social actors themselves.
Four experimental studies will address: 1) how the presence of a focal social
actor impacts coordination success in small groups, 2) different ways in which
players and options can correspond to yield this effect, and 3) whether or not
being a focal actor is universally beneficial. It is expected that the presence
of a focal social actor will improve coordination by suggesting a strategy which
sees individuals more likely to select behavioral options which are related to
or correspond with the social actor. To address these questions we will create
focal actors through false feedback regarding social traits. All studies will
use groups of three participants. Feedback will be manipulated such that groups
are either homogenous on a social trait or comprised of one unique individual
who differs on a social trait from two others in the group. In terms of broader
impacts this research will contribute to our understanding of how interdependent
entities coordinate their actions, a question which has interested social
psychologists, economists, and laypersons alike. Such an understanding has far
reaching implications for common social interactions such as conversation,
collaborative work, and traffic negotiation. By adding social factors to the
formal concepts of game theory, this work will shed more light on the question
of how tacit coordination works. It will build on existing research to extend
the concept of social focal points and it will attempt to explain several
seemingly disparate phenomena, such as the impact of status, timing, and outside
options on behavior in coordination games. It will add to the growing body of
evidence that those interested in coordinated behavior would be well served to
consider not just factors regarding the problem set or structural environment,
but also features of the social actors facing the coordination problem.