* 1124794
* CDI-Type I: A Unified Probabilistic Model of Astronomical Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* David Hogg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 675,000.00

Overview: The astrophysics community has produced a Petabyte of of imaging data
in a wide range of wavelength channels in the last decade, and is planning to
produce a thousand times more in the next. At the same time, the computer
science machine learning community has developed powerful methods for extracting
knowledge scalably from large, heterogenous data sets. This project is to
construct a model--a detailed quantitative explanation--for every pixel of every
digital astronomical image ever taken by any telescope in the world, including
those from amateurs and hobbyists.

Technical description: The proposed model is a justified approximate
probabilistic model, making extensive use of non-parametric Bayesian methods.
The model will be hierarchical in nature, with the higher layers capturing
regularities among stars and galaxies, and the lower layers will accurately
model the image formation process, incorporating all the various noise
processes. The internal parameters of the model will contain the best possible
astronomical catalog given the input data; no current astronomical catalog is
built using either hierarchical probabilistic inference, or built from the union
of all available data. Science will be enabled by this catalog as it has been
enabled by all previous astronomical catalogs: it will contain the position,
brightness, temperature, parallax, and proper motion of every star and position,
intensity, and morphology of every galaxy, even for sources for which there is
evidence in the collection of data but not (sufficiently) in any individual
image. Other internal parameters of the model will contain a quantitative
description of calibration properties for all the image-generating hardware. All
these products will help to refine and extend an existing astrophysics software
and services for calibration and automated data processing.

Broader impacts: This project provides unique opportunities in citizen science
since it leverages images taken by amateur and hobbyist astronomers in creating
astronomical knowledge by offering them opportunities to contribute in exactly
the same fashion as professional astronomers. The project draws together two
disparate fields: machine learning and astronomy, and thus has the potential to
create a new sub-area of "inferential astronomy". The project offers enhanced
opportunities for research-based advanced interdisciplinary training for
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate researchers. All code created for this
project will be released under the open-source license and all model components,
parameters, and other internals will be freely disseminated to the wider
research community through the project websites at: http://Astrometry.net/ and
http://thetractor.org/ .