* 1124073
* Firms, Networks and Shocks:  An Empirical Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Ali Hortacsu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 272,259.00

This award funds research on how economic shocks move through an entire economy
via network links between individual firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A modern
economy is comprised of intricately linked production units. The structure of
this production network is one of the key determinants of how shocks are
transmitted throughout the economy. Understanding the structure of the
production network and how it affects the propagation of economic shocks can
inform government policy regarding how to prepare for and recover from adverse
shocks, such as natural disasters, energy price spikes, and financial shocks
such as the bankruptcy of key suppliers and customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
network structure of production and its effect on shock propagation has been
studied in previous research, but only at the sectoral level using input-output
tables. The first project will empirically characterize the inter-firm
production network in the U.S., mapping the individual supplier-customer links
in the production economy. The investigator develops a model of network
formation to fit key facts about the network. That model is then used to
simulate how shocks to individual firms propagate through the supply chain and,
potentially, to the whole economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project will
study intra-firm linkages between production plants owned by multi-plant firms.
Understanding why firms expand into vertically related businesses can provide us
with insights regarding how managerial/entrepreneurial talent diffuses through
the economy, and also potentially inform policy regarding vertical
acquisitions/mergers. The project uncovers and aims to explain an empirical
puzzle: there are very few internal shipments between seemingly vertically
related plants of multi-plant firms. This suggests vertical integration is not
necessarily about facilitating the flow of physical inputs between productive
units, but rather intangible inputs, such as management practices and R&amp;D
output/manufacturing know-how. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third project in the
proposal was motivated by U.S. Treasury's Auto Warranty Commitment program in
2009, which provided a government back-stop against warranties issued by GM and
Chrysler. The investigator studies the linkage between the financial health of
warranty-issuing durable goods manufacturers (such as auto manufacturers) and
consumer expectations regarding the firm's viability. After establishing the
existence and magnitude of this link in the U.S. auto industry using very
detailed data on used car auctions, the potential for fundamental instabilities
in the U.S. auto manufacturing sector due to multiple equilibria/bank-run type
dynamics is studied through an empirically calibrated model. The model is then
used to assess the effectiveness of government policies (such as warranty back-
stop programs) to thwart such dynamics.