* 1124696
* NEB: Meta-Capacitance and Spatially Periodic Electronic Excitation Devices (MC-SPEEDs)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Andrew Rappe, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,749,999.00

This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond
competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at the National
Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research Initiative of the
Semiconductor Research Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: The goal of
this project is to create a new generation of low-power, high on-off current
ratio, fast response switches. Field effect transistor (FET) switches are
ubiquitous in the semiconductor industry, yet conventional FETs are constrained
by the fundamental size, power and speed limits of electrons moving through
silicon channels and manipulated by electrostatic gates. This project focuses on
creating transistors that bypass these limits by incorporating novel channel and
gate materials, and in which exotic electronic states can be manipulated. In
particular, transistors are created by integrating high-mobility two-dimensional
electronic channels - such as exist in a single atomic layer of carbon, or
graphene - with multifunctional (e.g., electro-mechanical, magnetic) gates.
These devices are then used to investigate enhanced switching capabilities -
including those possessing novel charge-accumulating and storage
characteristics, the use of low-loss collective excitations as a replacement to
dissipative charge transport in FETs, and the development of large fan-out
switches based on these concepts. The device architecture envisioned in this
project provides an adaptable and reconfigurable platform capable of meeting
multiple application demands and evolving with time to provide a test-bed for
next generation computing, data storage, and sensing devices. Results will be
achieved by close collaborations within a multidisciplinary team of materials
scientists, chemists, and physicists from three universities (Drexel University,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and University of Pennsylvania), who
work together on first principles-based materials design, measurements, device
fabrication and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL: The success of
this project can lead to a new paradigm in future nanoelectronics with impact on
many applications of technological and economic importance. Concepts developed
here enable devices having multiple capabilities and re-configurability, and
therefore high functional density that may be attractive for computing, data
storage, sensor, and other technologies. The combination of computational
approaches, materials synthesis, characterization and nano-fabrication targeted
at bringing together novel materials - such as graphene and multifunctional
oxides - is expected to bridge multidisciplinary areas, thus opening up exciting
opportunities to discover new phenomena. The multi-faceted challenges to be
tackled in this project provide ample educational and training opportunities for
both undergraduate and graduate students for emerging interdisciplinary fields.
Leveraging PIs' ongoing efforts and involvements in organizations promoting
diversity, students from underrepresented groups are aggressively recruited with
the aid of multi-campus summer research opportunities to be created through this
project. The PIs are also dedicated to bringing the state-of-the-art research
into the classroom, and advances made here enrich curricula of courses that the
PIs teach. With the aid of extensive outreach infrastructure available across
the three institutions involved, the PIs leverage results from this project to
advocate nanoscience and technology to groups ranging from high school students
and teachers to the general public.