* 1124813
* CDI Type-II: Collaborative Research: From Ion Channels to Blood Flow and Heart Sounds: A New Paradigm in Cyber-Enabled Multiphysical Analysis of Heart Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* H. Howie Huang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

The conceptual premise of the proposed research is that integrating new modeling
and computational approaches into the analysis of heart function will enable the
development of transformative simulation-guided analytical tools for
characterizing heart function in the not-too-distant future. The goal of the
project is to develop multi-physics models of ventricles in normal and abnormal
hearts that run efficiently on large-scale, heterogeneous computer systems. The
research will focus on applying these computational tools to healthy hearts and
also to those with arrhythmia or other disorders. One novel aspect of the work
incorporates the direct computation of heart sounds which should significantly
advance non-invasive diagnosis of diastolic dysfunction. Beyond cardiac function
and heart disease, the impact of the research extends to the areas of
computational biophysics, biomechanics, computer engineering and fluid
mechanics, as well as to other organ systems. The research will produce an
integrated array of simulation tools for electromechanical/hemodynamical
modeling in normal and diseased hearts that will be made available to the
broader community though effective data management. Research training of
students and postdocs will contribute to a new generation of scientists and
engineers who can apply computational thinking across disciplinary boundaries.
Educational impact within the PIs? universities will be enhanced by translating
the research into new and existing courses; impact outside the PIs institutions
will be achieved via planned high-school and minority-focused outreach
activities.