* 1124573
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Investigation of the "Iranian Model" for Paid Unrelated Kidney Donation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Elham Mireshghi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 9,405.00

Doctoral student Elham Mireshghi (University of California, Irvine), under the
supervision of Dr. Michael Montoya, will undertake research on the intersection
of public policy, religion, and biotechnology through an examination of the
making and implementation of policy for the regulation of human organ donation.
Previous research has focused on either altruistic organ donations or illegal
organ markets. This project will be undertaken in Iran, which is the only
country where financial payment for kidney donation is legal and
bureaucratically routinized, an arena of organ donation that has not previously
been investigated by social scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mireshghi will
employ multiple social scientific research methods for data collection. She will
conduct interviews with samples drawn from the four primary groups involved: the
organization that instigated and now implements the policy; medical doctors;
clerics who were consulted; and donors, recipients, and their families. She also
will observe at hospitals where the operations are performed and collect and
analyze religious documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important
because it will contribute to understanding the process by which sensitive
innovations are regulated and how those regulations are connected to social,
cultural, and economic contexts in which they exist. Findings from the research
may also contribute to the debate on solutions for the worldwide organ shortage.
Funding this research also supports the education of a graduate student. This
research is supported by both the NSF Cultural Anthropology Program and the Law
and Social Sciences Program.