* 1124123
* Determining Feasibility and Scalability of a Life/Medical Science Hybrid-core Based Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Liqing Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,325,316.00

Future HPC systems must match the needs of users, which are not adequately
defined by single measures such as floating point operations. This is
particularly true in the life and medical sciences where the data sets are
immense and computations are frequently not floating point intensive. We will
deploy a different computer architecture and different surrounding
infrastructure (hardware, software, personnel) to explicitly address the
emerging needs of the non-PDE solving community, and leverage recent advances
made on a prototype system, Shadowfax, at Virginia Tech. We intend to create an
extensible FPGA-based cluster as an expansion to existing FPGA modules that is
balanced with a data storage system to address the needs that are typical of
life/medical science applications. We will optimize and tune a diverse sampling
of critical life science implementations on three commercially available
processor types, microprocessors, FPGAs and GPGPUs, to confirm the performance
and general applicability of this approach and will then make the system and all
components available to the community on which to do computations and via an
outreach program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims are:&lt;br/&gt;1) To
optimize and evaluate the effectiveness of a Hybrid-core based cluster relative
to standard microprocessors and GPGPUs specifically for life and medical science
applications that are non-floating point, data and memory intensive and to
validate the utility and scalability for a set of the most in-demand compute-
intensive applications that samples diverse algorithm/application
space.&lt;br/&gt;2) To create a secure web-based portal through which
life/medical science users can analyze their data. &lt;br/&gt;3) To propagate
our knowledge and experience via a training and internship program that will
enable users, developers and systems personnel to use the prototype system or
locally replicate and support a similar system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel
and generalize-able HPC approaches to be investigated in this project will
potentially demonstrate types of computations and data manipulations are the
best matches for certain architectures, thus will address the very different
needs of the growing life/medical science data-driven research community. If
successful, computers and techniques established here could join the established
network of HPC floating point-centric computers to respond to this growing unmet
need. By engaging commercial partners and focusing efforts on specific
demonstration applications, we will immediately demonstrate community value and
dramatically increase the speed with which these novel systems can be deployed
and scaled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system will immediately be available to
users, especially a plurality of biomedical research groups who are generating a
variety of '-omics' data for which access to the tools running on appropriate
systems is limiting the accuracy and completeness of analysis and thus value. By
propagating our quantitative findings via a number of channels, we will
contribute to how biomedical data is analyzed, and establish a basis upon which
future computational production facilities are designed to meet this specific
community need.