* 1124009
* Collaborative Research: Housing Status and Life Course after Privatization in Russia
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Theodore Gerber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 151,810.00

Housing Status and Life Course after Privatization in Russia

This study examines whether and how housing status (quantity, quality, and
tenure) influences socioeconomic inequality, family formation and dissolution,
and subjective perceptions and outlook. Social scientists observe that aspects
of housing may directly shape outcomes such as the educational and occupational
attainment of children, rates of marriage, cohabitation, divorce, and
childbearing, and perceived security, happiness, life satisfaction, and
political attitudes. But we do not know whether housing has independent causal
effects on these outcomes because households obtain housing in a non-random
manner: the same variables (such as family wealth and income) that affect access
to housing also shape educational attainment, marriage rates, and happiness. In
other words, housing may be endogenous to the outcomes it purportedly shapes.

The project takes advantage of the opportunity that contemporary Russia offers
to study the causal effects of housing. Under the Soviet system housing was
allocated based on criteria like household structure, age, and seniority at
work, not wealth and income. When the Soviet Union collapsed, housing stock was
privatized by simply giving residents the property rights to their dwellings.
This privatization effectively locked-in the non-market distribution of housing
status from the Soviet period. Subsequently, housing markets have not developed
in Russia, due to mainly capital constraints. Thus, the distribution of housing
status today is still based largely on Soviet-era criteria rather than market
principles, giving us a unique opportunity to study whether and how housing
status exerts independent causal effects on life course outcomes.

To take advantage of this opportunity, the investigators will conduct an
innovative survey of Russian urbanites ages 32-55, their spouses or cohabiting
partners, and some of their parents. This cohort passed through crucial
transitions to young and middle adulthood, when housing matters most, just
before or after the collapse of the Soviet Union (in December 1991). The survey
will obtain complete housing histories of focal respondents and their
spouses/partners from 1991 (including extensive information on each dwelling
lived in and how it was obtained) through 2012, education, household structure,
employment, partnership, and childbearing histories, family background
characteristics, the education of their children, a range of attitude measures,
and other relevant information. Finally, they will survey the parents of 25% of
focal respondents to verify the accuracy of retrospective housing histories and
collect more information.

The project will produce a major advance in social scientific understanding of
the effects of housing in Russia, which in turn will dramatically improve
knowledge about how housing might function in other national contexts.

Broader impact. The survey will be unique in terms of its comprehensive measures
of individual- and household-level housing status and of the outcomes and
behaviors that housing is hypothesized to influence. The resulting data file
will be available to the public, thereby adding a vital new resource for housing
researchers. The substantive findings produced by the study will help
policymakers, both within and outside Russia, craft effective policies to
promote the positive and ameliorate the negative effects of housing on
inequality, demographic change, and the well-being of their societies. The
investigators will report on the policy implications of their studies in a
series of policy memos.