* 1124844
* Collaborative Research: International Collaboration in Chemistry: Formation Mechanisms of Iodinated Disinfection By-Products from X-Ray Contrast Media
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Michael Plewa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2016
* USD 216,464.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) program of the Division of Chemistry
will support the international collaboration in chemistry research program of
Prof. Stephen Duirk of the University of Akron, Prof. Michael Plewa of the
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Dr. Susan Richardson of USEPA, and
Dr. Thomas Ternes of the Federal Institute of Hydrology in Koblenz, Germany. The
collaborative team of investigators and their students will employ advanced
measurement methods to elucidate the formation mechanisms of highly toxic iodo-
disinfentant by products (iodo-DBPs) from the reaction of drinking water
disinfectants with iodinated X-ray contrast media (ICM). ICM have never been
investigated as precursors to DBPs in drinking water treatment, despite the fact
that they are widely used and are found at high levels in surface waters. The US
researchers will identify low molecular weight iodo-DBPs formed during the
reaction of chlorinated oxidants with ICM and their TPs, and German researchers
will identify high molecular weight reaction products. The toxicity (mammalian
cell genotoxicity and cytotoxicity) of the reaction product mixtures and of
individual iodo-DBPs identified will also be measured to determine which ICM,
and their microbial transformation products (TPs), and reaction conditions give
rise to toxic by-products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As clean water sources are
contaminated with anthropogenic chemicals from wastewater inputs, it is
important to understand how these contaminants can be chemically transformed
during drinking water treatment resulting in the formation of toxic
transformation products. Understanding contaminant transformation pathways will
ultimately result in minimizing or eliminating the formation of highly toxic
DBPs in drinking water, which could potentially impact the millions of people
worldwide who consume disinfected drinking water. The study will provide an
excellent educational opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students to
carry out an environmental chemical science project of great societal importance
in international collaborative settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
international collaborative research project is supported jointly by NSF and the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation) (DFG).