* 1124318
* Collaborative Re:Temporal resolution in benthic assemblages: assessing and modeling the roles of burial dynamics, seafloor type, and intrinsic factors using (un)natural experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Clark Alexander, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 12/31/2014
* USD 210,000.00

Collaborative Re:Temporal resolution in benthic assemblages: assessing and
modeling the roles of burial dynamics, seafloor type, and intrinsic factors
using (un)natural experiments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Susan Kidwell, University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Clark Alexander, Skidaway Institute of
Oceanography&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologists increasingly appreciate the need
for longer term perspectives on the presence and abundance of species in coastal
environments in order to evaluate how these important ecosystems have been
altered by human activities, which in most areas began well before the advent of
quantitative surveys in the early 20th century and federally mandated
biomonitoring in the 1970s. Very young fossil records ? that is, skeletal
remains from the last few decades, centuries, and tens of millennia, embedded
within the upper few meters of the sedimentary record ? offer a promising means
both of reconstructing changes in ecosystems over the full history of
cultural/industrial development and of acquiring the information on truly
natural conditions that is essential to developing restoration targets. However,
to confidently merge these geologically young paleontological data with
conventional neo-biological data, we need to understand how, if at all,
biological information is altered with the progressive, natural burial of shelly
remains. Research over the last 20 years finds that molluscan death assemblages
(clam and snail shells) present within the uppermost, storm- and animal-stirred
few centimeters of the seabed can include some fairly old shells (thousands of
years old, especially on open continental shelves), but are strongly dominated
by individuals that died during the last (most recent) ?urban? century and
especially the last few decades. Death assemblages from this mixed layer are
thus clearly time-averaged, but the strongest signal is from the final stages of
skeletal accumulation, much like a photographic time-exposure produces a
somewhat blurry track of a moving object whose final position is captured with
snapshot-like clarity. &lt;br/&gt;Here, with NSF funding, we will test for the
first time the extent to which skeletal assemblages retain this level of
temporal resolution as they undergo progressive burial into deeper, more
permanent layers of the Holocene sedimentary record, where the assemblage is no
longer refreshed by new shell input and is subject to different chemical
regimes. We will leverage extensive prior knowledge of seafloor animals and
environmental conditions on the southern California continental shelf to conduct
a series of observational experiments on the key factors thought to control
skeletal accumulation, namely (1) the intrinsic durability of shell material
(focus on six key genera of bivalves, differing in shell mineralogy and
microstructure), (2) rates and types of sediment accumulation (land-derived mud
and sand, plus shell-rich seabeds deprived of sediment), and (3) rates and
depths of sediment mixing by storms and burrowing animals, with factors 2 and 3
quantified using radioisotopic methods. Shell ages will be based on radiocarbon-
calibrated amino-acid racemization dating, which we have already determined
works well in this region. Data on how temporal resolution changes with burial
will be generated by dating sets of shells from a series of horizons in long
(3-4 m) sedimentary cores. We will take these cores at sites both along the
known legacy gradient of sediment toxicity from DDT-charged wastewater effluents
on the Palos Verdes shelf and from historically uncontaminated seafloors,
providing an ?unnatural? experiment on the effects of bioturbation. Using
stochastic simulations and likelihood analysis of shell-age frequency
distributions as well as conventional statistical analysis of experimental
results, this project will identify the dominant mechanisms that determine shell
preservation, which is relevant to the ecological fidelity as well as the
temporal resolution of skeletal assemblages in both the deep- and near-time
fossil records. &lt;br/&gt;Of even broader implications, we will develop and
refine protocols for merging biological information from paleontological and
neo-biological sources, as part of the burgeoning new field of conservation
paleobiology. Research papers will be published in marine biological and
pollution journals rather than only earth science journals to promote scientific
integration. We already have a cooperative relationship with scientists from
several regional agencies charged with environmental management, who will be
kept up to date with research results by talks on site. Archived skeletal
assemblages from our cores will constitute a new resource for future studies of
diverse types (e.g., morphology, sclerochronology, isotopes, molecules),
particularly when combined with extensive mixed-layer death assemblages that we
have already archived from past (1970s) and ongoing (2003 ? present) surveys and
biomonitoring of living shelf communities. The project will provide field and
lab experience for a post-doctoral scholar and for undergraduate and graduate
student assistants drawn from an historically black institution (Savannah
State). We will also develop a lab exercise for use in local high schools and
2-year or 4-year colleges on the historical ecology of the southern California
marine bight and the power of sedimentary cores for environmental and ecological
analysis. This region has strong public interest and governmental commitment to
coastal environmental quality, and thus has a good existing infrastructure for
public outreach.