* 1124175
* EXP: CTSiM: Fostering Computational Thinking in Middle Schools through Scientific Modeling and Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Kolodner
* 08/31/2013
* USD 570,779.00

This project's investigation is at the nexus between scientific thinking,
computational thinking, modeling as an investigative endeavor, and visual
programming tools. The PIs are infusing middle-school science with efforts to
promote computational thinking, doing that through making modeling a more
significant part of science activities. The modeling experiences learners have
become progressively more complex throughout each module and more complex across
modules, with the increases in complexity informed by complexities of becoming a
computational thinker. Modeling and computational thinking are foregrounded in
each module, with each becoming more fluid over time as a result of the
repetition of increasingly complex modeling experiences in a variety of
situations, all of which build on each other. The mental model building,
computational thinking, modeling, and science education literatures all inform
the endeavor. The technological innovation includes creating and refining a
modeling environment appropriate to middle schoolers, including an appropriate
visual programming language. Research questions address issues in learning
computational thinking in the context of learning to model and use models for
investigation (and vice versa) and trajectories towards competency in
computational thinking and modeling as their research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational thinking is becoming a more and
more important required expertise of scientists -- both those who work at the
high levels of computational science and engineering and those who support them
and apply computational science. In addition, as computation becomes more and
more ubiquitous in a whole variety of disciplines and workplace
responsibilities, the rest of the population, too, needs to be more expert at
computational thinking and at using computational tools. Infusing computational
thinking and the use of computational tools into the curriculum in appropriate
ways is the right way to promote this cross-cutting expertise. Science is one
place in the curriculum where computational thinking can easily be integrated,
and doing so not only holds the promise for readying more of the population for
careers and jobs that require computational thinking and use of computational
tools but also making middle school science more exciting to more of the
population.