* 1124430
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Struggle to Change: Life Course Alteration and Environmental Opportunities of Juvenile Offenders
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Michaela Soyer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 9,497.00

Among the greatest challenges the Juvenile Justice System faces is a chronically
high rate of recidivism among juvenile offenders. Recent studies have estimated
that half of incarcerated youth will go on to commit new crimes after their
release from detention. In spite of the many programs that have been designed to
support desistance from criminal activity, many of these young offenders will
never successfully develop into non-offending adults. The present study
investigates why teenage offenders continue to recidivate despite their efforts
to 'go straight'. To address this question, it follows 30 young men in Chicago
and Boston who have broken the law and have subsequently expressed an intention
to change their behavior. In both cities, participants are interviewed over the
course of a year. Questions are designed to elicit information on the
motivations underlying personal behavioral choices and how participants perceive
their surroundings. The goal is to gain insight into the interaction between
individual behavior and the opportunities offered by the structured social
environment, recognizing how the context within which behavioral reform is
attempted variously facilitates or inhibits new actions. It is argued that a
positive and secure concept of identity may protect young men from recidivating.
Hence, the aim of this research is to observe the emergence of such positive
identity concepts or to recognize the forces that have inhibited them when they
fail to develop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research demonstrates that young men
are exposed to a variety of influences that interact in dynamic ways in the
course of attempting to reform their behavior. It aims to aid in the development
of juvenile justice programs that are more effective for taking into account the
context within which young offenders struggle to change the courses of their
lives.