* 1124714
* NEB: Hybrid Spintronics and Straintronics: A New Technology for Ultra-Low Energy Computing and Signal Processing Beyond the Year 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,559,568.00

Intellectual merit: This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020
and Beyond competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at
the National Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research
Initiative of the Semiconductor Research Corporation. The complementary metal
oxide semiconductor field effect transistor, considered the workhorse of modern
computing machinery, is inherently energy-inefficient because it is a charge-
based digital switch. In contrast, a single-domain nanomagnet with uniaxial
shape anisotropy, that encodes binary bits in its magnetization orientation, is
much more energy-efficient because it is a spin-based switch in which the spins
internally interact. Therefore, magnetic computing circuits hold a potential
advantage over their electronic counterparts. That advantage however will be
lost if the methodology used to switch the magnet becomes so energy-inefficient
that it adds an exorbitant energy overhead. To this end, a hybrid
spintronic/straintronic paradigm for switching magnets has been developed that
reduces the energy dissipation by several orders of magnitude and heralds an
ultra-energy-efficient magnetic computing and signal processing architecture.
This project will: (1) develop all the modeling tools necessary to simulate
these devices and their switching dynamics. They will incorporate the effects of
device and circuit stochasticity and thermal fluctuations via appropriate models
such as stochastic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equations and/or Fokker-Planck
equations; (2) demonstrate Bennett clocking and successful logic bit propagation
in a digital gate array fabricated with nanolithography, where clocking is
carried out with tiny voltages generating strain; (3) design energy-efficient
neuromorphic architectures based on multi-state hybrid spintronic/straintronic
synapses and neurons that can process analog signals; and (4) demonstrate image
processing with straintronic/spintronic nodes communicating via spin waves to
implement specific image morphing algorithms. These image processors will be
extremely fast since they will rely on the physics of magnetic interactions
between spin wave circuits and the collective activity of multiferroic magnetic
cells to elicit the required functionality, without requiring any software or
execution of instruction sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
proposed research will potentially impact all areas of computing and signal
processing. Computers employing the hybrid spintronics/straintronics approach
can be so energy-efficient that they could operate by harvesting energy from the
surroundings, without requiring a battery. Thus, they have unprecedented
applications in medical devices implanted in an epileptic patient?s brain to
monitor brain signals and warn of an impending seizure. They can run by
harvesting energy from the patient?s body motion alone. They also have other
applications in areas such as structural health monitoring where they can
constantly monitor fatigue and fracture propagation in bridges and buildings,
while harvesting energy from vibrations induced by wind or passing traffic.
Integration of this research with education will entail traditional graduate and
undergraduate student training, while minority enrichment will involve training
high-school students recruited through the Richmond Area Program for Minorities
in Engineering at Virginia Commonwealth University, minority outreach centers at
University of California-Riverside, Office of Engineering Outreach and
Engagement at Michigan, and the Center for Diversity in Engineering at
University of Virginia. K-12 outreach will leverage the Math and Science
Innovation Center at Richmond and the Summer Discovery Program at Virginia
Commonwealth University. New graduate course material will be developed at each
participating institution and disseminated through textbooks, tutorials and the
worldwide web.