* 1124431
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Local Perceptions of Hydrological Change and Consequences for Landscape Use Transformations: The Tikuna in Colombia's Amazonia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Rocio Rodriguez Granados, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 17,570.00

Researchers have investigated community vulnerability, adaptation and resilience
in the face of global climate change, as well as community perceptions of the
local-level effects of these global processes. Less attention has been paid to
exploring how climate changes are affecting subsistence strategies and socio-
cultural systems even though this information is critical for understanding
long-term landscape preservation. The research to be undertaken by University of
Georgia doctoral student Rocío Rodríguez Granado, with the guidance of Dr. Julie
Velasquez Runk and Dr.Theodore Gragson, will contribute to filling that gap
through a study of how a local indigenous group is responding to changes in
hydrologic cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out among
the Tikuna, an indigenous people who live in Colombia and who rely on their
landscape for hunting and gathering and small-scale agriculture. Preliminary
research has shown that the Tikuna are both aware of and are responding to
hydrologic changes. The hydrological cycle determines what, where and when
subsistence activities take place. The researcher's goal is to document Tikunas'
adaptation strategies as an indicator of how environmental change understandings
are influencing subsistence strategies more generally in Colombian Amazonia.
Colombia is one of the most diverse countries in the world, in terms of both
cultural diversity and biological diversity, and most of the indigenous groups
left in the country are located in the Amazon region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will collect information on Tikuna views of the environment and their
changing relationship to it through semi-structured interviews, oral histories,
focus groups, the elicitation of ecological calendars, and resource walks to map
changing land use patterns and perceptions of environmental changes. These data
will be compared to patterns of rainfall and temperature taken by the Colombian
government over the last 40 years as well as parallel data collected by the
researcher during the field year. The result will be a tropical case study that
documents local-level environmental effects of global climate change, both
culturally and materially, as well as associated shifts in livelihood and other
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will
contribute to theorizing the relationship between perceptions of climate change
and climate-change induced shifts in livelihoods. As such, findings also have
the potential to contribute to the literatures on the complex adaptive human
systems and historical ecology, and to the development of culturally effective
conservation and development practices. Supporting this research also supports
the education of a graduate student.