* 1124946
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: LOV Domain Signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Carey Johnson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 426,000.00

With this International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes (CLP) Program in the Division of Chemistry is supporting
collaborative work by Professor Carey Johnson of the University of Kansas and
Professor Bernhard Dick of the University of Regensburg, Germany. This award is
through a partnership with the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), who will
support the research in the Dick lab. The international team will carry out
fundamental studies on the light-activated signaling process that triggers
phototropism, the process by which plants grow towards light. The protein
responsible is called PHOT and contains two protein domains called LOV (Light-
Oxygen-Voltage) domains. The team will investigate the biochemical steps by
which PHOT transmits the signal that initiates phototropism following activation
by light. The mechanism appears to involve formation of interacting pairs
(dimers) of LOV domains. The interaction of LOV domains will be studied by a
range of techniques, including detection of single dimers by fluorescence
spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of the proposal range
from the training of graduate and undergraduate students to a fundamental
understanding of signaling in LOV domains, which belong to a broad class of
proteins involved in signaling, not only in plants but in the other biological
kingdoms as well. Participants in the project will include undergraduate
students in the UKanTeach program at the University of Kansas, which trains
science majors at KU for high school science teaching.