* 1124074
* Support for Institutes and Research Groups on Qualitative and Multi-Method Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* David Collier, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,690.00

The Institute for Qualitative and Multi-Method Research (IQMR) promotes the
teaching and application of qualitative research methods and their combination
with complementary analytic techniques in political science and cognate
disciplines. The associated Research Group is an authors' workshop that seeks to
help scholars publish in the field of methodology, thereby adding to the core
canon of published research on which the wider academic community draws.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the tenth Institute (June 2011), roughly 250
instructors will have taught advanced qualitative methods to over one thousand
graduate students and junior faculty. Topics covered include case study methods,
archival research and fieldwork, the intersection of qualitative and
quantitative methods, ethnographic research, and experiments. Moreover,
Institute attendees will have the opportunity to present research designs in
small-group discussion sessions. The sessions offer students feedback on their
own original research, as well as valuable practice presenting their work and
critiquing that of others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the distinctive focus of
the Institute's faculty and teaching program is qualitative methods, instructors
and participants are strongly concerned with how qualitative methods undergird
and complement alternative analytic approaches. Accordingly, the Institute
maintains a broad methodological focus that reaches across--and seeks to bridge
various--epistemological divides. To that end, IQMR regularly features faculty
with a background in statistical theory, experimental methods, and interpretive
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond training graduate students and junior
faculty in the use of qualitative and multi-method research techniques, the
Research Group held at the same time as the Institute encourages young scholars
to develop their methodological skills and become fully engaged in producing
(and not just using) qualitative research methods. It is a catalyst for the
continued expansion of the burgeoning literature on these methods. Meeting
during the break between the two weeks of the Institute, this authors' workshop
offers an excellent opportunity to present work on qualitative and multi-method
techniques and to receive feedback on ideas from the Institute's highly-regarded
faculty. As a result of the Research Group, the core group of scholars
developing new qualitative research methods has grown, and the menu of available
research technologies has been enhanced.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While the
training and feedback benefits provided to attendees are substantial, the
Institute and Research Group also have an impact on the broader academic and
policy-making communities. Past attendees have gone on to develop courses in
qualitative methods at their own universities, and research group participants
have published books and articles that are widely read across various
disciplines. NSF support has enabled the Institute to offer scholarships to
students who would otherwise not have been able to attend.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute has helped to ensure that the qualitative
and multi-method research that makes up a substantial portion of political
science and related fields is conducted in a rigorous, transparent, and
productive way. In turn, this helps to increase our confidence in the
conclusions scholars reach about the world's most pressing matters, and it aids
policy-makers in devising well-informed prescriptions for tackling them.