* 1124281
* DIP: Collaborative Research: Mixed-Reality Labs: Integrating Sensors and Simulations to Improve Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Charles Xie, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 09/30/2016
* USD 958,439.00

This collaborative project is investigating the characteristics of a mixed-
reality learning environment that combines the rich context and multi-sensory
experiences of a physical lab with the interactive simulations of a virtual lab.
The hybrid environment integrates sensors and simulations to bring out the
advantages of each setting in a complementary way. The research team is
developing four such mixed-reality laboratory experiences for secondary school
level chemistry and physics courses and studying student learning in these
contexts. Two of the activities use an integration strategy in which data
acquired in real time from a physical experiment are used to control a virtual
experiment. The advantage of this coupling is that abstract concepts or
invisible processes can be visualized on the computer screen while the physical
experiment is underway. Whenever the learner's hands-on interaction with the
physical experiments changes the sensor measurement, the visualization in the
virtual experiment responds accordingly, creating an intimate link between the
two worlds. The other integration strategy uses physical and virtual experiments
in parallel, challenging the student to match the results measured by the
sensors and the results computed by the simulations. The learning potential in
this configuration stems from the ability to go back and forth between both
worlds, adjusting the virtual experiment to match the physical experiment and
then adjusting the physical experiment to test the fidelity of the virtual
experiment. Implementations of the four activities in eight classrooms are being
compared to classes covering similar content. The intellectual merit of this
project lies in its investigation of the potential of cyberlearning technologies
to transform inquiry in the lab. In addition, the project brings to bear the
expertise of a recognized team of researchers. The project is exercising its
broader impacts through its identification of a new instructional approach to
STEM education. The combination of physical and virtual labs carries the
potential for broad utility, with the insights and examples developed by this
project potentially applicable throughout STEM education. In fact, because all
of the project software is open source and the materials made available freely
from the project's website, the only expenses to schools are for the sensors. A
key design criterion is that all project software is compatible with sensors
from multiple vendors so that schools are not limited in their choices.