* 1124879
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Structure and dynamics of amino acids adsorbed on coinage metal surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Barbara Hinch, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2016
* USD 404,174.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program,
Professor Hinch and her coworkers in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical
Biology at Rutgers University are using high resolution angular diffraction and
time of flight analysis of thermal helium scattering to investigate structure,
assembly and low energy molecule surface vibrations of adsorbed amino acids.
This International Collaboration in Chemistry award includes a collaborator,
Professor Stephen J. Jenkins at Cambridge University in the United Kingdom. His
work is supported by EPSRC in the United Kingdom. The interactions of alanine,
glycine and proline adsorbates with coinage metal surfaces are the focus of this
research. These systems are believed to adsorb as carboxylate species and the
amino groups may or may not undergo protonation. Information about chirality and
possible racemization of adsorbed phases will be evident in the surface
sensitive diffraction measurements. The real time kinetics of film assembly of
these molecules on the surfaces, determined with this non destructive probe,
will provide an understanding of the long- and short- range intermolecular
interactions. In transitioning from low to high coverage regimes, changes in the
discrete vibrational modes, and the effective masses of the scattering centers,
will elucidate the significance of hydrogen bonding in these self assembled
films. The low energy vibrational spectra are also to determine the influence of
coadsorbed hydrogen levels in film stability, kinetics of assembly and surface
diffusion and reaction mechanisms. Through collaboration with Professor Jenkins'
group at Cambridge University, the Hinch group at Rutgers will also be able to
utilize high-resolution low-temperature scanning probe techniques for studies of
amino acid films. The international collaboration also offers a powerful
computational capability and understanding of the multi-dimensional potential
energy surfaces governing vibrational motion in simple adsorbed amino acids. A
mutual objective is to image, simulate, and measure the dynamics within hydrogen
bonding networks established in the amino acid
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the
understanding of the behavior of molecules adsorbed on surfaces. The knowledge
obtained will implications for a variety of fields and applications, including
chirally-specific sensors, enantioselective chemical synthesis, and possibly
medical implant materials with improved biocompatibility. The research also has
considerable workforce development benefits, as graduate and undergraduate
students and post-doctoral associates will engage in a richly interdisciplinary
research experience, which entails a variety of experimental techniques as well
as theory and computation. The student experience will be further augmented by
the international exchange aspects; extended visits by Rutgers and Cambridge
group researchers to the partnering laboratory will provide invaluable
experience with research environments beyond each participant's home
institution.