* 1124244
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Aqueous Host-Guest Chemistry with Self-Assembling Metal-templated Cages
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Christopher Cramer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah L. Stoll
* 08/31/2015
* USD 485,000.00

With an International Collaborations in Chemistry (ICC) award, Professors Laura
Gagliardi (PI) and Christopher J. Cramer (co-PI) of the University of Minnesota,
supported jointly by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program and the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program
(CTMCM) in the Division of Chemistry as well as the NSF Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE), will engage in research with Professor Jonathan
Nitschke of the Department of Chemistry, Cambridge University, United Kingdom,
to assess the fundamental factors affecting binding and recognition in the
aqueous host-guest chemistry of small to moderate-sized organic molecules inside
self-assembling, metal-templated cages. By taking advantage of spiral feedback
between modeling and experiment, they will identify key steric and electrostatic
interactions in the complexes, the control of which will facilitate the rational
design of improved host-guest combinations. Theoretical models based on both
quantum and molecular mechanics will be employed. Quantum mechanical models will
be employed to supplement experiment with benchmark data for the selection of
classical mechanical force fields and also be used to compute spectral data
(e.g., NMR and UV/Vis) in order to compare to experimental host-guest
combinations. Classical mechanical force field modeling will be used to simulate
the dynamical behavior of host-guest combinations and for the prediction of
potentials of mean force associated with aqueous binding events. With sufficient
validating data in hand, in silico design efforts will be undertaken with the
goal of focusing synthetic efforts on host-guest combinations showing enhanced
selectivity and binding efficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular cages have
been shown to stabilize unstable molecules, such as white phosphorus, a
spontaneously-flammable and highly toxic form of the element. Cages can also
selectively speed up (catalyze) reactions by binding to high-energy reactive
intermediates, thus lowering their energies. In order to extend these uses and
develop new ones, fundamental understanding must be gained as to the weak
interactions between encapsulated molecules and their hosts. This collaborative
research project will allow a US-UK team to combine theory and experiment to
come to an understanding of the fundamentals of this 'host-guest chemistry' with
the goal of being able to design new cages for applications as yet undreamt-of.