* 1124931
* CDI-Type I:   Accelerating Simulations Using CPU+FPGA Heterogeneous Processing
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* John Lach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 595,519.00

The computational modeling of biological and physiological processes is becoming
a growing component of any comprehensive research effort aimed at understanding
complex systems. A significant limitation to such studies is the computational
efficiency used to assess complex data sets that often span multiple time
scales. An example of this is the heart which is one of the most important
organs in the body, and for which computational modeling is becoming
increasingly important to understanding its function. In addition to the large
number of cells in the heart, computational modeling and simulation of cardiac
function becomes extremely complex when considering both the feedback inherent
in many cardiac processes (requiring a fine timescale) and the long-term effects
of various stimuli (requiring long simulations). Multi-timescale simulations are
therefore required. This project will utilize cardiac function as a model system
to develop new and faster computational tools. New processing capabilities will
be developed for automatically partitioning intra- and inter-time-step
computation among heterogeneous processing units that are now becoming
commonplace in commodity computer systems. In particular, computation will be
partitioned and mapped to graphics processing units (GPUs) and field
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) in addition to general-purpose central
processing units (CPUs), with each processing unit targeting different types of
parallelism and computational bottlenecks. These capabilities will dramatically
accelerate multi-timescale simulation and other computationally complex
algorithms, providing an improved understanding of cardiac function and other
complex systems. The project will produce an open-source resource for
partitioning computation to heterogeneous computing units that will be broadly
useful across a range of disciplines. The research will provide
interdisciplinary training for graduate students in systems biology and computer
science. In addition to carrying out much of the research on this project, these
students will also perform outreach aimed to encourage younger students to
pursue careers in science and engineering.