* 1124043
* Algorithms for Computing the Equilibrium Payoff Sets of Dynamic Games with Perfect Monitoring
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Dilip Abreu, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 232,443.00

This award funds research in new methods and algorithms for computing strategic
equilibria. Many economic situations involve repeated interactions between
agents. These repeated strategic interactions also appear in other realms of
social science including politics and international
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most basic formalization of such
interactions is a repeated game. This provides a mathematical framework in which
ongoing interactions can be quantified and the impact of such factors as the
myopic temptations to cheat, the number of participants, the information
available to participants when they plan their moves and responses, the
compellingness of present versus future concerns, and so on, can be
simultaneously assessed in a coherent way. An indispensable tool in this
endeavor is the notion of equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, except in
the most trivial formulations, the actual computation of possible equilibria is
a difficult task. Even in relatively simple stylized settings it is difficult
for the social scientist to investigate the impact of changes in underlying
conditions (what happens if the price of certain inputs changes, what if
regulations are put in place which limit the information firms have about their
rivals, what if trade tariffs are altered, and so on). This project aims
squarely at this computational problem.&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team seek to
develop methods that yield answers rapidly using standard laptop computers.
Preliminary results include a number of promising new methods. The overall goal
is to extend these results to other important classes of repeated interactions
and thereby provide students, researchers and practitioners, important new tools
to facilitate their analysis of ongoing interactions.