* 1124814
* CDI-Type I:Engineering Massively Parallelized Fluidic Processors: From Data to Predictive Models to Functional Designs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Raghunathan Rengasamy, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Currently, microfluidic devices can produce millions of nanoliter-scale droplets
allowing high throughput biological analysis. Given the multi-step nature of
biological analysis, these droplets often need to be shuttled through a network
of fluidic channels so that they can be merged with other reagent-loaded
droplets, then sorted and eventually analyzed. Realizing this vision of an
ultrafast fluidic bioprocessor in the laboratory is quite a daunting task
because non-linearity in the motion of droplets through interconnected networks
precludes full control over the position and timing of each and every droplet.
The principal hypothesis of this work is that computational thinking approaches
can lead to a paradigm shift in precision engineering of error-free fluidic
processors by narrowing down the design space and yielding optimized solutions
of network architecture. Preliminary data supports this hypothesis, motivating
us to implement computational strategies to address this design challenge.
First, predictive models of the basic fluidic components of a processor will be
built. Second, predictive control strategies will be used to address the
relative significance of passive approaches vis-Ã -vis active methods to regulate
droplet trajectories in fluidic networks. Finally, specialized genetic
algorithms (GAs) will be developed to optimize network architecture for desired
processor functionality. Additional cyber aspects of the proposal include
generation and analysis of tremendous amount of digital microscopy data
capturing the non-linear dynamics of droplets in networks and efficient
knowledge generation from this abundant data using the best available
computational infrastructure. Thus, the proposed work cuts across several
disciplines including control theory, systems engineering, computational
science, non-linear dynamics, fluid mechanics, microfabrication and image
processing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results from this study will not only
advance scientific and engineering frontiers in a variety of disciplines but
will also lead to transformative impact in applications related to biological
analysis, material synthesis, biosensing and disease diagnostics. The
computational tools being developed in this work can be adapted to analyze
complex networks in natural systems including microcirculation and
transportation systems. Educational component of the project includes drawing
graduate and undergraduate students to the visually striking microfluidics
research and providing state-of-the-art training in interdisciplinary areas -
yielding a workforce that is uniquely trained. In addition to disseminating the
results through conference presentations and publications, the digital movies
generated during the project will be stored on dedicated network servers for
access to other users to eventually build a digital library of fluidic processor
architectures.