* 1124480
* PASI: Molecular-Based Multiscale Modeling and Simulation; Montevideo, Uruguay; September 1-14, 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Cameron Abrams, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/2012
* USD 100,000.00

1124480&lt;br/&gt;Pfaendtner &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced
Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department
of Energy (DOE), will take place September 1-14, 2012 at the Institute Pasteur
in Montevideo, Uruguay. Organized by Dr. W. James Pfaendtner and Dr. Cameron F.
Abrams from the Chemical Engineering Departments at the University of Washington
in Seattle, Washington and Drexel University in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
respectively, the institute will address the subjects of molecular-based multi-
scale modeling and simulation. More specifically, it will be structured into
three broad areas that include enhanced sampling, coarse-grained modeling, and
rare-events/rate calculations. Overall, the PASI will give students simultaneous
exposure to a) the theoretical underpinnings of new methods, b) the algorithmic
details of their implementation, and c) hands-on practice using the above-
mentioned methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because multi-scale simulations can be
used to study many systems at the atomic level, the methods taught in this PASI
have applicability to a wide range of scientific and technological fields,
including drug design, the biomedical sciences and energy science. Furthermore,
the activity will also have a significant impact on the research choices of the
30 student participants by providing them with the guidance to use NSF Teragrid
Resources to perform research-grade calculations after the PASI is over.