* 1124327
* Critical new perspectives on molybdenum cycling under modern and experimental euxinic conditions: Tuning the paleoredox proxy
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Timothy Lyons, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2015
* USD 298,506.00

The story of ancient ocean chemistry is the story of our origins. The geologic
record reveals the presence of animals over only the last 10% of Earth?s
4.6-billion-year history and the origins of modern humans only a flicker of time
ago. Most researchers link the appearance of the first animals to a rise in
atmospheric oxygen to a level high enough to support complex animal metabolisms.
The first 90% of Earth history, however, is a story of profound change in the
oxygen state of the atmosphere and ocean, with complete absence of oxygen over
the first half of Earth history and an oxygen-free deep ocean for most of the
next half. Oxygen abounds today, and the ocean teems with animals, yet the
oxygen-lean landscape of the early ocean was the cradle of our ancestors. The
best view of these early organisms and their surroundings comes from fossils and
the chemical properties of sediments deposited within the ancient ocean, and no
element in the periodic table has played a greater role than molybdenum (Mo) as
a window to the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molybdenum, a nutrient essential in
the biological cycling of nitrogen, must have been a determining factor in the
paths and rates that led ultimately to the early evolution of marine animals,
particularly since its concentration in seawater varies dramatically with the
availability of oxygen. This and other life-sustaining metals can be scrubbed
out of seawater in the presence of hydrogen sulfide, which probably spread
through sizeable portions of the ancient ocean. Recent research by this group
and a few others has come a long way in providing a roadmap to the chemistry of
ancient seawater based on the distributions and isotopic properties of Mo in
ancient sediments, but key questions remain. Our understanding of the co-
evolution of early life and ocean chemistry can only be as strong as the
knowledge of how Mo is cycled now and in the past?particularly under the oxygen-
poor conditions that dominated the early ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
seeks to use novel, cutting-edge analytical methods in the lab and in the field
to fill essential gaps in our grasp of Mo biogeochemistry. Among the key issues
and questions are the mechanisms of Mo uptake across diverse depositional
settings, particularly those with abundant hydrogen sulfide in the seawater.
What specifically are the relationships to organic matter, the remains of
organisms, and are the isotopes of Mo fractionated during interactions with
organic substrates? Isotopes are atoms of the same element that differ in their
masses and specific reaction behaviors and so can provide unique information
about chemical pathways and the controlling environmental factors, such as
oxygen availability. What is the full range of potential Mo hosts in settings
rich in hydrogen sulfide, and how does dissolved Mo speciate and fractionate
isotopically under those conditions? Although these chemical questions are quite
specific, the implications are broad and speak to the ability to fingerprint
conditions in the ocean that either fostered or challenged the origins and
diversification of early life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this study
will extend widely. A far greater ability to unravel the history of life is an
expected outcome, and investigators will develop and refine novel analytical
methods with broader relevance to many other trace metals and their
biogeochemical cycles, including those in the modern ocean. Thanks to their
hard-earned experience they are now able to demonstrate the great utility of
particle accelerators in geobiological research. They aim to smooth the path for
others traveling the same route by providing a virtual experience (website and
short course) that captures their analytical maturation from beginners to
experts, spanning from the particulars of our experience to more general
logistical and scientific details (a sort of ?Synchrotron for Dummies?). They
plan a high level of undergraduate involvement that mirrors UCR?s status as one
of the most culturally diverse campuses in America. Finally, in an effort to
reach across international boundaries, investigators have planned monthly group
meetings with their colleagues in Beijing designed to emphasize student
presentations, to enhance the flow of ideas in both directions, and to foster
additional collaborative exploration of the early ocean and its co-evolving
life. Although the methods are diverse and demanding, their motivations distill
down to a single simple question: where did we come from?