* 1124657
* CDI-TYPE I:  Biologically Relevant Sensor Networks for Climate Change Studies in Intertidal Ecosystems
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Brian Helmuth, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 09/30/2015
* USD 447,666.00

The intertidal zone - the region between the low and high tide lines along the
coasts of the world?s oceans - serves as a key test bed for exploring the
effects of global climate change on species distributions and abundances. Recent
studies show that the first signs of climate change involve not only mortality
but also changes in the growth and reproductive output of organisms. Therefore,
the ability to quantify spatial and temporal patterns of physical stressors in
nature is critical, in order to connect laboratory measurements of physiological
tolerance to ecological patterns in nature. Many large-scale remote monitoring
networks (buoys, satellites, weather stations) have been deployed to collect
environmental data (e.g. air, water and surface temperature) across broad
spatial scales for extended periods of time, with the goal of relating climate
change to the present and future distributions of populations and species. While
large-scale measurements of these parameters are vital, they may not be
sufficient for understanding and predicting the effects of weather and climate
change on patterns of distribution and changes in biodiversity, because large-
scale measurements of "habitat" are often very poor predictors of "the
environment" as perceived by the organism. For example, air temperature is often
a very poor indicator of animal body temperature, which is what drives
physiological response. We propose to design and deploy a wireless "biomimetic"
sensor network (WSN) that monitors environmental parameters most relevant to
climate change impacts- temperature and pH- at temporal and spatial scales that
are physiologically and ecologically relevant. Despite the wide varieties of
WSNs that have been studied and deployed in various terrestrial environments
(e.g., forests, deserts, swamps, volcanoes), monitoring the intertidal zone
remains challenging. Periodic changes in sea level due to tides cause the
communication channel quality to oscillate and thus make the intertidal zone a
highly unstable environment for radio communication. To survive in such an
environment, we propose a channel-aware sensor network that can self-diagnose
its communication capability and adapt its network protocols accordingly, e.g.,
an adaptive MAC protocol has various transmission policies depending on the
channel quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the broader implications of
our study for climate change to society, we propose an integrative plan to form
teams of teachers, undergraduate and graduate students. These teams will
collaboratively conduct research, and will produce inquiry- and, standards-based
educational materials for local K-12 classrooms based on our study results,
emphasizing the applications of cyber-enabled technology for studying the
natural world, and the effects of weather and climate in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal is to study physiological
responses to temperature and pH, and the ecological effects of weather and
climate. This proposal will (1) achieve a fundamental advance in understanding
the ecological impacts of climate change by monitoring the small-scale, local
conditions of ecologically important animals (mussels) in near-real time using
wireless sensor networks, and produce a mechanism for creating an "early warning
system" for key intertidal sites (e.g., reserves, shellfish farms) around the
world, (2) achieve fundamental advances in channel-aware wireless sensor
networks that can intelligently estimate the communication channel quality and
select opportunities for uploading measurements to a data collection center in a
highly unstable radio environment. In addition to monitoring the environmental
parameters of interest, the network will sense properties that directly affect
the communication channel condition and achieve channel-awareness.