* 1124012
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Disjuncture in Perceptions of Success in Collective Action for Natural Resource Management: The Case of Hokkaido, Japan
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2013
* Shingo Hamada, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 7,500.00

Indiana University doctoral student Shingo Hamada, with the guidance of Dr.
Richard Wilk, will undertake research on variability in how different social
groups perceive and define successful marine conservation and the effects of
that variability on actual marine resource recovery. The project's specific
focus will be why herring restoration projects in Japan have developed in
coastal communities in the last two decades, despite uncertain benefits both
economically and ecologically. This research will contribute to improved
understanding of the conditions in which multiple stakeholders engage in
conservation efforts and the cumulative ecological effects of their
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will undertake thirteen months
of fieldwork in a fishing community in Hokkaido, northern Japan, where he will
focus on the herring industry. The herring industry is particularly important in
the wake of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami because it has persisted while other
fisheries are at risk. Hamada will conduct multiple semi-structured interviews
and carry out participant observation in conservation-related events, such as
reforestation activities and hatchery operations. He will recruit a wide range
of informants, including fishers, seafood entrepreneurs, reforestation project
participants and organizers, fishery scientists, and municipal administrators.
The researcher will apply a series of social scientific research methods to
determine the agreements and variations in the cultural values of herring and
herring fishing among actors, and to identify how socio-cultural contexts
influence the success of the restoration projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is important because many conservation projects fail to achieve social
and environmental sustainability. Findings from this study will contribute to
building theory on what brings about improved human-environment relations and
successful collective environmental decision-making. The research also will
contribute to the doctoral training of a social scientist.