* 1124222
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multi-Stakeholder Perceptions of Legitimacy in a Decentralized Governance System
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* H. Russell Bernard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 19,000.00

Doctoral candidate, Laura Kowler (University of Florida), supervised by Dr.
Christopher McCarty, will investigate the interaction among diverse stakeholders
in a decentralized natural resource governance system. The research will be
conducted in Bolivia where forums called "platforms" are organized to address
the challenges of Bolivia's evolving forest governance system. Platforms are
deliberative spaces that enable the discussion and negotiation of disparate, and
often conflicting, interpretations of state-sponsored approaches to natural
resource management. The overarching research question is: how does the
structure of interactions among multiple and distinct stakeholders in platforms
impact their individual perceptions of the legitimacy of the deliberative
process? This research examines how governance is constructed at the meso
(platform) level, while incorporating the effects of the micro (local or
community) and macro (national) levels. Platforms represent governance
experiments and are analyzed based on the principles of deliberative democracy,
which is claimed to secure legitimacy for policies by giving citizens access to
previously remote decision-making processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kowler will
collect social network data and observe four different platforms organized
around land use, access, and management issues in the northern Bolivian Amazon
region. Whole network data collected in these platforms will be used to
operationalize the interactions at the meso level while personal network
analysis will be used to measure the scalar influences among platform
participants and individuals at the micro and macro levels. Ethnographic methods
will contextualize the social network data and enable a more robust
understanding of the multi-level interactions shaping governance
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will
provide evidence to natural resource governance and development scholars and
practitioners about the governance arrangements, mechanisms, and the socio-
political processes that explain these relationships. Findings from this work
will also contribute to the larger question of how interaction across levels or
organizational borders impacts information flow and coordination through
particular individuals located at different levels. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.