* 1124277
* Heterogeneity, individual decision making and matching equilibria under uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Pierre Chiappori, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 285,480.00

The project is in two parts; both are in the line of previously funded research.

Â­The first part will extend results obtained on non-parametric identification of
continuous and discrete choice models using partial differential equations, and
provide an application to decision under uncertainty by heterogeneous agents. We
shall consider the issue of non-parametric identification from a general,
theoretical perspective, a particular emphasis being put on contexts in which
identification conditions generate systems of (at least two) first order PDEs in
one unknown function - a structure common in several economic models, including
'collective' models of household behavior. These theoretical ideas can then be
applied to specific questions, regarding in particular non-parametric
identification of discrete choice models. Particularly, we plan to analyze
models of (multiple) discrete choice with heterogeneous agents and unobserved
product characteristics, frequently used in the empirical IO literature (the so-
called 'BLP' models). These theoretical tools will then be applied to specific
issues involving decision under uncertainty. While decision theory has made
dramatic progresses in the last decades, many (if not most) empirical studies
still refer to a standard framework that relies on expected utility, true
probabilities and a representative consumer. Our goal is to test and non-
parametrically estimate empirical models of decisions under uncertainty
involving non-expected utility, probability deformation (or 'risk perception')
and unobservable heterogeneity.

The second part is devoted to matching theory. Again, it will include
theoretical and empirical work. On the theory front, we plan to analyze several
extensions of standard matching theory, including multidimensional matching,
matching without transferable utility, matching within a unique population (the
so-called 'roommates problem'), dynamics of matching and others. On the
empirical front, we shall first carefully reconsider issues linked to the
empirical estimation of matching models; in particular, how can a (reasonable)
stochastic structure be introduced within a matching model. We then plan to
apply these models to empirical issues, with a particular emphasis on two
topics: risk sharing and matching on the marriage market.

While some outcomes of the project will be fairly technical, the stakes are
clearly general. The first part is ultimately aimed at improving our
understanding of decision-making under uncertainty. Modern decision theory has
emphasized several patterns that had been previously neglected. One is the
importance of risk perception (which, formally, translates into what is often
called probability deformation). Standard theory used to assume a fully
transparent perception process - i.e., people simply use 'true' probabilities,
at least when they are known. In reality, matters are much more complex, and
risk assessment is a sophisticated and (partly or largely) subjective operation
that may reflect the decision-maker's idiosyncrasies. While the corresponding
theory is by now well developed, empirical analysis of these issues has largely
concentrated on laboratory experiments. Our goal is to go beyond experiments,
which unavoidably come with their limitations (selected populations, small
stakes, experimental conditions ...), and try to apply these notions to 'real
life' situations. The first requirement to achieve this goal is a serious
reconsideration of empirical methods, which we plan to undertake in the coming
years.

Matching models, on the other hand, are more and more widely used to study many
topics. Our own investigation is fundamentally motivated by one basic belief -
namely, that the intrahousehold distribution of power matters for household
decision making. We believe, for instance, that a given benefit may not have the
same behavioral outcomes (in terms of, say, investment on children) when paid to
the wife instead of the husband. Obvious as this claim may sound - and supported
as it may be by a number of empirical results - it is worth noting that standard
consumer theory, at least as it existed until the 90s, was simply assuming away
such a differential impact. Indeed, the dominant model, based on the
maximization under budget constraint of a unique, household utility, implied an
income pooling property, whereby only aggregate income, not its different
component, may matter. Past research, funded in part by previous NSF grants, has
provided both theoretical foundations and empirical support for a more general
conceptual framework, in which the spouses' respective decision powers do
influence outcomes. Our current topic is to better understand the generation of
such powers. In particular, we plan to investigate how the legal and demographic
conditions on the marriage market influence the allocation of decision power
within the household - and, ultimately, household behavior. These conditions
include laws governing divorce and alimony, but also the sex ratio and the
distribution of earnings and education among men and among women. Two examples
can be mentioned:

- The spectacular discrepancy between male and female demand for higher
education over the last decades can be explained by the changing impact of
education on marriage markets. Specifically, Chiappori, Iyigun and Weiss (AER
2009, NSF-funded) have calibrated a model showing that both the sign and the
magnitude of the observed outcomes could be explained by a model of this type.
We plan to take this theory to data on marital patterns in the US over the last
50 years, to see whether observed empirical patterns support or falsify our
approach. - A striking feature of some marriage markets, particularly in China
and India, is the recent emergence of hugely imbalanced sex ratios (up to 125
men for 100 women in some states). Such disequilibria will have strong effects
on intrahousehold allocation of resources; we plan to model and quantify these
effects. More importantly, we shall investigate how the resulting reallocations
will alter individual incentives to acquire and maintain human capital; in
particular, whether one can expect a significant increase in female demand for
human capital, which could further exacerbate the disequilibrium.

Finally, a topic lies at the intersection of the previous two themes, namely
risk sharing. We plan to better understand how households and communities in
general cope with income shocks, especially the respective roles of and the
interactions between risk-compensating transfers and labor supply adjustments.
Again, emphasis will be put on gender issues (do variations in male and female
respective decision powers influence the household's reactions to shocks?) and
on matching (how are risk sharing networks formed to start with?).