* 1124648
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: First-Principles Based Control of Multi-Scale Meta-Material Assembly Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,602.00

The assembly of colloidal nano- or micro-particles into perfectly ordered
periodic structures provides a basis for manufacturing photonic band gap
materials and other multi-scale meta-materials with unique electric, magnetic,
and optical properties. Although proof-of-concept materials have been made in
laboratories to verify their amazing properties, no existing process is yet
sufficiently controllable, scalable, and robust for high-throughput
manufacturing to enable commercial applications. The fundamental limitation to
assembling colloidal components into ordered structures is the complex interplay
of thermal motion, interparticle interactions, and external fields that lead to
defect-rich and often arrested states. We propose a new approach to the meta-
material assembly problem that combines expertise from four separate scientific
fields that traditionally have had minimal interaction. Mathematical models of
the colloidal systems, represented as free energy landscapes (FELs) in a few key
variables that characterize the state of the assembly process, will be
constructed using data from advanced microscopic imaging and analysis tools. The
FELs will in turn be used as input to rigorous process control algorithms,
developed for stochastic processes, that will navigate the landscapes to yield
defect-free products. This strategy will be demonstrated and refined on
prototype lab-scale reactors, using real-time digital microscopic imaging as the
sensor and programmable particle-particle interaction potentials & electric
fields as the actuators, to produce meta-materials.

In terms of broader impact, successful development of fundamental tools for
large-scale assembly of defect-free colloidal crystals has the potential to
produce revolutionary technologies (e.g. optical computing, energy harvesting,
sub-diffraction limit imaging, invisibility cloaking) not unlike the creation of
single crystal silicon to enable integrated circuits and modern computing. No
existing processes today are capable of producing such materials at a commercial
scale despite 25 years of trial-and-error efforts. A strategy of rigorous real-
time control using quantitatively accurate process models, like that proposed
here, is required. The education and outreach activities will incorporate
integrate concepts from modeling, control, simulations, and experiments,
including rich visual data from colloid experiments (e.g. images, videos) and
physics-based simulations (e.g. renderings, animations) to provide intuitive
education/training for students at all levels.