* 1124534
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Institutions and Dominance within Social Movements:  How Legal Strategies Shape the Agendas of Movements for Social Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Lauren Edelman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 06/30/2012
* USD 14,922.00

Although litigation plays a central role in the strategies of many contemporary
social movements, surprisingly little is known about the conditions under which
social movement actors adopt litigation strategies or how litigation shapes a
movement's substantive agenda. Existing research has shown that litigation
attracts enormous publicity and political attention, increasing the visibility
and standing of movement actors who use it. However, litigation may
simultaneously detract attention from movement actors who use extra-legal
strategies, marginalizing their perspectives and claims. This research project
investigates what factors cause social movement actors to pursue litigation over
other tactics (e.g., legislative lobbying, service provision, or protest) and
how litigation, as a social movement tactic, shapes movements' priorities and
their substantive goals. The project is theoretically situated in the recent law
and social movement literature. The research plan involves coding of
organizational, institutional and government documents as well as interview with
social movement actors.

The data generated through this project will expand knowledge regarding
strategic choice in social movements. Furthermore, by examining how litigation
comes to dominate other strategies for social change, this research is poised to
illumine larger theoretical questions about how social movement actors can
reinforce existing legal institutions, even as they deploy litigation as a
strategy of resistance.