* 1124624
* 2011 Thin Film and Crystal Growth Mechanisms Gordon Research Conference  &amp; Gordon-Kenan Research Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Christine Orme, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 06/30/2012
* USD 9,750.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;This award supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program will provide funds for students, post docs and young faculty
to attend the Gordon Research Conference on Thin Film and Crystal Growth
Mechanisms to be held July 17-22, 2011 at University of New England, Biddeford,
ME. This conference focuses on new developments that impact understanding of
crystallization and ordering. Attendees seek to measure, understand, and control
three interrelated arenas (a) fundamental interfacial processes; (b) crystalline
architectures; and through the first two, (c) materials function. The program
addresses each of these topics approximately in this order. The particular
strength of this Gordon Conference is its emphasis on interfacial processes the
mechanisms of crystal growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;The
Gordon Research Conferences provide a unique forum to bring together experts,
young scientists, and students around a particular thematic topic to disclose
unpublished data, to challenge and discuss novel ideas, and to push the
frontiers of science and innovation forward. New collaborations can be formed
and new ideas generated that would not otherwise occur if not for these
important conferences. The organizers have included 7 female and 1 Hispanic out
of the 27 invited speakers and conference chairs. Also, plans to broaden
participation to underrepresented groups are discussed. Students, post docs and
young scientists will benefit from this conference through intellectual exchange
and international participation.