* 1124144
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A neurolinguistic investigation on bilingual advantages at learning an additional language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Cristina Sanz, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation project tests whether adults who are bilingual (who learned
two languages as children) are better at learning a foreign language than are
monolingual adults. Previous research suggests that bilinguals have an advantage
over monolinguals at some tasks, including creative thinking and problem
solving. Recently, researchers have also claimed that bilinguals are better than
monolinguals at learning another language, but this hypothesis has not yet been
tested systematically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine this
hypothesized advantage by having bilingual adults learn a language that they
don't already know--one that is, in fact, an artificial language, which by
design they could not already have been exposed to--and comparing their
performance to that of monolingual adults under the same learning conditions.
The proficiency that participants attain in the language, as well as measures of
their brain activity while they process the language, will be tested at two
points, once early on during learning (at low proficiency) and once at the end
of training (at high proficiency). The project will also evaluate the effect of
the context in which the artificial language is acquired by comparing learning
in a classroom to learning in an immersion context. Half of the bilingual
participants will train under classroom-like conditions; whereas the second half
of this group will receive training under immersion-like conditions. The
corresponding data for the monolingual group, which has already been collected,
indicates that by the time monolingual learners reach high proficiency, their
brain patterns look similar to those of native speakers of most languages,
particularly for those who underwent immersion-like training. This suggests that
monolingual foreign language learners can indeed become like native speakers in
how their brains learn and process the language. The data from bilinguals will
be collected and compared to the data from monolinguals. The hypothesized
bilingual advantage in acquiring new languages predicts that the bilingual
participants will be faster and more accurate than the monolinguals in learning
the artificial language. It also predicts that their brain patterns will be even
more similar to patterns that are typically found when native speakers process
sentences in their own first language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because learning
foreign languages makes an important contribution to the lives of many people
the world over in today's global economy, and because proficiency in foreign
languages is also critical to the security needs of the government, findings
from this project may have broader consequences for education, policy and
security.