* 1124752
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: Cyber-Enabled Studies of Complexity in Nanodusty Plasmas
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Steven Girshick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,389,244.00

"Nanodusty plasmas" are ionized gases in which particles only a few to tens of
nanometers in diameter nucleate and grow. These plasmas exhibit all of the
hallmarks of complexity in physical systems. As particles nucleate and grow they
become increasingly charged, profoundly affecting the plasma and setting in
motion a set of nonlinear couplings between the nanoparticle cloud and the
plasma which are now unpredictable. They are of practical interest, because
nanoparticles are a major source of contamination in semiconductor processing
and because of the use of plasmas to synthesize nanoparticles for a wide variety
of applications, ranging from photovoltaics to cancer treatment. In this project
a cyber infrastructure will be developed that will underpin the development of
numerical models of nanodusty plasmas. With this cyber infrastructure,
heretofore unresolved phenomena in these highly complex systems will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a collaboration that will advance
several different fields of science and engineering, bringing together expertise
in computational modeling of chemically reacting plasmas and plasma transport,
particle nucleation and growth, aerosol dynamics and computational chemistry. It
draws on staff and resources of the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute and
supercomputer facilities at Pacific Northwest and Argonne National Laboratories,
and involves collaboration with Sandia National Laboratories on the development
of computational techniques for parallelization of hybrid particle-fluid models.
The cyber platform to be developed will build upon the Hybrid Plasma Equipment
Model (HPEM), developed by one of the PIs, by implementing a hierarchy of
physics and chemistry modules to address the complexity of particle nucleation
and growth and aerosol dynamics. Leveraging the HPEM's existing industrial user
base, the project has a strong component of technology transfer, including
possible commercialization with an industrial partner. The project also has an
international dimension, collaborating with two research groups in
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop numerical models of
nanodusty plasmas as well as a cyber infrastructure to facilitate these models
and make these new tools generally available. The project will produce the
first-ever numerical models that self-consistently account for all of these
interacting phenomena: particle nucleation, growth and charging in a multi-
dimensional plasma; nanoparticle transport; plasma chemistry; electron and ion
kinetics; and the collective mutual effects of nanoparticles on a plasma. The
development of such models is a challenging undertaking, made more so by the
paucity of needed fundamental data on properties and reactivities of small
clusters, and by the fact that real plasma systems are typically three-
dimensional. Tackling these problems is ambitious from the viewpoint of physics
and chemistry, many aspects of which are poorly understood, and from the
computational viewpoint, as vast ranges of length and time scales are involved,
with strongly coupled interacting subsystems and nonlinear behavior. The
development of a cyber infrastructure that enables accurate simulations of real
nanodusty plasmas will mark a major paradigm
shift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students and postdocs involved in the
project will work in an interdisciplinary environment that bridges the cultures
of engineering and science. The project includes the development of a cyber
infrastructure to be made available to researchers in academia and national
labs, transfer of technology to industry through software licensing, and
international collaborations. Through the development of interactive Web-based
graphical user interfaces, real-time 3-D visualization, and massively parallel
computing, the project will transform the study of nanodusty plasmas, with
benefits to researchers in advancing fundamental understanding, to the
semiconductor industry in developing strategies to avoid nanoparticle
contamination, and to the creation of engineered nanoparticles for applications
such as photovoltaics and cancer treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
Cyber-Enabled Discovery and Innovation Program award and is co-funded by the
Division of Computing and Communication Foundations in the CISE directorate, the
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the
MPS directorate and the Office of International Science and Engineering.