* 1124568
* EXP: Developing Citizen Scientists Through Face-to-Face and Networked Learning Opportunities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Brigid Barron, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 08/31/2014
* USD 549,201.00

This research project is investigating how networked technologies can generate
excitement and expertise development among middle school students learning to
become citizen scientists. The investigators are partnering with "Vital Signs,"
a citizen science networked system located in the State of Maine, linked
statewide to schools and accessible not only to the focal participants (teachers
and students in seventh and eighth grade classrooms), but to anyone who wants to
learn and contribute. Outcomes of this project include 1) a set of case studies
of learners and teachers that that represent pathways of engagement that utilize
cyberlearning enabled resources; 2) a set of recommendations about new learning
resources and tools that can advance personalized learning for students,
teachers, and other learners; and 3) a set of ideas about ways to automate the
assessment of uploaded data from learners that can be linked to recommendations
about resources that can advance learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Vital Signs"
has high potential to generate excitement, interest, and a desire to learn about
the natural world by engaging learners directly in observing, documenting, and
sharing information about real world phenomena, specifically participating in
learning activities designed around scientific issues in their local communities
using authentic tools and collaborating with scientists. The Vital Signs program
engages teachers and students in seventh and eighth grade science classrooms in
inquiry-based science education around activities designed to study and
intervene in habitat invasion by non-native species. The STEM content they focus
on includes understanding of ecologies, processes of species proliferation, and
strategies for intervening in damaged ecosystems. The state of Maine serves a
diverse group of learners. Across the state, though average indicators of socio-
economic status (home income, poverty level, school lunch qualification, English
as a second language, and level of adult education) are close to national
averages, there are regional differences. The highest poverty rates in Maine are
routinely found in the counties on the west, north, and east borders of the
state, where in 2008 rates of child poverty ranged from 24-28%, while in more
affluent counties, they were less than half of that. Because all middle school
students are involved in the laptop program, this research is able to compare
cyberlearning processes and outcomes in relation to economic profiles of
communities. Further, the statewide laptop program is unique in the United
States and it creates a powerful opportunity to understand how communities who
vary in their economic profile, sources of livelihood and technological
immersion choose to engage in cyberlearning and what barriers they face.