* 1124261
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: What Drives Subnational Borrowing Conditions? Social Spending and Government Size
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Nils Ringe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The world's governments are growing increasingly dependent on credit markets.
This dependence is strengthening investors' capacity to reward or punish
governments for their policy responsibilities, size, and other potential drivers
of investor profits. This project examines sources of market punishments and
rewards as they relate to local and regional governments. It addresses two
questions. First, do international rating agencies penalize local and regional
governments for spending on health care, education, and other core social
service functions? Second, which governments borrow on the best terms: those
representing large or small jurisdictions?

The researcher argues that investors penalize governments for rigid social
commitments: high levels of spending on health care and other politically
sensitive social services. These commitments benefit large numbers of voters and
unionized service providers and are correspondingly difficult to cut. This
limits the fiscal flexibility that local and regional governments may require to
balance budgets, causing investors to demand higher interest rates on public
bonds and loans. But these reactions are offset by several national-level
factors, including sub-national authority to adjust revenues and expenditures,
national fiscal and economic performance, and the likelihood of national
bailouts.

The researcher also argues that, contrary to received wisdom, small governments
often borrow on better terms than do large issuers. Although investors value the
debt of large issuers for its liquidity, they also value diversification.
Investing in the relatively scarce debt of small governments allows investors to
diversify away from the more plentiful instruments of large issuers. But the
relative advantages of size also depend on market conditions and their
interactions with investors' liquidity preferences. Liquidity needs increase
with market volatility, inducing flights from the securities of small to the
securities of large governments. The intensity of these flights depends on
investors' liquidity preferences, which vary across time and countries.

This work tests these claims using a wide range of quantitative and qualitative
methods and data, including broad cross-national analysis of credit ratings and
methodologies, a more focused statistical look at regional borrowing costs in
Canada and Germany, and semi-structured interviews with bond underwriters and
investors.

This work advances interdisciplinary research in political science and
economics. First, it stands as the first broadly cross-national analysis of the
effects of financial globalization on sub-national provision of social services.
Scholarship to date has focused almost exclusively on the national level, while
provision of social services has been decentralized to significant degrees.
Second, this project advances research on economic agents' preferences over
social spending. Third, the project contributes to work on fiscal federalism and
sub-national bailout guarantees. Contrary to a large literature, it finds little
evidence linking bailout guarantees to sub-national fiscal dependence, but it
does find evidence linking guarantees to other factors. Finally, it advances
debates about the merits of fiscal decentralization for big and small
governments.

This research makes several broader contributions. It sheds light on the
sustainability of decentralized social spending in an age of austerity and
financial uncertainty. It also enhances understanding of the links between
public borrowing costs, government size, and the mark-to-market accounting
practices increasingly prevalent across the globe. In addition, it illuminates
the determinants of sub-national bailout guarantees.