* 1124218
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using eye-tracking to study auditory comprehension in codeswitching: Evidence for the link between production and comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jorge Valdes Kroff, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Bilinguals in the presence of other bilinguals engage in a linguistic skill
known as codeswitching, defined as the fluid alternation between two or more
languages within the same conversation (e.g. "El niño está reading el book").
Once thought to be a sign of lack of competence in either language, three
decades of research has revealed that codeswitching is systematic and not
random. Previous research has mainly studied the production of codeswitching
both from theoretical and sociolinguistic perspectives, leaving the
comprehension of codeswitched speech an understudied area of inquiry. Yet there
are critical consequences for the comprehension system. Whereas production is
under the control of the speaker, a listener must seamlessly integrate multiple
languages in real time in order to successfully comprehend codeswitched speech.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jorge Valdés Kroff, under the supervision of Drs. Paola
Dussias and Chip Gerfen, will conduct a series of experiments to investigate
whether codeswitches that are more frequent in production are easier to
comprehend for bilinguals. They will capitalize on the presence of grammatical
gender in codeswitched noun phrases to investigate this question and will use an
eye-tracking methodology known as the visual world paradigm. Participants are
shown objects in a visual scene while listening to a phrase that names one of
the objects. By examining the pattern of eye movements, researchers are able
make inferences on the timecourse of comprehension of speech.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This line of research provides an ideal testing ground for
examining the link between production and comprehension by specifically testing
the hypothesis that language use and exposure have critical consequences for how
the comprehension system processes language. Furthermore, the focus on Spanish-
English bilinguals in the U.S. will provide important information on a vastly
underrepresented yet increasingly visible sector of our society with
implications for language policy in education and cognition in general.