* 1124275
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RUI: Testing hypotheses for Late Devonian biotic and climatic events via high-precision CA-TIMS U-Pb zircon dating and quantitative correlation tools
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* D. Jeffrey Over, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2014
* USD 80,000.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Testing hypotheses for Late Devonian biotic and climatic
events via high-precision CA-TIMS U-Pb zircon dating and quantitative
correlation tools&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark Schmitz, EAR-1124488&lt;br/&gt;Boise
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D. Jeffrey Over,
EAR-1124275&lt;br/&gt;SUNY Geneseo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; The
Late Devonian period hosts a series of global biological extinction events of
such magnitude as to be counted among the major mass extinctions of the
Phanerozoic. Yet no consensus has yet been reached regarding the causative
mechanisms of extinction and associated changes in marine sedimentation,
biogeochemical cycling, sea level and climate. Testing of competing hypotheses
for Late Devonian extinctions?which include sea-level fluctuations and
regression, climatic cooling, ocean anoxia, bolide impact, and/or massive
volcanism?is currently hampered by a lack of sufficient temporal resolution in
paleobiological, tectonic and proxy climate records.&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a
multi-disciplinary research team of paleontologists, biostratigraphers and
isotope geochemists will combine high-precision U-Pb zircon geochronology on
interstratified volcanic ash beds in key stratigraphic successions with
quantitative biostratigraphy applied to a global Late Devonian multi-taxa
database compiled from the literature and new high-resolution sampling. The U-Pb
geochronology will utilize the chemical abrasion and EARTHTIME quadruple spike
isotope dilution methods to measure ca 0.1 Ma resolution ages, which will
calibrate the construction of the first highly resolved composite standard for
the Late Devonian via constrained optimization. With this high resolution age
model the research team will interrogate several fundamental questions relating
to the abruptness of the late Devonian biotic events, their global synchrony,
and process drivers. Specific hypotheses to be addressed include the synchrony
and causality between extraterrestrial impacts or massive volcanism and biotic
crises, whether the rates of associated eustatic rise and fall and fluctuations
in proxy records of carbon cycling and temperature are consistent with
Milankovich-band orbital forcing, and if feedbacks between climate,
glacioeustasy, ocean anoxia, and the carbon cycle caused the Late Devonian
biotic crises.&lt;br/&gt;This research will impact STEM human resource
development via participation of undergraduate students in a multi-disciplinary
international science team; develop international scientific collaborations;
support the science mission of the EARTHTIME geochronology initiative, and its
associated inreach and outreach programs; provide fundamentally improved
chronologies for numerous other Paleozoic climate studies; and improve our
understanding of deep time climate state transitions potentially analogous to
those leading to our current icehouse. The scientific process and content of the
proposed research will be captured by a parallel NSF-funded STEM education
initiative developing a series of web-based learning objects to teach the
science of geochronology and Earth history.