* 1124831
* NEB: Scalable Perpendicular All-Spin Non-Volatile Logic Devices and Circuits with Hybrid Interconnection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Paul Crowell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,300,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is awarded under
the Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond competition, with support by multiple
Directorates and Divisions at the National Science Foundation as well as by the
Nanoelectronics Research Initiative of the Semiconductor Research Corporation.
The research will provide an alternative to CMOS technology based on an all-spin
logic device. Although nanomagnetism plays a fundamental role in existing
magnetic storage technologies, the implementation of processing has
traditionally required the conversion of magnetic information (spin) to charge
and then back to spin after the processing step is complete. This approach,
however, realizes none of the advantages of working with pure spin currents,
which promise much lower power dissipation and potentially greater scalability.
An all-spin logic concept that has been inspired by a decade of progress in
semiconductor and metallic spintronics would achieve all-spin operation, but
only if substantial materials engineering, processing, and integration
challenges can be overcome. An interdisciplinary team has been assembled that is
uniquely positioned to address these challenges, which include (1) engineering
of bits which can function as either magnetic tunnel junction spin injectors
(for inputs) or giant magnetoresistance (GMR) sensors (for low impedance
outputs), (2) integrating these bits with interconnecting channels fabricated
from either normal metals, graphene or ZnO, (3) developing a process that will
provide for isolation of the input and output stages of the bits while
preserving the desirable spin transport properties of the interconnects, (4) a
test protocol grounded in both spin transport physics and circuit design
principles, and (5) a clear path for integration. The approach addresses one of
the severe roadblocks to practical spintronics, which is the need for efficient
spin transport across interfaces while meeting the simultaneous demands of an
economic and fully scalable processing technology. The team consists of an
expert on perpendicular magnetic anisotropy materials and spintronic device
engineering (Wang), a spin-transport physicist (Crowell), a circuit design and
fabrication engineer (Kim), a semiconductor materials and device engineer
(Koester), and a semiconductor spintronic materials engineer (Ding, an
international collaborator). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The unique
combination of materials engineering, device physics, process engineering, and
circuit design in this program will lead to a new family of logic devices. Just
as importantly, these four technical components will play a critical role in
training the engineers and scientists who will be carrying out nanoelectronic
research well beyond 2020. The team provides true interdisciplinary mentorship
for graduate students in multiple departments. In addition to technical training
in at least two disciplines, the PIs will emphasize student interaction with
industrial partners and participation in activities that allow students to
explain nanotechnology and spintronics to the public. The participants in this
program will also interact continuously with an active community of researchers
in magnetism, semiconductor device physics at the University of Minnesota and in
the surrounding community. This will prepare the diverse group of project
participants for careers spanning a continuum from basic research to the
implementation of new technologies. Mentorship of younger students, including
undergraduate researchers, is also a critical component of the program. The
project will proactively recruit minorities, women, and under-represented groups
as well as leverage existing university-wide efforts for promoting diversity and
outreach.