* 1124679
* Symposium: Synthesis and Processing of Organic and Polymeric Materials for Semiconductor Applications, San Francisco, California, April 25-29, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2011,09/30/2011
* Jian Li, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 09/30/2011
* USD 5,000.00

DeVincent Wolf&lt;br/&gt;1124679&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funding for the partial
support of a symposium titled "Synthesis and Processing of Organic and Polymeric
Materials for Semiconductor Applications", to be held at the 2011 Materials
Research Society (MRS) Spring Meeting, Apr. 25-29, 2011, in San Francisco,
California. The synthesis and processing of organic materials for photovoltaics
and solid-state lighting constitutes a multidisciplinary research area which
converges at the interface of synthetic organic chemistry, materials science and
engineering, semiconductor physics, and device engineering. This symposium
provides an ideal opportunity for scientists and engineers from different
disciplines to share their results and insights in the field of organic
semiconductors, with a highlight on novel synthesis and processing methods to
fabricate organic and functional polymeric materials which applications to
photovoltaics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will provide travel support for oral and poster presenters, who consist
mainly of new and emerging workers in the field. In particular, this support
will provide an opportunity for student attendees to become familiar with state-
of-the-art organic semiconductor technologies. Undergraduate participation in
the poster sessions will be encouraged as a means of exposing students to a high
level of research at an early stage in their careers.