* 1124006
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effect of naming  systems on the acquisition of and reasoning about time concepts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Nian Liu, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,999.00

This dissertation research investigates whether the use of numerical systems in
time concept names affects how adults reason about time and how children acquire
time concepts. For example, in Chinese, the word for Monday is literally
"weekday one" and January is "month one" whereas English uses arbitrary names
with planetary ("Sunday") or mythical origins ("Thursday"). Preliminary evidence
shows that in a number of mathematical tasks, children who acquire such systems
outperform children acquiring languages with arbitrary names for such time
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will test whether a
numerical naming system facilitates the child's acquisition of time sequences by
comparing monolingual children acquiring Chinese (numerical day- and month-
systems), English (non-numerical systems), Latvian (mixed), and Japanese
(mixed). Latvian is categorized as mixed because it numerical names for days of
the week, but arbitrary names for months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses a fundamental question about the relationship between language and
cognition, namely whether the linguistic coding of a concept in different
languages shapes the acquisition and subsequent use of that concept. The results
could have profound implications for our understanding of mathematical and
temporal reasoning. Given the importance of bilingual education and cross-
cultural exchange with China, this research will provide useful insights that
could be used to inform language language pedagogy.