* 1124131
* NEB: Scalable Sensing, Storage and Computation with a Rewritable Oxide Nanoelectronics Platform
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Chad Mirkin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,700,000.00

This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond
competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at the National
Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research Initiative of the
Semiconductor Research Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: The research
project explicitly addresses key scientific and technological challenges that,
if overcome, could lead to a possible replacement for conventional electronics
made from silicon. The novel nanoelectronics platform is based upon remarkable
properties of materials composed of lanthanum aluminate and strontium titanate.
The interface between these two oxide materials can be switched between an
insulating and a metallic state using a sharp conducting probe. Electronic
circuits can be "written" and "erased" at scales approaching the distance
between atoms (two nanometers). To develop useful electronics, it is imperative
to develop a scheme capable of creating and manipulating large numbers of
devices. This scaling is achieved through the use of large probe arrays. Each
probe must be capable of addressing multiple sites, enabling complex circuits to
be fabricated on a single chip, by the device itself. The oxide heterostructures
need to be grown on large manufacturable substrates: this has been demonstrated
with both silicon and one other material. The research project addresses many of
the core requirements for a reconfigurable storage, computing, and optical
sensing platform that can scale beyond what is currently possible for silicon.
The interdisciplinary research team directly addresses these scientific and
technological challenges with the variety of perspectives essential for the
development of breakthrough technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL:
This project seeks to transform exciting scientific achievements into cutting-
edge information technologies. The research directly addresses the need for
scaling beyond Moore's law and has the potential to create new high-tech
industries, thus creating new jobs in the US that require advanced skill sets.
To help address the need for highly trained workers and researchers, a new
OnRamp education program is designed that specifically targets difficulties that
students have in their sub-discipline while beginning their careers. OnRamp
tutorials are developed by beginning graduate students as they learn the ropes
of doing research. Graduate students help develop research-based learning
modules, which are shared with a broader research community. Both University of
Wisconsin and University of Pittsburgh continue and expand their high school
outreach programs aimed at increasing the numbers of students in
underrepresented groups in science and engineering disciplines.