* 1124821
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Folding Molecules Around Metal Ions and Non-Metal Anions
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* James Lisy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2015
* USD 411,182.00

James Lisy is supported by an International Collaborations in Chemistry (ICC)
award in the Chemical Structures, Dynamics and Mechanisms program in the
Chemistry division to develop a combined experimental and theoretical research
program that aims to understand the role of non-covalent interactions in the
formation of secondary structures in biological systems, and the selective
sequestration of ions. The Lisy group performs the experiments; the calculations
are carried out by the research group of Marie-Pierre Gaigeot at the University
of Evry, France. Her research is supported by the French funding agency, ANR.
The focus is to understand how intermediate configurations, of higher energy,
ultimately reach the ground state configuration, a process analogous to protein
folding, where the macromolecule goes from a collapsed and/or denatured state to
the native structure. The structure of these hydrated ion-molecule complexes are
determined by a combined experimental and theoretical investigation. Newly
developed experimental methods, combining mass spectrometry and infrared laser
spectroscopy, are used to identify and characterize the molecular configurations
of these systems. State-of-the-art theoretical methods, density functional
theory combined with molecular dynamics, are applied to these systems to
characterize the energy barriers between different configurations and the
pathways over these barriers connecting them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Mono and
divalent ions are ubiquitous in biological systems. They are involved in wide
range of functions and play important roles in the structure of proteins, RNA
and DNA. While many mechanisms for ion transport and selectivity are currently
being debated, solid experimental evidence is essential to gain insight at the
molecular level. Environmental remediation is also of particular interest in
light of safety concerns associated with the safe storage of nuclear wastes at
facilities, world-wide. The rapid growth of articles both in the popular and
scientific literature is a clear indication of the interest by many young
scientists, in the United States, Europe and Asia. Postdoctoral fellows and
students associated with the work not only learn modern and sophisticated
scientific methodology, but gain additional depth of knowledge through
individual contacts with visiting scientists, participation in national and
international conferences, and opportunities for 'hands-on' educational
training. Such individuals are ideally prepared to pursue independent scientific
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) is cofunding this proposal.