* 1124552
* Oxytocin and Socio-Emotional Sensitivity: Mechanisms of Gene-Culture Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Shelley Taylor, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Dr. Heejung Kim and colleagues (University of California, Santa Barbara)
investigate the role of culture, as a form of social environment, in the
behavioral expression of genes. Specifically, in this research, they examines
the dynamic interplay of socio-cultural and genetic factors, and their effects
on socio-emotional processes such as emotional support seeking, emotion
regulation, and emotional attention, in order to understand the psychological
and biological mechanisms underlying emotional responses. The proposal will
focus on the oxytocin receptor polymorphism (OXTR), a genetic locus thought to
be associated with socio-emotional sensitivity, and its role in social behavior
in East Asian and U.S. cultural contexts. The researchers examine whether OXTR
variants, as well as experimentally manipulated oxytocin levels, are related to
the ability to accurately detect others' mental and emotional states, and
whether this ability is related to the tendency of individuals to engage in
culturally appropriate social behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most conversations
about the role of genes typically center on the idea that a gene is linked to a
particular behavior. In the context of cultural, racial, gender, or other group
differences, this simplistic understanding about the role of genes can lead to
thinking that group differences are fixed or immutable. The model of gene-
culture interaction advanced in this research provides a more sophisticated
perspective by specifying the pathway by which socio-cultural factors can shape
the behavioral outcomes of genetic predispositions. Identifying the
psychological and biological mechanisms of gene-culture interaction will advance
the public understanding of the complex but fascinating interaction between
"nature" and "nurture" that produces diversity in human behavior. The work will
also support the training and education of students.