* 1124968
* MEETING: 15th International Congress on Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions. Kyoto, Japan, - Summer, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Sheng He, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2012
* USD 14,850.00

This project is to provide partial financial support for up to 15 United States
graduate students to present their work at the 15th International Congress on
Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions (15th IC-MPMI), which will be held at Kyoto
International Conference Center, Kyoto, Japan, on July 29-August 2, 2012. For
the past 30 years, this meeting series has been the premier forum for announcing
and presenting the most compelling scientific discoveries about the molecular
events that mediate the interaction of plants and microbes. The meeting content
includes both pathogenic and symbiotic associations and covers oomycete, fungal,
bacterial, viral, and nematode pathogens; nitrogen-fixing and mycorrhizal
symbioses; and even some unusual associations, such as parasitic plant-plant
interactions. Awardees will be chosen by an ad hoc committee consisting of the
Principal Investigator of the project and the United States members of the Board
of Directors of the IS-MPMI based on the quality of the science reflected in the
abstract, a statement regarding how attending this congress will impact the
applicant's research and/or career, and the applicant's curriculum vitae. Ethnic
and gender diversity and disabilities will be considered to achieve a broad and
balanced awardee portfolio. Past meetings of this series have fostered intensive
exchange of scientific information and collaborations across a broad range of
research topics and geographic locations, and have provided opportunities for
graduate students to present their work and to network with leading scientists.
As such, this meeting series has played a major role in the buildup of
fundamental knowledge in the area of plant-microbe interactions and in the
training of the next generation of scientists.