* 1124339
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Subjectivity and Relationship in Mixed-Ethnicity Families in Post-War Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Douglas Hollan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 18,500.00

Doctoral student H. Keziah Conrad (University of California, Los Angeles),
supervised by Dr. Douglas Hollan, will undertake research on individuals in
mixed-ethnicity families in the polarized contexts that follow ethnic conflicts.
The researcher will focus in particular on kin relationships and routine
interactions in the family as primary sites for the co-construction of
attitudes, values, and identities. In the aftermath of ethnic conflict, how do
people in mixed-ethnicity families understand themselves, maintain relationships
with kin, and bring up their children?

Research will take place over 12 months with families living in and around
Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina. Drawing on person-centered interviews, the
researcher will address how individual members of mixed-ethnicity families
describe themselves, their affiliation with other people in their family and
with symbols of ethnicity, and the ways that they experience or try to find a
sense of belonging. She also will contextualize individuals' introspective
accounts by documenting (through participant observation and video recording)
spontaneous interactions between family members and by tracing the networks of
care and obligation that organize family life for kinship groups that may appear
"unnatural" and treacherous because they cross ethnic lines. When examining both
personal narratives and interpersonal interactions, the researcher will attend
to specific processes through which younger generations might inherit,
internalize, appropriate, or transform their elders' memories of trauma and
attitudes toward ethnicity, as well as broader culturally-defined ways of
relating to identity and past violence.

Findings from this research will contribute to social scientific understanding
of the effects of collective violence, particularly in terms of the
intergenerational transmission of traumatic memory and attitudes of hatred or
empathic understanding. This work is also relevant to the development of post-
conflict reconciliation and transitional justice initiatives, including policy
to support cross-cutting ties, such as mixed marriage, which can reduce the
probability of further conflict. Finally, funding this research contributes to
the training of a social scientist.