* 1124677
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Next Generation of Compact Infrared Laser based sensor for environmental monitoring (NexCILAS)
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Frank Tittel, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry and
the Office of International Science and Engineering will support Professor
Tittel and his coworkers at Rice University in this International Collaborative
research program. The work will be conducted in collaboration with Professor
Aurore Vicet of the University of Montpellier, France. NSF's French counterpart,
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) will support the research of Professor
Vicet and his coworkers. The consortium will work to develop optical sensor
systems based on the integration of novel mid-infrared lasers, (quantum well,
quantum cascade, and interband cascade) operating in the 3-4 micron wavelength
region, into a sensor platform based on quartz enhanced photoacoustic
spectroscopy (QEPAS) which is miniature and robust. This integrated optical
sensing platform promises significant improvements in sensitivity for detection
of methane and other hydrocarbon greenhouse gases in environmentally important
monitoring applications. The ability to sensitively detect atmospheric trace
gases will impact understanding of atmospheric chemistry, and enable strategies
for mitigation of pollution and global warming by greenhouse gas build up. The
international collaboration facilitated by this project will provide the
students involved with a valuable research experience and lead to a more
globally aware scientific workforce.