* 1124533
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Aversive Emotional Reactions to Politics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Daron Shaw, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 11,725.00

This research asks a simple, important question: Why do so many Americans not
vote? The opportunity to participate is extended to the overwhelming majority of
adult citizens. Yet even presidential elections, the most high-stimulus of
contests, fail to bring nearly half of the eligible electorate to the polls. How
should this fact be interpreted? Are people nonvoters due to contented apathy,
or is it possible that many nonvoters are disgusted with politics? To be sure,
the time and attention required to register, learn about the candidates, and get
to the polls dissuade many from voting. But the second possibility drives this
project: can some nonvoting be attributed to negative emotional reactions to the
political system? A related question regards whether aversive emotions such as
disgust diminish information-seeking during electoral
campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, the researcher will
conduct a national survey experiment. Subjects will be asked to read a randomly
assigned mock news article designed to elicit one of four emotional reactions to
the political system: disgust, anger, anxiety or enthusiasm. A control group
will receive a fact-based article about politics intended to elicit no emotion.
After reading the article, subjects will be introduced to a simulated campaign
between fictional candidates, complete with the opportunity to learn more about
the candidates' personal histories and issue stances. After accessing as much,
or as little, information as they wish, subjects will be given the opportunity
to vote for their favored candidate. The researcher expects that subjects made
to feel disgusted will access fewer pieces of information and refuse to take
part in the mock vote. Consistent with prior work in both psychology and
political science, the researcher expects anger to be associated with diminished
information seeking but increased participation. Anxiety, meanwhile, should lead
to increased information seeking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
enhance understanding of political participation and political behavior.
Political scientists usually define nonvoters in the negative sense?as lacking
resources such as education, income and partisan affinity, which are believed to
cause voting. These current explanations, however, fail to explain the presence
of many nonvoters (perhaps about one-fourth) whose resources and interest should
be sufficient to cast a ballot. This project also advances political
psychologists' rapidly expanding inquiry into the effects of emotions on
political behavior, extending it explicitly into the study of voter
turnout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also makes several broader
contributions. The health of a democratic system hinges on the openness of
elections, and its representativeness is called into question when large groups
of the population exclude themselves from the electoral process. Uncovering the
emotional underpinnings of nonvoting advances understanding and suggests a way
forward for policymakers' efforts to boost civic engagement. This project
challenges the assumptions underlying more than a quarter century of political
reforms and mobilization efforts aimed at increasing turnout by lowering the
costs of voting, as in reformed registration laws.