* 1124862
* International Collaboration in Chemistry - Modular Microtubular Architectures for Photo-driven Generation of Dihydrogen and Dioxygen from Water
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Craig Hill, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 09/30/2014
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Office of
International Science and Engineering will support Professor Craig Hill and his
coworkers at Emory University to work in conjunction with Professor Lee Cronin
at the University of Glasgow in the UK to develop catalysts for the visible-
light-driven reduction of water to dihydrogen and the construction of a new type
of multifunctional, high-surface-area microtube composed of photosensitizer
cations and polyoxometalate (POM) catalysts. UK's Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) will support the research of Professor Cronin
and his coworkers. New photocathodes modified with these microtubes will be
constructed for the efficient photogeneration of dihydrogen. Interactions
between photosensitizer ruthenium cations and POM catalysts will be studied in
both solution and the solid state. The prosecution of this research requires
instruments and nano- and microfabrication infrastructure and materials
characterization techniques present in the UK laboratory. Equipment and
knowledge for photocatalysis and mechanistic investigations in Professor Hill's
laboratory will be shared with the UK laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
materials for the photogeneration of hydrogen from water and sunlight will be
developed using ruthenium photosensitizer cations and polyoxometalate catalysts.
The research will train young scholars in the technical, intellectual and
practical challenges associated with green energy chemistry together with the
catalysis, materials, and spectroscopic aspects of solar fuels research.
Investigators and students at Historically Black College and Universities and
Primarily Undergraduate Institutions will be invited to attend group meetings
and annual conferences.