* 1124126
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Age Differences and Cognitive Aptitudes in Ultimate Second Language Attainment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Michael Long, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 10,650.00

Very high-level, functional ability in foreign languages is increasingly
important in many walks of life -- from business and science to diplomacy and
national security. It is also very rare, and an early start and/or a special
talent, or aptitude, for languages is believed to be necessary. Language
aptitude is defined as a combination of cognitive/perceptual abilities
measurable on a standardized test and advantageous in second language (L2)
acquisition. Language aptitude has been related to variation in ultimate
attainment (i.e., long-term differences in acquisition) in both classroom and
immersion settings. This research will investigate the extent to which aptitude
for explicit language learning, defined as "language analytic ability," and
implicit language learning, defined as "sequence learning ability," are
differentially important, as measured by performance on tasks that involve
either controlled or automatic use of L2 knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
will be three groups of subjects: a control group of Spanish native speakers,
and two groups of Chinese immigrants, long-term residents of Spain, who learned
Spanish (a typologically very different L2) naturalistically, and whose first
sustained exposure was either as children (ages 3 and 6) or adults (after 15).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have relied on single measures of
aptitude, weighted heavily in favor of cognitive abilities that allow for
explicit learning (thought to be the primary adult learning process, as opposed
to implicit learning by children), and single measures of attainment that
favored controlled use of L2 knowledge. To correct for this, a metalinguistic
knowledge test and a word-monitoring task, as well as four grammaticality
judgment tests, will be used to assess the Chinese learners' Spanish under
different conditions of time pressure (pressured/unpressured) and modality
(visual/auditory). The results will help clarify the relative importance of
starting age and type of language aptitude (explicit or implicit) for learners
who need to achieve advanced L2 proficiency.