* 1124265
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Political Science and Social Identity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Dimitri Landa, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,080.00

Democratic government can only be held accountable if citizens acquire
sufficient knowledge about politics and policies. In many cases, politicians are
the most important sources of this information, and one of the well-observed
features of current politics is that this information is often couched in the
rhetoric of social identities. The appeals to social identities resonate with
voters because voters may lack other sources of political information and
because shared group membership guides voters on which information to use and
which source of information might be reliable as they make their decisions. Yet
because public officials typically know more about the content and consequences
of policies than voters do, there might be a concern that appeals to social
identities might bring voters to support policies that have unfavorable impacts
on them. This project focuses on the potential tradeoff between the benefits and
costs of social identity appeals.

Although social identity claims in politics are commonplace, we know little
about the mechanisms by which social identification influences political
behavior and we thus know little as well about what to expect from this
tradeoff. This project seeks to advance our knowledge by addressing two related
questions: when politicians should be expected to be more or less successful in
using identity claims to increase support for their positions and when the
electoral discourse may come to be dominated by identity claims. By developing a
new theoretical model of identity discourse and implementing a series of
laboratory experiments based on it, the researchers seek to pinpoint
determinants of individual decision-making rooted in otherwise unobservable
features of human behavior such as social identity, level of knowledge, and
beliefs about the world.

The project draws on and contributes to the related disciplines of political
science, economics, and social psychology. More broadly, it enriches
understanding of citizen decision making in the electoral process. Given the
central role that free and fair elections play in any democracy, the project
sheds light as well the workings of democracy overall.