* 1124569
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute on Numerical Methods and their Applications in Bioengineering; Sante Fe, Argentina; February, 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Graham Mustoe, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2013
* USD 99,500.00

1124569&lt;br/&gt;Griffiths&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced
Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department
of Energy (DOE), will take place February, 2012 at the Universidad Nacional del
Litoral in Santa FÃ©, Argentina. Organized by Dr. D. Vaughan Griffiths, Dr.
Graham Mustoe, and Dr. Anthony Petrella, all from the Colorado School of Mines
(CSM) in Golden, Colorado, the institute will focus on advanced numerical tools
and their applications to bioengineering. Topics will include finite elements,
boundary and discrete element methodologies, constitutive modeling of composite
materials, prosthesis modeling, probabilistic methods, and concepts and
applications of medical imaging. Two field trips will be organized to a local
hospital and to a bioengineering manufacturing company, enabling participants to
obtain first-hand exposure to practical and medical issues in bioengineering. To
encourage the use of numerical methods, students will be provided with finite,
boundary, and discrete element software, which will allow them to apply the
theoretical knowledge acquired during the course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
PASI aims to generate future long-term collaboration between participants from
the US and Latin America, which will span both academia and industry, including
publications, joint presentations and sessions at international scientific
congresses in bioengineering. The organizers are planning on attracting a
diverse selection of student participants to the PASI through their ties to
regional universities with a high proportion of underrepresented graduate
students in engineering fields. A web site to be developed will be used to
publicize the course, define recruitment criteria, and also for disseminating
information and handouts relating to the PASI. After the activity is over, the
site will become a resource for participants to keep in contact, and learn of
future events, conferences and workshops related to the dual themes of numerical
methods and bioengineering.