* 1124119
* Measurement of the Drag Coefficient for Seagrass at Tidal, Storm, and Seasonal Scales
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Christopher Houser, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2013
* USD 78,931.00

The ability of seagrass to attenuate waves and currents provides ecological
stability to many marine and estuarine environments and makes these areas some
of the most productive coastal ecosystems. It is also believed that large and
dense seagrass beds can protect the shoreline from storm waves that would
otherwise cause dramatic erosion. The ability of vegetation to attenuate the
wave field is often described in terms of the drag coefficient, which is
dependent, to varying degrees, on the local hydrodynamic forcing (wave heights,
water levels and quasi-steady currents), the characteristics of the vegetated
area (density, spatial configuration, location and size) and the blade
morphology (geometry, relative height to water depth, buoyancy and rigidity).
While it is straightforward to calculate the drag coefficient for rigid
(emergent) vegetation, it is relatively difficult for submerged vegetation that
tends to be flexible and moves with the waves. The ability of submerged
vegetation to "go with the flow" reduces drag, such that large distances are
required for there to be a significant reduction in wave energy. In general,
submerged vegetation appears only to be an effective attenuator when the
vegetation is: 1) held rigid by a steady current; 2) a rigid shoot early in the
growing season; or 3) swaying at a different frequency than the local wave
field. In other words, the ability of seagrass to attenuate waves is quite
limited, particularly during storm events when there is the greatest potential
for shoreline erosion. As a consequence, the ability of submerged vegetation to
attenuate wave energy will vary at tidal, storm and seasonal scales in response
to changes in tidal current and water depth, the distribution of wave height and
period, and the evolving characteristics of the vegetation. This year-long
field-based study will quantify the frequency-dependent drag coefficient and the
ability of seagrass to attenuate wave height and energy over a range of wave,
current and water level forcing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following Hurricane
Katrina in 2005, there has been considerable debate about the role of vegetation
in reducing storm surge and wave-caused erosion. In response, the National
Academy of Engineering identified the "urgent" need to describe the interaction
of vegetation and nearshore hydrodynamics at a range of spatial and temporal
scales. While there have been significant advancements in our understanding of
wave attenuation from controlled laboratory settings, these results are largely
based on artificial vegetation in a monochromatic wave field. The single drag
coefficient does not account for changes in the behavior of the seagrass during
storm conditions and over the growing season. This study will provide estimates
of the drag coefficients for seagrass over a wide range of water levels and wave
forcing. Because coastal management largely depends on wave models that use
friction factors to describe the potential for wave attenuation by vegetation,
realistic seagrass drag coefficients is of great interest to coastal managers.
Specifically, the drag coefficients derived from this study will allow managers
to assess the potential benefits of existing seagrass beds to shoreline
protection and in designing shoreline protection or restoration projects
involving seagrass.