* 1124051
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Are bilinguals better learners? A neurocognitive investigation of the bilingual advantage
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2013
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2013
* USD 11,991.00

With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Cari Bogulski will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation under the direction of Dr. Judith Kroll and Dr.
Janet van Hell. Current research demonstrates that bilinguals are often
advantaged relative to their monolingual counterparts on tasks that require
cognitive control. A few past studies have also identified a bilingual advantage
in the realm of word learning. However, these documented benefits of
bilingualism are largely correlational, with little known about the underlying
mechanisms that map language use to cognition and learning. One possibility is
that all of the documented benefits of bilingualism reflect the effects of the
constant mental juggling a bilingual at any age must exercise, as both of a
bilingual's two languages appear to be active even when one language alone is
required. Alternatively, different aspects of language use may map onto
different types of cognitive consequences. The proposed research seeks to
uncover the way that the use of multiple languages affects language learning as
well as learning in other domains. The planned experiments will test the scope
of the bilingual advantage in foreign language vocabulary learning by using
electrophysiological measures that may provide a more sensitive index of the
time course of early learning, compare the learning of linguistic and
nonlinguistic information, and determine whether the bilingual advantage can be
seen in the learning of a signed vs. spoken language. The goal of this set of
experiments is to identify the cognitive mechanisms that underlie foreign
vocabulary learning, and thus, to identify how learning a foreign language can
be strategically enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research has a number
of broader implications. It will contribute important foundational knowledge
about multilingualism that will inform educational issues in a society in which
many learners are faced with the task of acquiring a second language past the
earliest stages of childhood. The research will also contribute to the training
of an increasingly diverse group of language scientists by including
undergraduate research students who are themselves bilingual and by fostering
scientific collaboration at Gallaudet University to include signed as well as
spoken languages.