* 1124225
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Peer Effects in Prison
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Thomas Barrios, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 07/31/2012
* USD 5,500.00

Relative to other industrialized countries or to rates within the United States
in the past (measured both in absolute number and as a percentage of
populations) the United States incarcerates a great many people. This paper
examines one aspect of what happens among populations of incarcerated
individuals; namely how inmates affect each other in prison. The investigators
use random assignment to cells, identify peer effects in adult prisons, and use
the estimates of these effects to model the reduced recidivism that would likely
follow from a more efficient cell assignment system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
a detailed panel data set of state inmates that spans 25 years and conditional
random assignment of prisoners to cells inside Kansas prisons, this project
studies how peer interactions in prison affect the outcomes of offenders both in
prison and after release and how inmate reallocation can effect these
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By estimating statistical models of peer
influence, it explores whether grouping inmates with similar histories
reinforces disciplinary problems in prison and later criminal activity outside
of prison, and whether cellmates and block-mates influence the decision to join
prison gangs, use drugs, enroll in education programs, or enroll in
rehabilitation programs. Utilizing recent methods on reallocation of individuals
across groups in the presence of social spillovers, this project derives optimal
cell reassignments and estimates the gains and tradeoffs from
reassignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent economic literature has examined the
causal effects of peers in various settings including the workplace,
neighborhoods, and schools. This is the first attempt to explore peer
interactions within adult prison populations. The effects of prison conditions
and deterrence have only recently begun to be investigated, and the latest
research has established evidence of peer effects in juvenile prisons
perpetuating crime after prison. Social multipliers have for some time been
hypothesized to be responsible for the high cross-city variance of crime rates
in the United States and this study contributes to this literature by examining
whether social multipliers in prison perpetuate crime on the
streets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computation of optimal cell assignments is
valuable to departments of corrections who endeavor to minimize overall
recidivism, prison violence, or drug use, or who aim to maximize participation
in education or rehabilitation programs. Since these reallocations leave the set
of inmates unchanged, they represent - in principle - implementable policies.