* 1124093
* Collaborative Research: A Reaction Kinetics Database for Modeling Biogeochemical Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Amanda Olsen, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 66,145.00

Understanding how quickly environmental reactions take place is the goal of
EarthKin, a geochemical database focusing on the rates of geochemical reactions.
EarthKin scientists from University of Maine, Penn State, Columbia, and Saint
Francis University will compile existing reaction rates into a one-stop database
that will allow access to researchers working on a diverse range of projects
ranging from removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and permanently storing
it beneath the ground to cleaning up contaminated environmental sites. When
completed EarthKin will be available to scientists free via the web at
www.earthchem.org. Not only will we compile existing data, but we will also
encourage new researchers to become involved by uploading their new results into
the database.

Recent advances in geoinformatics (the subdiscipline of developing technological
and computation tools to facilitate information dissemination in the
geosciences) have drastically increased access that researchers have to
geological information. Many recent endeavors have focused on online publishing
of large data sets in order to make data available to the wider community.
EarthKin is especially interesting in that it is one of the first attempts to
include experimental data in a web-based data management platform. To do this,
we will need to build new tools and data structures that will allow the existing
EarthChem platform to incorporate a new type of data.