* 1124885
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Hydrogen Tunneling in Carboxylic and Amino Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2011,11/30/2015
* Wesley Allen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 11/30/2015
* USD 316,572.00

Wesley Allen of the University of Georgia is supported by an International
Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) award in the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms program of the NSF Division of Chemistry for a joint theoretical/
experimental study of hydrogen tunneling in carboxylic and amino acids. The
research is performed in collaboration with Professor Peter R. Schreiner of the
Justus-Liebig University of Giessen, Germany. The Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) is the partner agency supporting the German side of
the collaboration. &lt;br/&gt; Chemical reactivity is conventionally understood
in broad terms of kinetic versus thermodynamic control, wherein the driving
force is respectively the lowest activation barrier among the possible reaction
paths or the lowest free energy of the final products. Very recent breakthroughs
in the preparation and characterization of hydroxycarbenes (R-VC-VOH) have
demonstrated that quantum mechanical tunneling is a third driving force that can
supersede traditional kinetic control and govern reactivity based on
nonclassical penetration of the potential energy landscape intervening reactant
and product. The Allen and Schreiner research groups investigate the role of
hydrogen tunneling in the conformational dynamics of organic compounds of
biological significance, namely, -Ñ-keto carboxylic acid (1) and -Ñ amino acid
(2) paradigms. For this purpose, matrix isolation experiments in Germany are
joined with high-level ab initio theory in the United States. &lt;br/&gt; This
ICC award supports wide-ranging, innovative activities that comprehensively
address NSF broader impacts criteria. The professional training and intellectual
development of graduate students is a key mechanism for broader impacts, and
thus the project revolves around Ph. D. students in American and German research
groups that are ethnically diverse and strongly international in character.
Theory students will travel from Georgia to the German laboratory for immersion
in the experimental environment. Likewise, German students will visit Georgia to
experience the realm of high-level theory. Advanced computational methods
resulting from the theoretical research will be freely shared with the
scientific community via the PSI electronic structure package. Undergraduate
research projects involving computational applications of tunneling methods will
be undertaken with the aid of the Ph. D. students.