* 1124850
* NEB: Physics-Inspired Non-Boolean Computation based on Spatial- Temporal Wave Excitations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Wolfgang Porod, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,600,000.00

This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond
competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at the National
Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research Initiative of the
Semiconductor Research Corporation. This work is motivated by the vision of
future computer chips with millions of cores, where each core has a complexity
similar to early microprocessors. Furthermore, it is envisioned that computation
in such systems might be done in an entirely new way, more akin to wave
propagation in a brain-like network of processing elements. This work will
identify wave-like non-Boolean computational primitives based on the spatial-
temporal characteristics of such processor networks, and inspiration will be
gained from known wave behavior in physics and applications derived from these.
In addition, nanoelectronic systems will be explored where such wave-type
excitations might find a natural implementation. This research will identify, on
the physical level, computational building blocks based on nanoelectronic
structures with spatial-temporal wave-like dynamics, and on the computer science
level, ways to perform computation with such non-Boolean primitives. This
interdisciplinary research, which spans the whole range from nanostructures to
new paradigms for computing, will require a team with expertise that spans the
whole range from physics to computer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will lay the groundwork for a radically different approach to
information processing, which is based on physics-inspired and brain-like wave
behavior in large-scale arrays of nanoelectronic processing elements.
Specifically, our research will identify computational building blocks of future
computing systems, along with the inherent state variables, where each
computational task directly maps onto the underlying physical structure. This
project will also identify which information-processing tasks will find their
natural implementation in such architectures. This proposed research is planned
in synergy with the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRI) Nanoelectronics
Research Initiative (NRI) and activities at the SRC-NRI Midwest Institute for
Nanoelectronics Discovery (MIND). In particular, this research will partner with
Dr. George Bourianoff at Intel, who leads a study group on Ultra Low Power
Application Specific Non-Boolean Systems, which is closely related to the
research proposed here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work would
impact the way information processing is done in future information-processing
systems. This work will not merely lead to incremental improvements in
information processing systems, but open the door to an entirely new approach to
computer architecture. Computation no longer will be based on elementary Boolean
logic functions, but on physics-inspired and brain-like wave activity. This will
necessitate a complete re-thinking of how computation is being done. As part of
this research, graduate students will be educated and trained in this new way of
thinking about how computation is done in a more brain-like fashion. Building
upon active REU and RET programs, undergraduates and teachers will participate
in this work. It is a stated goal to perform this research in an environment of
maximum inclusivity of underrepresented groups.