* 1124314
* WORKSHOP: 2012 Computer Supported Cooperative Work Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Leysia Palen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2012
* USD 25,994.00

This is funding to support next year's CSCW doctoral research consortium
(workshop) of approximately 14 promising doctoral students from the United
States and abroad, along with 6 distinguished research faculty. The event will
take place in conjunction with the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, to be held in Bellevue, Washington on February 11-15, 2012,
and sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest
Group on Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). The CSCW conferences are a premier
venue for the presentation of research relating to the design and use of
technologies that affect groups, organizations, and communities, and are
attended by approximately 500 professionals from around the world. The
development and application of new technologies continues to enable new ways of
working together and coordinating activities. Although work is an important area
of focus for the conference, technology is increasingly supporting a wide range
of recreational and social activities. CSCW has also embraced an increasing
range of devices, as we collaborate from different contexts and situations. The
conference brings together top researchers and practitioners from academia and
industry who are interested in both the technical and social aspects of
collaboration. CSCW 2012 will be the 24th conference in the series. Research
reports published in the CSCW Conference Proceedings are heavily refereed and
widely cited. More information about the conference may be found at
http://www.cscw2012.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Colloquium at CSCW
2012 will take place on Saturday, February 11 and Sunday, February 12, with
follow-up activities (including poster sessions) during the conference's main
technical program. Goals of the doctoral consortium include building a cohort
group of new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues spread out
across the world, guiding the work of new researchers by having experts in the
research field mentor them and provide constructive advice, and making it
possible for promising new entrants to the field to attend their research
conference. Student participants, who are chosen by a review committee based on
materials submitted by applicants in response to the CSCW Call for
Participation, will make formal presentations of their work during the workshop,
and will receive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is geared to
helping students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative
to other CSCW research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and
whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Extended
abstracts of the students' presentations will be published in the CSCW
supplemental proceedings, which are distributed to all attendees. The organizing
committee will take proactive steps to ensure and increase participation from
institutions and ethnic groups that have been traditionally underrepresented at
CSCW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The CSCW doctoral consortia, which
began in 1992, have been highly successful in providing a forum for the initial
socialization into the field of young doctoral scholars, and many of today?s
leading CSCW researchers participated as students in earlier consortia. These
doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next generation
of CSCW researchers, allowing them both to sharpen the research skills and to
create a social network among themselves and with senior researchers at a
critical stage in their professional development. Maintaining and fostering
research dialog among the diverse disciplines that are present in the CSCW
community results in synergistic and transformative research collaborations.
Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of
dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the
students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field.