* 1124486
* From Mindless to Mindful Choice:  How Introspection Improves Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Michaela Huber, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 09/30/2017
* USD 410,425.00

In this project, the Principal Investigators will examine how introspecting
about one's personal normative beliefs about how to make good decisions can
improve the quality of decisions. The proposal is grounded in three ideas: (1)
that people's decisions are often "mindless" in that people make decisions
unaware of their normative beliefs; (2) that becoming mindful of their normative
beliefs brings people's decision processes into closer correspondence with those
beliefs; and (3) that introspection can increase mindfulness and that
introspection therefore increases the correspondence between normative beliefs
and decision processes. Four sets of studies will be conducted, using laboratory
and field experiments with student and non-student samples. The first set of
studies will test whether introspection about the normative influence on
decisions of emotional factors and objective scope (such as magnitude and
probability) before making decisions causes people to weight emotion and scope
in closer correspondence with their normative beliefs, typically decreasing the
weight of emotional factors and increasing the weight of scope. The second set
of studies will test whether asking people to introspect about the normative
influence of personal preferences and social influence (such as political
partisanship and peers' preferences) before making decisions causes people to
weight personal preferences and social influence in closer correspondence with
their normative beliefs, typically decreasing the weight of social influence and
increasing the weight of personal preference. The third set of studies will
examine moderators of these introspection effects, including differences in need
for cognition, differences in normative beliefs, and the relative complexity of
a decision. The final set of studies will examine implications of introspection
for social decision making, including evaluations of others' personal decisions,
evaluation of policy makers' decisions, and behavior in strategic social
situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research
will provide scientific evidence for a simple introspection procedure that will
advance understanding of whether and when people make decisions according to
their personal beliefs. In so doing, the research will demonstrate a simple way
to improve the quality of people's decisions in many domains, including
charitable donations to alleviate humanitarian suffering, evaluation of
environmental policy, perceptions of terrorist risks, personal financial
decision making, consumer choices, and cooperative behavior in social contexts.
This research will thus provide knowledge about a useful tool both for those
interested in improving others' decisions (such as managers, marketers, and
policy makers) and for those interested improving their personal decisions (such
as employees, consumers, and citizens). This research will also clarify and
extend a relatively new construct in Judgment and Decision Making that
distinguishes between mindless versus mindful choice, providing an
operationalization of those two states, and examining the mechanisms, boundary
conditions, and beneficial consequences of moving from mindless to mindful
choice. These studies will offer a simple, effective means of improving the
quality of decisions without reliance on "heavy handed" external interventions
that nudge people in a particular direction, going beyond interventions that
rely on other people's ideas about the best and proper way to make decisions.
There are also broader impacts inherent in the process of conducting this
research, including the training and support of a group of undergraduate and PhD
students that is diverse in sex and ethnicity, and the proposed research will
foster international collaboration and training among, faculty, graduate, and
undergraduate students in the United States and Germany.