* 1124669
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type I: Developing Computational Models to Guide the Design of Chemomechanically Responsive, Reconfigurable Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 345,448.00

The goal of this grant is to advance the fundamental understanding of a new
class of dynamically reconfigurable surfaces that interconvert chemical and
mechanical energy and thereby, exhibit unprecedented adaptive and self-
regulating behavior. The research team plans to focus on systems of nano- and
micro-scale pillars embedded in stimuli-responsive gels and harness various
external stimuli to trigger reversible changes in the gels, which will power the
concerted movement of the embedded structures and the associated, "programmable"
changes in surface properties. To guide the experiments, the PIs will explore
new computational approaches that seamlessly integrate the dynamic behavior of
the responsive gels, a range of external stimuli, the embedded pillars, and the
molecular components that decorate the pillars and gels. Through collaborative
efforts, the PIs will establish a conceptual and theoretical basis for an
emerging field of adaptive mechanochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the combined experimental and computational studies will facilitate the
fundamental understanding of mechanochemical signal transduction and the
complex, multi-scale "outputs" of these adaptive systems. Through this
collaborative research, the PIs will establish a new framework for the design of
adaptive materials in which external stimuli can be used to elicit coupled
chemical and mechanical responses and their feedback loops. The students
involved in the project will participate in high-school events to speak with
underrepresented minority students and create a high-school experimentation tool
in order to motivate them toward higher education in the physical sciences. The
PIs and participating students will be engaged in general public activities,
giving lectures and volunteering at the local Science Museum; the PIs also plan
to organize a symposium on "Modeling and Synthesis of Soft Dynamic Biomimetic
Materials" at a national meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is co-funded
by the Division of Materials Research.