* 1124877
* Collaborative Proposal: Neuromagnetic Correlates of American Dialect Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* William Idsardi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2015
* USD 164,700.00

Humans are remarkably adept at recognizing other human voices, not only for the
messages they communicate, but also for social and personal information about
the person they are talking with. For example, when we answer the telephone we
can easily recognize whether it is someone we know (Mom) or someone we don't (a
telemarketer). Listeners also make rapid judgments about a speaker's age, gender
and where they are from. This project investigates human behavioral and early
brain responses to the recorded spontaneous speech of speakers with the same or
different dialects and genders using a neuromagnetic brain imaging technology,
magnetoencephalography (MEG). Investigators will examine the rating,
identification and discrimination of American English dialect stimuli by
listeners while their brain activity is passively recorded. These brain activity
data will be correlated with dialect differences and behavioral measures. While
there has been considerable work on early neural correlates of prosody, very
little work has examined the neural basis of within-and across-category
perception of speech characteristics that have real-life importance in areas of
prejudice and discrimination. Researchers investigating social aspects of
language have had limited access to brain imaging technologies, and consequently
this collaborative research will contribute to speech perception, neuromagnetic
brain research and sociolinguistics, and will foster new connections between
these fields. Moreover, this research has other important social and legal
implications because its results will bear directly on how courts can and will
interpret automatic neural processes and higher order cognitive processing
resulting in discrimination and prejudice.