* 1124087
* EXP:  Enabling Pedagogical Communication Between Learning and Programming Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Clancy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

Continuing increases in computer power have led to significant advances in
iteractive software-development environments (IDEs) that aim to help programmers
plan, write, test, and fix programs efficiently. Learning management systems
(LMSs), which make available learning resources and activities, have similarly
evolved to support good pedagogical practice, such as collaborative work and
embedded assessments, over the entire course of a discipline. This project is
investigating practices for linking an LMS to an IDE in ways that will enable
computer instructors to better support their students' learning. It is expected
that this investigation, aimed at undergraduate and advanced high-school
students, will result in better learning not only of computing concepts but of
programming practices required for designing and implementing sophisticated
software. Research and evaluation activities are aimed at investigating student
learning and engagement and the ways that teachers change their practice in
supporting students. The project findings, along with the tools and packaged
curricular activities, are to be widely disseminated to technical and
educational communities through professional meetings and online repositories.
While the integrated software environment and guidelines about effective use for
promoting learning will be broadly useful for computer science education, it is
expected that this effort will also provide more general guidelines about
integrating learning management systems with productivity-support systems in
other domains and disciplines.

New curricular activities enabled by this integration, along with the increased
support and feedback that students will receive from both instructors and
classmates, are expected to provide valuable support to all students learning
computing and software engineering but especially to students who are
traditionally underrepresented in computing courses or who might otherwise drop
out. Results of research will inform design of software systems that integrate
learning-management systems with productivity-support systems to allow students
across a variety of disciplines better gain insight into the big challenges of
the disciplinary practice, better gain practice addressing those types of
challenges, and better gain knowledge and skills needed to address those
challenges.