* 1124365
* Symposium: Symposium on themochemical conversion of biomass to liquid fuels, Stillwater, Oklahoma, June 1, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2011
* Mark Wilkins, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 10/31/2011
* USD 7,420.00

1124365&lt;br/&gt;Wilkins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a symposium during the summer
of 2011 on the themochemical conversion of biomass to liquid fuels, to be held
at Oklahoma State University in conjunction with the annual meeting of the USDA
Multi-state "Science and Engineering for a Biobased Economy" Research Committee.
The purpose of this symposium is to educate both the Committee and the Oklahoma
biomass conversion research community on the latest innovations in bioenergy and
biobased products, with special emphasis on thermochemical conversion of biomass
to liquid fuels. The symposium will host 7-8 speakers, covering the following
topics: biomass gasification, pyrolysis, conversion of bio-oil to useful
products, and conversion of syngas to alcohols through heterogeneous and
biological catalysis. All speakers will be nationally recognized experts in
their respective research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a large community of researchers at
Oklahoma State University, University of Oklahoma, and local Oklahoma companies
who are interested in thermochemical conversion of biomass to liquid fuels. The
symposium will also encourage participation from the Native American nations
that are in close proximity to the Oklahoma State University campus in order to
educate their leaders about how their nations could benefit from potential
opportunities offered through thermochemical biomass conversion technology.
Graduate and undergraduate students on campus for summer research will also be
encouraged to attend the symposium, which will allow them to interact with top
researchers in bioenergy. The symposium will also promote the Oklahoma-EPSCoR
NSF project on Bioenergy that is currently underway.