* 1124975
* CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research:  Collaborative Multi-Robot Exploration of the Coastal Ocean
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kanna Rajan, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 44,847.00

CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research: Collaborative Multi-robot Exploration of the
Coastal Ocean (COMECO)

Overview: The coastal ocean is a complex environment driven by the interaction
of atmospheric, oceanographic, estuarine/riverine, and land-sea processes, which
result in dynamic coastal features such as blooms, anoxic zones, and plumes
(estuarine, oil, pollutant). Effective observation and quantification of these
features require simultaneous, rapid measurement of diverse water properties to
capture its variability. This project aims to synthesize and understand the
basic principles of environmental sensing based on the integration of adaptive
robotic sampling with human decision-making. The techniques being developed
augment existing ocean models and aid coastal exploration to ensure that robots
are present at the "right place and time" to provide the most effective
measurements.

Technical Description: The absence of a single model assimilating all available
physical and biogeochemical data to provide a reliable view of ocean features
favors the combination of human expertise, model refinement, and analytical
adaptive sampling adopted in this project. Human decision-making is coupled with
probabilistic modeling and learning in a decision support system enabling
environmental field model discovery and refinement. The project extends the
state of the art in multirobot adaptive sampling by investigating the
relationship between environmental field structure and sampling performance,
developing improved field boundary tracking techniques, and creating methods for
multi-resolution, multivariable sampling. These advances are being made by
addressing two broad research challenges. The first, Model-Based Asset
Allocation, involves synthesis of large-scale, low-resolution data with human
scientific expertise to make timely, model-informed asset allocation decisions.
The second, Sampling-Based Model Refinement, involves small-scale, high-
resolution autonomous cooperative selection and execution of robot sampling
trajectories. Both challenges involve the handling of multivariate, multi-
resolution, temporally evolving fields. The project includes a feasibility and
evaluation study in coastal ocean exploration using underwater robots.

Broader Impacts: Decision support with diverse data integrated in a form that is
interpretable by a non-computer specialist will have a broader impact applicable
to a range of domains, including ocean and space exploration, environmental
disaster response and military andhomeland security. The ocean science community
will have a new and powerful tool to augment their understanding of dynamic
coastal phenomena and policy makers an important tool to aid decision making
impacting coastal communities. It is expected that the methods developed will be
broadly applicable to the general task of goal-driven exploration and
characterization of large areas. The project will involve graduate students who
will be trained in an interdisciplinary context. The project results will be
disseminated in the peer-reviewed scientific literature as well as via the
project website at: http://robotics.usc.edu/comeco.html