* 1124393
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Racial and Confirmation Bias in Lie Detection
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Vera Wilde, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

With the late 20th century expansion of the "law and order" state, use of
avowedly objective, scientific forensic evidence skyrocketed in public programs,
policies and institutions. U.S. criminal justice, immigration, and national
secuirty systems now routinely use "lie detectors" to inform criminal,
administrative, and employment investigations. Yet there is widespread
scientific evidence that there is no technology capable of detecting deception,
as there is indeed not evidence of a "deception response" to detect. Thus,
numberous widespread forensic procedures lack scientific basis. Ironically,
scientific evidence abounds demonstrating the potential of cognitive biases to
affect the interpretation of forensic data. These biases can include demographic
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to advance knowledge and
understanding of validity problems in forensics in dialogue with diverse
literatures in political and social psychology, bias and equity in policing,
policy and law. The puzzle is how different kinds of mental shortcuts interact
in polygraph chart interpretation under various conditions. This investigation
is provoked by the clear and pressing need for more rigorous science in the U.S.
criminal justice and national security systems. There is a severe paucity of
academic research in any discipline on bias in forensics in general and
polygraphs in particular. This is an important political science project,
because unscientific forensics appears legitimate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study uses a mixed methods framework combining experimental, survey and field
observations. The experimental element of this project aims to isolate causal
mechanisms of potential bias by recruiting a large nationwide sample of law
enforcement professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this research will be
made available online post-publication. The proposed research will be presented
at academic and law enforcement conferences. Findings from the project will
quantify bias, determine the conditions under which bias arises, and contribute
to the development of lie detector best practices.