* 1124895
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: A Theoretical Investigation Of The Role Of The Chemical Bond In The Raman And Fluorescence Response Of Molecule-Nanoparticle Hybrids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Vladimiro Mujica, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Vladimiro Mujica at Arizona State University is funded by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in an International Collaboration in
Chemistry, with partners Arne Keller at the University of Paris in Orsay as well
as Osman Atabek and Monica Calatayd all funded by France's Agence Nationale de
la Recherche. This is co-funded by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE). This project aims at a theoretical investigation of the
influence of the chemical bond between a molecule and a semiconducting
nanoparticle on the Raman and fluorescence responses of these hybrid systems.
These processes must be jointly considered, as the excitation and decay pathways
become interdependent due to the appearance of midgap states, induced by the
formation of the chemical bond and interfacial charge transfer that play a
fundamental role in both photoexcitation and electron injection into the
nanoparticle. This involves the calculation of the cross section for both Raman
scattering and fluorescence, based on the properties of the time-correlation
function of the effective dipole moment of the system. The emphasis is on
processes that are resonant in the hybrid but not in the separate components,
due to the reduction of the energy gap for electron excitation. Laser
photoexcitation simultaneously provokes the creation of an electron-hole exciton
and probes the Raman and fluorescence responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
developing reliable procedures to predict the light that emerges when laser
light shines on these molecule-nanoparticle hybrid systems, greater
understanding will be obtained of the fundamental physical and chemical
processes in bio-sensors and also in solar cells and photocatalysis. These three
areas are crucial for energy and health-related research and for the
technological implementation of new photovoltaic devices and sensors. The
project involves a strong international scientific cooperation between teams of
researchers in France and the U.S and it also contemplates active collaboration
with experimental groups and human resources formation.