* 1124316
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rural-Urban Linkages and Livelihood Strategies in Tamatave, Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Bram Tucker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 12,600.00

University of Georgia graduate student Laura M. Tilghman, under the guidance of
Dr. Bram Tucker, will undertake research on the changing nature and importance
of linkages between urban migrants and their rural kin. The strong
interconnection between village and city has been a longstanding theme of
research on African urbanization, and scholars have recently called for more
attention to the variation in the linkages migrants engage in, and more
systematic analysis of how linkages play into migrants' economic survival
strategies. Tilghman will explore these issues in Madagascar, whose isolation as
a large island makes an interesting contrast to mainland African studies where
internal and international migration are strongly
intertwined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is guided by two questions. First,
what factors account for variation in how migrants maintain ties, the frequency
that they do so, and how they perceive the importance of such linkages? Second,
how does the overall strength of migrants' ties with their rural places of
origin impact their ability to survive and thrive in the city? These research
questions will be analyzed in the context of rural-urban migration in the
northeast coast of Madagascar. The study will follow a cohort of 60 migrants,
using weekly linkage activity questionnaires, seasonal livelihood and well-being
assessments, and regular interviews and participant observation to capture their
linkage activities and well-being over the course of 12 months. Focus group
interviews with migrants' rural family members will provide additional
information and context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study contributes to
scholarship on both rural-urban linkages and contemporary urban economies. The
research will shed light on how aspects of modern African city life, such as
entrenched urban poverty, new gender roles, the rising popularity of evangelical
Christian faith groups, and the growing reach of the capitalist market economy,
may be changing the longstanding ties between cities and villages. The study
will also test whether hypotheses positing that linkages are essential for urban
survival hold up under more systematic analysis using multidimensional and
seasonally-iterated measurements of urban economic well-being. Funding this
research also supports the education of a graduate student.