* 1124176
* EXP: Developing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math ( STEM) Identities through Participation in Science-Infused Media and Virtual Peer Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Allison Druin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

Researchers are seeking to understand the roles that school libraries, school
librarians, and virtual peer networks (VPNs) can play in helping middle-school
students become interested in STEM, imagine themselves in STEM careers, and see
themselves as interested-in-science people. In four different schools,
youngsters recruited by science teachers (those especially interested in
science), English teachers (those especially interested in story telling and
writing), and librarians (those who are especially inquisitive) are
participating together in an after-school program to learn how to compose
science-related stories and use a variety of media for that purpose. Members of
each community support each other in writing and in learning. The software
registers their "collaborators" and helps them keep track of the expertise of
community members. Design of the socio-technical system (software, story-telling
activities, mentors) is informed by the literature on identity formation,
identity formation environments, and roles of social
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-white students are not choosing STEM
careers; low-socio-economic-status students have limited access to resources and
technology that can help them have imaginations about STEM interests and
careers, and many of these same youngsters are also missing role models who
could help them envision themselves in STEM careers. This project focuses on
development of future scientists through development of after-school programming
and an on-line virtual peer network (VPN) aimed toward helping participants
think about themselves as science-interested people. Focusing on libraries as a
venue for promoting STEM-identity formation and librarians as mentors offers a
new and promising model for connecting formal and informal learning
opportunities.