* 1124894
* NEB: Novel Quantum Switches Using Heterogeneous Atomically Layered Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Tony Heinz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,300,000.00

This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond
competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at the National
Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research Initiative of the
Semiconductor Research Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: The search
for high-performance electronic switches operating at low power dissipation has
generated many concepts that go beyond the control of charge flow in traditional
semiconductor device structures. These novel devices are based on the use of
alternative state variables, including the characteristics of single-particle
quantum systems, such as spin, pseudospin, and carrier wave-function phase, and
the characteristics of correlated many-body quantum systems, such as excitons
and exciton condensates. The goal of this project is to develop the basis for
transformative technology that would be made possible by the availability of
high-performance electronic devices employing such quantum state variables,
rather than traditional semi-classical transport of charge. To this end, a team
of investigators at Columbia University and University of Florida is devoted to
the fabrication, characterization, and theoretical analysis of such quantum
switches. The research exploits recent technological advances in the synthesis
of atomically thin layers of van der Waals solids and heterostructures formed
from combinations of such layered materials. The potential of this approach is
exemplified by the excellent electrical characteristics exhibited by
heterostructures of atomically thin layers of graphene and hexagonal boron
nitride. In this project, devices are built from such well-developed material
systems, where the primary fabrication challenges involve precise control over
geometry and interface cleanliness. The key research components of the project
are as follows: (i) The assembly and fabrication of atomically thin
heterostructure devices based on the co-lamination of van der Waals materials,
atomic-layer deposition processes, and advanced patterning techniques; (ii) the
analysis of distinctive quantum coherent transport processes in weakly coupled
layered heterojunction device structures by electrical and optical measurements;
(iii) the establishment of new state variables based on quantum coherence; and
(iv) the demonstration, characterization, and theoretical modeling of switching
devices based on novel state variables. Devices resulting from this research
effort promise performance with respect to switching speed and energy
dissipation that significantly exceeds the limits imposed by conventional
semiconductor device technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL: The
development of the new electronic devices based on low-dimensional functional
material platforms opens important directions in both fundamental and applied
research. The availability of practical high-performance, low-energy switching
devices is of great significance for the continued advancement of electronics
and the associated information technology industry. Thus, the demonstration of
devices based on new switching principles has the potential for broad
technological impact. The diverse capabilities of the team also significantly
enhance the educational opportunities for students and postdocs at Columbia and
at collaborating institutions. The highly interdisciplinary research carried out
in this project provides cutting-edge training for graduate students and
postdocs, as well as for undergraduate students. The team integrates research
activities with educational efforts by offering new lecture and laboratory
courses, as well as modifying existing ones. The team also undertakes broader
educational outreach through sponsorship of summer research projects for high
school students. Significant efforts are made toward K-12 outreach by training
of highly motivated high school students, and by enhancing interactions with
local K-12 educators to introduce front-line research to students.