* 1124754
* NEB: Ultimate Electronic Device Scaling Using Structurally Precise Graphene Nanoribbons
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* William Dichtel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project is awarded under the Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond
competition, with support by multiple Directorates and Divisions at the National
Science Foundation as well as by the Nanoelectronics Research Initiative of the
Semiconductor Research Corporation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective
of this proposal is to design and synthesize structurally precise graphene
nanoribbons (GNRs) and incorporate them into high-performance electronic
devices. GNRs are narrow strips of single-layer graphene that have garnered
considerable attention as a possible replacement for silicon in high-performance
nanoelectronic devices. Exploring the full potential of GNRs has been hampered
by their limited availability and poor control of their width and edge
structure. The proposal involves a collaboration between researchers at Cornell
University and Princeton University. This project involves the synthesis of
precursor polymers and their oxidative annealing into GNRs. The effects of edge
structure and doping levels on materials properties will be determined, and the
effect of changing structural parameters on the fabrication and testing of
transistor and sensor device performance of GNRs will be undertaken.
Computational modeling to support both the synthesis and device fabrication will
be accomplished using a variety of approaches from ab initio studies of the
electronic properties to Molecular Dynamics and Kinetic Monte Carlo studies to
determine the structural characteristics. The proposal also integrates several
educational initiatives with the research efforts. A new national group called
"Women in Nanoelectronics" will be formed as part of this project, and the goal
of the group will be to attract young women to nanoscience disciplines. Graduate
and undergraduate students will receive training in an interdisciplinary,
collaborative research environment and will be encouraged to broaden their
skills through exchanges among the Princeton and Cornell
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing using graphene nanoribbons,
ultrasmall strips of matter comprised of a single layer of carbon atoms, has the
potential to generate efficient, ultrasmall devices; however, many significant
technical hurdles must be overcome to realize the benefits. The project
addresses an important, longstanding problem in using graphene in electronics
and will further our understanding of this technologically important material.
Such work could impact industries that use microprocessors in their products,
including computer, consumer electronics, automotive, etc.