* 1124749
* The Role Of Brassinosteroid Inactivation In Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Michael Neff, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 12/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

Brassinosteroids are growth-promoting hormones that are required for plant
development. Most investigations have concentrated on either brassinosteroid
biosynthesis or on their response pathways. In contrast, the Neff group studies
brassinosteroid inactivation and has demonstrated the importance of this process
with regard to plant development. To gain a more comprehensive understanding,
the Neff group has expanded their studies to include all five potential
brassinosteroid inactivating enzymes. The following hypotheses will be tested in
this study: 1) The five different brassinosteroid-inactivating pathways have
redundant as well as distinct roles in development. The Neff lab will use
molecular, genetic and biochemical analysis to examine the potential overlap
between each of these brassinosteroid-inactivating pathways. 2) The five
different brassinosteroid-inactivating pathways have overlapping and distinct
regulation mechanisms. The Neff group has identified a transcription factor that
modulates both CYP734A1 expression and plant responses to the most-active
brassinosteroid, brassinolide. They will expand these molecular/genetic studies
to include all five brassinosteroid-inactivating genes in Arabidopsis. 3)
CYP72C1 uses inactive brassinolide precursors as a substrate for regulating
hormone levels. Early attempts at identifying CYP72C1 products via over-
expression in plants or in heterologous expression systems involved feeding
studies with brassinolide. However, the Neff group has recently discovered that
CYP72C1 does not use brassinolide as a substrate, instead preferentially binding
biochemical precursors. They have established international collaborations with
hormone biochemists and will use multiple expression systems coupled with
biochemical analysis to identify the product of CYP72C1 activity. Broader impact
of the proposed activity: This work will likely impact multiple areas of plant
research including studies of: plant hormones, gene regulation, and genetic
interactions during development. These studies will contribute directly to the
education of two Ph.D. students as well as undergraduate students in the Neff
group. As in the past, results from these studies will be presented in peer-
reviewed publications, in national and international meetings as well as in
local public schools.