* 1124037
* EXP: GeoGames - A Virtual Simulation Workbench for Teaching and Learning through a Real-World Spatial Perspective
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Neelam Soundarajan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 09/30/2015
* USD 376,372.00

This project is aiming to learn how to promote geospatial thinking skills and
ability to use data gathered geospatially to solve complex problems. The
technology being developed leverages on-line maps to situate scenarios in
GeoGames so that learners have access to real GIS, remote sensing,
socioeconomic, agricultural and other data and models as they engage with others
to solve real-world problems in the GeoGame. The focus is on helping learners
gain and use a spatial perspective in their thinking and problem solving.
Geogames present real-world challenges that require large-scale data collected
across geographical areas in game-like ways to draw in the learners; the
learners solve problems using the data found through navigating the maps and in
conjunction with each other. Research questions being investigated are about how
to use such games, visualizations, and data to engage learners in learning in
the context of real-world problem solving, learning to solve problems of real-
world complexity, and learning to use geospatial representations. The innovation
integrates the strengths of geospatial technologies, gaming, and social
networking to promote learning about real-world facts and also complex,
interlinked human, environmental, and technological systems in an experiential,
collaborative, and engaging way. The focus is at the college level but
ultimately could be appropriate for high-schoolers, middle-schoolers, and the
general population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policy people tell us that a geospatial
perspective is essential in addressing many of society's pressing issues (e.g.,
economics, agriculture, climate change, transportation, relief, urban planning,
emergency services). This approach of GeoGames may provide an engaging and
broadly-applicable way to educate future policy makers in taking a global
perspective on both the global and local problems they address. The approach may
also provide a way to help the public appreciate the connectedness of the world,
the broad implications of local policy decisions, and the issues that must be
considered in policy making.