* 1124936
* CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research: A Computational Thinking Approach to Mapping Critical Marine Mammal Habitat Through Readily-Deployable Video Systems
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* G. Carleton Ray, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 60,000.00

Unprecedented thinning and retreat of the Arctic sea ice cover together with
recent climate modeling studies that predict the Arctic could be free or nearly
free of sea ice in summertime within the next few decades have raised concern
for the future of Arctic ice-Â­associated marine mammals. All species of ice-
dependent marine mammals of Beringia have been subject to petitions to designate
them as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Accordingly, in 2008, the polar bear was listed as threatened after the U.S Fish
and Wildlife Service [2008] found that ?polar bear habitat - principally sea ice
- is declining throughout the species? range?. The case for the Pacific walrus
is under review with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Endangered Species
Program and two ice seal species have been proposed for protective status. A
major challenge facing these national policy decisions is lack of information
concerning the extent and distribution of critical habitat within the overall
ice pack. Most climate models and standard sea ice data products provide ice
extent and concentration information, but these quantities only partially
explain the distribution of Arctic marine mammals. The size and shape of ice
floes and openings has also been shown to be important, but there are currently
no standardized means of monitoring these properties of the sea ice cover.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here aims to develop new, powerful video
processing techniques and bring them to bear on the problem of identifying and
quantifying critical habitat areas within the Arctic ice pack. The project team
brings together scientists and engineers with expertise in advanced image and
video analysis and modeling, computational science, sea ice geophysics and
marine mammal ecology. The research plan is centered on a computational-thinking
approach to transforming high-volume video data into low-volume high-relevance
information that is key to decision support in a range of settings. The overall
aim is to develop and implement advanced video processing algorithms based on
geophysical and ecological knowledge of sea ice to routinely map marine mammal
habitat in ice covered waters. Data from the system will be disseminated to a
cyber-enabled forum of experts, who will aid in habitat interpretation and
provide guidance for data acquisition. The project will build on existing cyber-
enabled forums such as the Sea Ice for Walrus Outlook (SIWO, co-organized by
Eicken) as models for implementation. The techniques that will be developed will
be readily extendible to other observing tasks such as marine hazard
identification. Such information will become increasingly important in the near
future with growing commercial activity and limited decision-making and support
infrastructure in the Arctic. A readily-deployable, networkable system will
allow increased marine traffic in the Arctic to be turned to an
advantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the NSF Directorate
for Geosciences and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).