* 1124859
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Preparation and Utilization of SF5-Containing Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Joseph Thrasher, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 349,000.00

An International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) between two laboratories in
the area of fluorine chemistry, one from the inorganic side - Professor Joseph
Thrasher of Clemson University and the other from the organic side - Professor
Günter Haufe of the University of Münster, Germany, funded by the Chemical
Synthesis (SYN) Program of NSF's Chemistry Division (with contribution from the
Office of International Science and Engineering) and its German counterpart the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), seeks to advance transformative research
in the emerging field of pentafluorosulfanyl (SF5) chemistry. This research
activity involves developing new or improved synthetic routes to key
SF5-containing building blocks as well as using these building blocks to
introduce the SF5 group into complex organic structures, energetic materials,
and polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluorine has a prestigious position in many
areas of organic chemistry with products involved in everyday life, e.g.,
medicinal and agrochemicals, as well as novel materials. The development of
viable methods for the simple introduction of the SF5 group into organic
compounds could enhance the likelihood of obtaining materials with improved
performance in many areas of application. Broader impacts include the
development of a pipeline of motivated, interested students prepared to
undertake careers in STEM disciplines, particularly in the field of fluorine
chemistry. Along with the scientific exchange, the cultural and language
exchange during this research is expected to result in the dissemination of this
work to the general public.