* 1124338
* Acquiring the semantics and pragmatics of attitude verbs
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2016
* USD 380,000.00

This project investigates how children come to learn the meaning of verbs that
describe mental states such a "think" or "want". Such verbs are important for
several reasons: first, unlike action verbs like "run," they describe internal
states that are not easily observable. Second, such verbs have often been used
as a window into children's understanding of other people's minds. Children seem
to make consistent mistakes in their understanding of verbs like "think". This
is often taken to reflect an initial inability to attribute mental states (such
as beliefs) to others (so-called 'theory of mind'). However, our understanding
of children's linguistic representation of mental verbs at various stages of
development is lacking in important ways. Yet, such an understanding is crucial
before causal claims can be made about the connection between language and
theory of mind. Several factors could be responsible for children's linguistic
mistakes. In particular, we explore the hypothesis that the difficulty children
experience with these verbs is neither conceptual, nor grammatical in nature,
but derives from mastering how these verbs are used in conversation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;One of the central aims of this research is to develop tools for
determining whether success or failure in some linguistic task is driven by
grammatical knowledge or the reasoning associated with using this knowledge.
Consequently, this research will have clear implications for language delay, and
disorders of language and cognition, such as Autism. In addition, this project
will provide funding and research experience to graduate and undergraduate
students. Graduate students working on the project will serve as near-peer
mentors to the undergraduate students. This arrangement provides graduate
students with mentoring experience, better preparing them for research
positions, and providing a model for graduate training beyond individual
research.