* 1124618
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Information Structure and Dative Word-Order Alternations in English and Korean: L1 Children, L2 Children, and L2 Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Bonnie Schwartz, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The goal of this dissertation research is to investigate effects of information
structure on word-order alternations as language develops, in both first
language (L1) and second language (L2). Previous research has shown that adult
native speakers tend to place given/old information before new information; this
is called the "Given-before-New" principle. For example, in a situation where
"the pie" is the topic of discussion, adult speakers are more likely to say
"Sandy brought the pie to some friends" than "Sandy brought some friends the
pie."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In L1 acquisition, some researchers have suggested
that young children fail to comply with the Given-before-New principle because
they are unable to distinguish what they know/believe from what others
know/believe. This account, called the Theory of Mind (ToM) account, has not
been tested experimentally. This dissertation project will investigate, for both
English and Korean, whether children who show sensitivity to what others
know/believe also obey the Given-before-New principle. In addition, this project
will investigate, in both Korean-speaking learners of English and English-
speaking learners of Korean, whether knowledge of the Given-before-New principle
automatically transfers from L1 to L2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be
collected via: (i) a novel "Oral Contextualized Preference task," in which
participants listen to pairs of sentences following stories and choose their
preference; (ii) an Oral Acceptability-Judgment task, in which participants
listen to short dialogues between two characters and decide the acceptability of
test sentences; (iii) a False-Belief task to assess children's mastery of ToM;
and (iv) a Picture-Description task to measure L2
proficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first bidirectional study on word-
order preference in association with information status, across different age
groups using the same innovative methods, in both L1 and L2. It is also the
first experimental study of the Given-before-New principle in Korean. The
results should therefore be of immediate interest to scholars of English and
Korean, language development, and language pedagogy. Another impact is the
potential to extend a new experimental paradigm to other language domains. The
project will enhance the infrastructure for international research, and will
provide the student co-PI with extensive training in many aspects of language
research.