* 1124627
* EAGER: The International CHO Genome Community Project
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Kelvin Lee, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The overall objective for this EAGER proposal is to develop a framework to
support the international Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell community's effort to
move into the genomeera. CHO cells are currently the most widely used mammalian
cell line for biopharmaceutical production. Nearly 70% of all recombinant
biotherapeutics, yielding a global market of nearly $100 billion per year, are
produced in CHO cells. Biopharmaceutical production will continue to provide the
pharmaceutical industry with tremendous growth in the next several years,
enabling continued research into new medical treatments and the expansion of
manufacturing facilities. Unfortunately, efforts to improve the system using
metabolic engineering and other scientific and engineering methodologies have
lagged due to the absence of a genome and community&lt;br/&gt;genome framework.
As a result, this project will implement the infrastructure to pursue two
specific aims for support of the international CHO community:&lt;br/&gt;Specific
Aim #1:&lt;br/&gt;Develop an information technology (IT) - infrastructure to
support the sharing of genome-scale data and tools for the CHO biotechnology
community and provide a forum where the CHO biotechnology community can interact
and synergize on-line.&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim #2:&lt;br/&gt;Educate graduate
students on the use of bioinformatics to implement and analyze the CHO genome
and enhance specific productivity and product quality using new webbased tools
of importance to the CHO community.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal results from the development of a one-stop website portal to support
the community. As part of the establishment of this portal, a number of
bioinformatic tools will need to be employed to seamlessly migrate existing
genome-scale datasets into a common interface.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this proposal relates to the important impact this effort will have on the
entire international CHO biotechnology community. Partners from a wide range of
international entities including academic, government, and industrial
scientists, have come together to support the CHO genome community by providing
resources, expertise, and data. Additional impact will come from the education
of graduate students working on the project who will closely interface with
industrial scientists and from workforce development activities for the
industrial community.