* 1124412
* The Development and Use of Memory Editing Strategies in Children
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* James Lampinen, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,380.00

False memories occur when people remember events in a way that diverges from the
way the events actually happened. Both children and adults can be subject to
false memories, but adults develop a number of strategies to limit these errors.
One strategy involves making use of expectations about how vivid and distinctive
particular sorts of memories should be (i.e., distinctiveness strategy). Another
strategy involves making use of knowledge that memory of one event sometimes
implies that another event did not happen (i.e., logical inconsistency
strategy). Although these memory editing strategies are well developed in
adults, they are less developed in children. The purpose of the planned research
is to understand how children develop these skills.  In the first two
experiments, children and adults will study lists made up of both pictures and
words.  Because pictures tend to produce more vivid memories than words, a
participant using the expected distinctiveness strategy should have fewer false
memories for pictures. To measure the use of the logical inconsistency strategy,
some participants will study lists where each item is presented as either a
picture or a word, but never in both formats. This will allow them to use the
logical inconsistency strategy (e.g., "I know it was not a picture because it
was a word").  Other participants will study lists that include some items that
are presented as pictures, some items that are presented as words, and some
items that are presented as both pictures and words ? making the logical
inconsistency strategy invalid. To see if strategy use is related to frontal
lobe development, participants will complete a standard neurological test
battery that measures frontal lobe function (Experiment 1-3). To see if strategy
use is learned through experience, some participants engage in multiple study
test trials to see if this experience increases strategy use (Experiment 2). The
final year of the project will examine if these strategies are used by children
in situations that mimic the challenges faced by actual child witnesses
(Experiment 3).  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of high profile cases in the
1980s and 1990s raised public concern about whether children sometimes falsely
remember events, especially after suggestive questioning. In these and other
contexts, the accuracy of children's memory can be of vital importance. Part of
the puzzle involves understanding why children are less able to avoid false
memories than adults. A science based understanding of strategy development in
children could produce an immediate impact in these and other cases. The
research we plan on conducting may improve methods for interviewing children and
may help us understand the situations where children are most likely to fall
prey to false memories. The research will also help determine if there are
individual differences between children which may make some children more prone
to memory errors than others. Finally, the research may have important
educational implications.  If the strategies being investigated are learned
through experience, the planned research may result in educational approaches
that help children to learn these strategies more efficiently. In fact, as part
of the investigators' plan to share the results of this research, they intend to
hold annual "learning about learning" workshops with local school districts.
These workshops will allow the investigators to share with educators the results
of the research and will also allow the researchers to gain insights from the
first hand experiences educators have helping children to learn.