* 1124460
* Landscape Sensitivity to Changing Climate: Plio-Pleistocene Erosion and Sedimentation in SE Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Arjun Heimsath, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2014
* USD 240,481.00

Landscape sensitivity to changing climate: Plio-Pleistocene erosion and
sedimentation in SE Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Arjun Heimsath, Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1124460&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Remnants of
sedimentary basin levels in southeastern Arizona are prominent and striking
deposits, and as such they have attracted the attention of geologists from the
early 20th century through the present. Despite extensive descriptive work
capturing their visual conspicuousness, there is little consensus on the ages or
geologic origins of these deposits. Although the sediments with which these
landforms were built have obvious source areas that can be traced and mapped,
the potential combinations of tectonic and climatic forces conspiring to leave
such deposits abandoned are far from clear and have not been well examined. The
ages inferred for loosely correlative basin high stands have ranged from ~20,000
years ago to 1.0-2.2 Ma and are based more on conjecture than quantitative
geochronology. This project will establish an absolute timeline for the final
stages of when these basin were filled with sediments, as well as when the
basins were subsequently incised and dissected by regional erosional events.
Establishing such a timeline requires application and development of cosmogenic
nuclide methodology that will extend its temporal reach and test the innovative
use of multiple stable and radio-nuclides. The sampling strategy will cover a
broad range of sedimentary basin levels across southeast Arizona and will
quantify both the ages of the deposits and the source area erosion rates.
Because the undeformed basin high stand surfaces and underlying basin fill may
date to the time that active tectonic forcing ceased in the region, the erosion
of the surfaces is likely to have been driven by climatic forcing. Firmly
establishing the chronology of these features, as well as the paleo-erosion
rates of the source areas thus helps to build a bridge in understanding between
how tectonic and climatic forces shape the Earth?s surface.&lt;br/&gt;The
visually arresting nature of these surfaces across southeastern Arizona insures
broad interest in their origins as well as how they may enable insight into
tectonic and climatic forces. By establishing the geochronology of such widely
studied and virtually undated landscapes we will expand the intellectual reach
of this project well beyond the testing of hypotheses. Specifically, the Sky
Island Alliance will help us coordinate how understanding the impacts of past
climates on the landscape will help better predict future changes across the
ecologically sensitive areas of this study. Each of the sedimentary deposits
that we are studying originates in source area that is now home to endemic
species and spatially isolated ecosystems. There is, therefore,
interdisciplinary interest in quantitatively understanding how these landscapes
change under different climate regimes. Additionally, the NSF-funded Jemez River
Critical Zone Observatory (CZO), run by colleagues at the University of Arizona,
has field sites near some of our field sites. We are coordinating field efforts
and dating strategies with them, thus insuring synergy between projects with
intellectual overlap, but very different project objectives. We will coordinate
training and outreach of undergraduate and K-12 students with both
collaborators, thus further widening the reach of the project. Collaborative
research between this project and the Berkeley Geochronology Center will help
develop facilities at Arizona State University as well as train graduate
students. Finally, class trips to the field areas used for this project are
helping to develop both the field component and the curriculum of undergraduate
and graduate courses taught in our school.