* 1124382
* Identity fusion and extreme group behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* William Swann, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 432,836.00

Most contemporary analyses of group processes have been guided by social
identity theory or self-categorization theory. Both of these theories have
emphasized group identification as the measure of alignment with groups.
Identification is doubtlessly an influential determinant of the tendency for
group members to band together in derogating members of out-groups and
applauding fellow in-group members. Nevertheless, identification reflects
people's alignment with the category rather than with the individual members of
the category. In contrast, identity fusion emphasizes familial sentiments toward
the group connectedness and reciprocal strength sentiments that motivate fused
persons to make profound sacrifices for individual "family" members. Recent
research by Dr. William Swann and his collaborators has shown that when people
become fused with a group, their personal and social identities theoretically
combine synergistically to motivate pro-group behavior. The result is that
identity fused persons are especially inclined to donate their personal funds to
the group and take bold action on behalf of the group, including even endorsing
fighting and dying for the group. The research supported with this award is
designed to understand extreme devotion to a group ("hyper-fusion")and how it
might be countered. In nine experimental laboratory studies, the researcher
focuses on the antecedents of fusion, the circumstances when identity fusion may
play a unique role and consider the possibility that hyper-fusion may sometimes
compromise people's capacity to fulfill multiple roles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus on the antecedents of extreme behavior will
enhance understanding of terrorism, which is obviously relevant to national
security, international relations, and America's economic well-being. Moreover,
both graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Texas (UT) will be
involved in the conceptualization, design, and implementation of the research.
Finally, women and minorities will be specifically recruited as assistants as a
way of broadening the participation of underrepresented groups.