* 1124075
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Exploring and Controlling the Reactivity of Endohedral Fullerenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Jorge Gardea-Torresdey, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the International
Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) Program and the Macromolecular, Supramolecular,
and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF, Professor Echegoyen from the University of
Texas-El Paso and Professors Martin, Poblet and Torres from Spain will
synthesize, isolate, and characterize a series of new fullerene derivatives with
highly unusual electronic properties. Some of the new derivatives will possess
one or more attached ferrocene or ruthenocene groups to five-membered rings on
the surface of endohedral fullerenes, to yield the first endohedral
buckymetallocenes ever reported. Electronic coupling between the exo- and
endohedral metal species will be measured and analyzed. The properties of these
new compounds will be fully characterized using a wide variety of techniques,
especially electrochemistry, looking for endo-exo interactions and their
relationship to the overall properties. In a second project, a new series of
Covalent Organic Frameworks (COFs) based on newly designed porphyrins and
phthalocyanine linkers will be prepared, in an effort to obtain COFs with
relatively large pore sizes. The ability to incorporate fullerenes inside these
COF pores will be probed with a variety of techniques to try to assess if Donor-
Acceptor (D-A) interactions exist and how strong they are.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fullerenes,
also called 'Buckyballs' are all-carbon compounds with unique and somewhat
unusual electronic properties that make them useful in many applications, for
example in solar cells. They are closed carbon structures (the one possessing
only 60 carbons is identical to a soccer ball) and are capable of undergoing
chemical reactions on their surfaces. Fullerenes that encapsulate other species
inside, such as clusters of other atoms, are called endohedral fullerenes, and
these have very interesting and unique electronic properties. Many reactions
have been used to functionalize the surfaces of fullerenes, both empty as well
as endohedral, but some unique ones will be explored in the present work,
especially on the endohedral compounds. The resulting compounds will be
characterized and their properties measured, specifically looking at potential
applications in solar photovoltaics. Besides the immediate educational
experience and mentoring provided to the undergraduate and graduate students
involved in this project, the most profound broader impact of this project
derives from the commitment of the US Principle Investigator (PI) to recruit and
educate underrepresented minorities in his laboratories. The PI actively
recruits Puerto Rican and other Hispanic and minority students to his labs as
evidenced by the fact that 14 of his 22 PhD graduates have been Hispanic. In
addition to actively mentoring underrepresented minority students (Hispanics
primarily), this project involves very strong international collaborations with
three different research groups in Spain, two being synthetically oriented and
one theoretical. The PI has a long and fruitful history in both of these broader
impact areas and these are expected to continue under the present grant.