* 1124174
* Collaborative Research: Non-Standard Asymptotic Theory for Semiparametric Estimators
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Michael Jansson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2014
* USD 129,747.00

Modern statistical and econometric models in social and natural sciences are
complex and typically include many unknown parameters. Some of these parameters
are of particular interest to the researchers and policymakers (e.g., the mean
effect of a treatment), while others are not (e.g., the exact form of a
regression function or the probability law of the observed covariates). The
latter parameters are usually called nuisance parameters because their values
are needed in order to conduct valid statistical inference on the parameters of
interest, even though the researchers are not interested in them. An important
class of these models are the so-called semiparametric models, which have the
distinctive feature that the nuisance parameters are functions (as opposed to
numbers). A modern, well-established approach in statistics and econometrics to
conduct inference in semiparametric models is to estimate in a flexible, non-
parametric way the nuisance parameters first (using the available data), and
then employ these estimates as a preliminary guess of their true value in order
to conduct inference on the parameters of interest. This procedure is
generically referred to as semiparametric inference, and is particularly useful
because of its flexibility and lack of sensitivity to biases generated by model
misspecification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiparametric inference procedures are
very popular among theoretical researchers, partially because of their nice and
well understood large sample properties (approximations that assume a large
amount of data). However, these inference procedures are considerably less
popular among empirical researchers and policymakers, mainly because they are
known to be highly sensitive to the way that they are implemented in practice.
Specifically, an important drawback of most semiparametric inference procedures
is that they rely on non-parametric techniques for the estimation of the
nuisance parameters, which in turn require the selection of tuning and smoothing
parameters. These additional parameters are artificially introduced in the
inference procedure to flexibly approximate the unknown functions (the nuisance
parameters). The large sample approximations employed in the literature ignore
the effect of these additional parameters that are artificially introduced in
the construction of the inference procedure. This fact, in turn, leads to an
important lack of robustness of semiparametric inference procedures, that is,
small changes in the choice of tuning and smoothing parameters lead to
dramatically different empirical results, making applied work unreliable in
general. In other words, this lack of robustness usually translates in incorrect
statistical inference that may lead researchers and policymakers to draw flawed
conclusions from empirical work that employs these semiparametric inference
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposed research agenda
is to develop new, alternative large sample approximations to commonly used
semiparametric inference procedures that (at least partially) account for the
effect of the specific user-defined choices of tuning and smoothing parameters
involved in the inference procedure. This alternative asymptotic theory leads to
more "robust" statistical inference procedures because it captures the effect of
certain terms that are assumed away by the conventional large sample
approximations. This project will proceed in two main stages. First, alternative
large sample approximations will be developed for specific semiparametric
examples, including weighted averaged derivatives and partially linear model.
Not only these models are of interest in their own right, but also they will
provide some of the key ingredients to understand the new theoretical features
emerging from the non-standard large sample approximations studied in this
proposal. Among other problems, the goal is to establish an alternative first-
order large sample distribution, derive valid standard-error estimators, develop
new ways of selecting the value of the tuning and smoothing parameters, study
the validity of commonly used resampling procedures, and explore the higher-
order implications of the alternative asymptotic approximations. Once the study
of these particular semiparametric procedures is well understood, the second
stage of the investigation will be to develop a generalization and unification
of the theoretical results outlined for the special examples, which will cover
many other problems of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research are expected to benefit several fields of study, ranging from Economics
or Political Science to Biostatistics or Public Health, allowing researchers to
conduct "robust" inference in semiparametric models, and making semiparametric
inference more attractive to researchers and policymakers. To further increase
the impact of this research proposal, a key goal is to provide computer code for
commonly used platforms, and to write a non-technical survey with a discussion
on theory and implementation of both the classical results and the new results
emerging from the research proposed.