* 1124619
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Electrochemical Methods in High-Valent Palladium Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,11/30/2012
* David Vicic, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 11/30/2012
* USD 335,000.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry award in the Division of Chemistry
supports Professor David A. Vicic at the University of Hawaii to collaborate
with Professor Yulia H. Budnikova of the Kazan Scientific Center at the Russian
Academy of Sciences in performing electroanalysis on a series of palladium
complexes in order to identify new Pd(III) complexes, and to systematically
investigate their redox properties under aerobic conditions. These results will
be applied to the discovery of new synthetic transformations using the higher
oxidation states of palladium and will be extended to electrocatalytic C-H
functionalization methods involving nickel. The research aims toward an
understanding of the details of transformations that could enable new reactions
with nickel, which would complement the existing chemistry of
palladium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementing the existing synthetic chemistry
of palladium with corresponding reactions using nickel could lower the costs of
catalysis and enable greener synthetic methods. The tabulation of redox
potentials for a series of palladium complexes will help guide chemists in
choosing an appropriate oxidant for high-valent transformations. New
electrochemistry experiments derived from this research will be incorporated
into laboratory courses in Advanced Inorganic Chemistry and
Spectroelectrochemistry.