* 1124403
* Collaborative Research: CDI- Type II: Towards Analyzing Complex Petascale Datasets: The Milky Way Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Joseph Silk, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,139,984.00

The Milky Way Laboratory will create interactive access to one of the largest
numerical simulations of cosmological structure ever created. With its data
volume close to a petabyte, it illustrates the emerging data challenge -- how
new breakthroughs require non-incremental changes in the way we do science. As
datasets are doubling in size every year, traditional analysis techniques are no
longer adequate. Scientists need a new instrument, like a "microscope of data",
a data-scope, that can look at both the details and the large-scale features in
the mountains of digital data. Increased raw computer power is necessary, but
not enough -- we also need to use new computational thinking to develop the new
approaches needed. The NSF-supported research aims to achieve such a
breakthrough in data-intensive computational analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
particular science focuses on the compelling question of the origin and
evolution of the Milky Way Galaxy, the home of the Sun and our solar system.
Understanding our place in the Universe will in turn lead to insight into the
nature of the enigmatic 'dark matter', the substance whose gravity holds the
Milky Way together, but about which little is known. The project will create a
publicly accessible 'Milky Way Laboratory' that will combine the output of the
largest state-of-the-art computer simulations of the formation of the Milky Way
with the largest observational datasets of the properties of stars (like the
Sun) in our Galaxy, and provide the means to answer questions that go beyond the
scope of either dataset. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The publicly accessible data and
the tools developed will enable scientists to run their own innovative
experiments at unprecedented scales, demonstrating that it is possible to tackle
problems on the petabyte scale in a university setting today. The project will
provide a blueprint to address similar data-intensive problems in other areas of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international team consists of astronomers,
particle physicists and computer scientists from academia (Johns Hopkins and UC
Santa Cruz) and industry to accomplish its ambitious goals. The project will be
using the NSF-funded 5.5-petabyte Data-Scope system, under construction at the
Johns Hopkins University, a unique data-intensive environment designed to carry
out experiments like the Milky Way Laboratory. The Data-Scope will be located at
a new computational facility at JHU, funded by an NSF ARRA grant.