* 1124479
* Acoustic variability and perception of children's speech
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2017
* Peter Assmann, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2017
* USD 283,023.00

No two voices are exactly alike, and speech sounds can vary dramatically when
produced by different individuals. A substantial component of this variability
stems from anatomical differences between speakers that reflect their age and
sex. Although these factors complicate the relationship between acoustic cues
and phonetic properties of speech, they provide information from which the
listener can determine the age, sex and size of the speaker, referred to as
indexical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed research is
to investigate the relationship between indexical and phonetic properties in
children's speech through four linked projects. Project 1 involves the
construction and acoustic analysis of a vowel database from children ranging in
age from 5 through 18 years. The database will provide the materials for
experiments investigating the perceptual consequences of age-related changes in
speech. In Project 2, natural and modified versions of the recordings will be
used to examine the cues that distinguish male from female voices at different
ages. Project 3 will investigate the perception of speaker age in children's
voices and evaluate the effectiveness of vocal age conversion using synthesis
techniques based on models of vocal tract scaling. Project 4 investigates the
link between vowel identification and indexical properties, requiring listeners
to provide vowel identification responses together with judgments of the
perceived sex and age of the speaker. Pattern recognition models will be
implemented using acoustic measurements from the database to model the
statistical relationships between the acoustic properties of children's speech
as a function of age and sex, and to predict listeners' responses in the
perceptual experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide valuable
information on speech development and the processes by which listeners extract
linguistic and indexical information from children's speech. The findings could
provide useful information for automatic speech recognition systems applied to
children's speech, reveal effective strategies for synthesizing children's
voices, and serve as normative data in clinical studies of disordered speech.