* 1124369
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution and Influence of Interest Group Networks before the Supreme Court
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Dino Christenson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 125,821.00

Interest groups use a variety of techniques to exert influence, among which
coalition strategies are dominant. This project brings a new theoretical
perspective to the study of interest group coalitions by applying network theory
and methods. Such a perspective provides a lens where the attributes of
individuals are less important than the relationships and ties among actors in
the network. This project addresses three important questions about interest
group behavior: how have interest group coalition strategies changed over time;
which factors determine whether interest groups work together; and do particular
interest groups wield more power before the Court? Utilizing a network measure
of interest group coalitions based on cosigner status to United States Supreme
Court amicus curiae, or friend of the court briefs, the central players and
overall characteristics of this dynamic network from 1930 to present-day are
illuminated. In addition, the analyses suggest which attributes bring interest
groups to work together and how power in the network influences judicial
decision-making and litigation success.

Through the creation of a new network measure applicable to 80 years of interest
group activity and an associated data set of interest group characteristics,
this research provides scholars an unparalleled opportunity to study the
relative impact of interest group coalitions as they engage the governmental
process.