* 1124141
* Collaborative Research: Autotrophic carbon fixation at a shallow-water hydrothermal system: Constraining microbial activity, isotopic and geochemical regimes
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Costantino Vetriani, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2015
* USD 196,665.00

Currently, there is only limited information on the identity and activity of the
microorganisms carrying out CO2-fixation in situ, despite the fact that these
organisms form the basis of their respective ecosystems. Representatives that
are able to grow autotrophically are known to exist in almost all major groups
of prokaryotes, and these organisms play essential roles in ecosystems by
providing a continuous supply of organic carbon for heterotrophs. Microorganisms
present in extreme environments utilize CO2- fixation pathways other than the
Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle. At present, five alternative autotrophic CO2
fixation pathways are known. Different carbon fixation pathways result in
distinct isotopic signatures of the produced biomass due to the isotopic
discrimination between light (12C) and heavy (13C) carbon by the carboxylating
enzymes. Thus, inferences about the carbon fixation pathway predominantly
utilized by the microbial community can also be made based on the stable carbon
isotopic composition of the organic matter, in extant systems as well as in the
geological record. However, at present little is known about the systematics and
extents of fractionation during carbon fixation by prokaryotic organisms, and to
our knowledge no studies exist that have systematically studied the relationship
between the operation of different carbon fixation pathways and how this is
reflected in the stable carbon isotopic composition in a natural system. This is
a 2-year interdisciplinary, international research program that employs a
powerful combination of cutting-edge research tools aiming to improve our
understanding of autotrophic carbon fixation and its chemical and isotopic
signature along environmental gradients in a natural hydrothermal system. The
following hypotheses are addressed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1. The diversity of
microorganisms present along a thermal and redox gradient, and rates of CO2
fixation, will reflect adaptation to in situ temperatures and geochemical
conditions&lt;br/&gt; 2. Microorganisms utilizing the CBB cycle for autotrophic
CO2-fixation will represent a smaller percentage of the chemolithoautotrophic
community at higher temperatures, where microorganisms utilizing alternative
CO2-fixation pathways dominate&lt;br/&gt; 3. Isotopic values of biomass and
specific biomarker molecules will vary along a thermal and redox gradient from
zones characterized by a higher hydrothermal fluid flux and thus higher
temperatures to the surrounding, cooler areas, corresponding to the physiology
of the microorganisms utilizing different pathways for carbon
fixation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use a multidisciplinary approach to
delineate the relative contribution of the different carbon fixation pathways
along an environmental gradient by combining metagenomic analyses coupled with:
1) an assessment of the frequency and the expression of specific key genes
involved in carbon fixation, and 2) with the measurement of carbon fixation
rates. These data will be integrated with the determination of stable C isotopic
composition of biomass, DIC, and specific hydrocarbons/lipids. Due to its easy
accessibility, well-established environmental gradients, and extensive
background information, the shallow-water vents off Milos (Greece) will be used
as a natural laboratory to perform these studies. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
The data generated in this study will allow constraints on the relationship
between autotrophic carbon fixation and the resulting isotopic signatures of
biomass and specific biomarker molecules (e.g. CH4, C2+ alkanes, lipids) in a
natural system.. This has implications for assessing the importance of carbon
fixation in extant ecosystems, and it will also provide a tool to improve the
interpretation of isotopic values in the geological record.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This is an interdisciplinary and collaborative effort between US and
foreign institutions, creating unique opportunities for networking and to foster
international collaborations. This will also benefit the involved students (1
graduate, several undergraduates) and a postdoc. The PIs have been involved in
several educational and public outreach activities over the years that have
reached literally millions of individuals. Finally, the project fits with the
focus of a number of multi-disciplinary and international initiatives, in which
PIs are active members (e.g. SCOR working group on Hydrothermal energy and the
ocean carbon cycle;and Deep Carbon Observatory at CIW).