* 1124389
* Collaborative Research: Tracking Chemical, Isotopic, and Molecular Signatures of Tightly Coupled Sulfur Cycling in Phototrophic and Chemosynthetic Microbial Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* David Fike, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 02/28/2015
* USD 120,753.00

The metabolic activity of microorganisms dominates the biogeochemical evolution
of the Earth over geologic time. One of the fundamental questions facing
scientists seeking to understand global biogeochemistry is: What is the
relationship between microbial community composition (who¡¦s there?), metabolic
activity (what are they doing?), and ambient environmental conditions (e.g., pH,
sulfate levels) (how are they impacted?). Sulfur cycling, particularly the
coupling between sulfate reduction and sulfide oxidation, is one of the dominant
geochemical pathways driving carbon mineralization within many diverse microbial
ecosystems today. Isotopic and mineralogical evidence recovered from ancient
rocks suggest biological sulfate reduction played an important role on early
Earth as well. In attempt to better understand this globally important process
and the corresponding biosignatures of active sulfur cycling microorganisms, we
are proposing a multi-disciplinary, high-resolution geochemical and molecular
biological investigation of closely coupled microbial sulfur cycling in three
representative microbial ecosystems. These include a 3-4 member synergistic
anoxygenic phototrophic consortium, moderately diverse chemosynthetic sulfur-
oxidizing mats, and highly complex benthic oxygenic photosynthetic microbial
mats. These systems differ in terms of biological complexity and in the major
sulfur cycling pathways, that collectively will provide fundamental information
regarding light-dependent and -independent sulfur metabolisms. Our work combines
analyses at high spatial (?Ým-scale) resolution of sulfur and carbon isotopic
data using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and FISH-nanoSIMS,
microvoltammetic sulfur species measurements, and CARD-FISH molecular imaging to
investigate the linkage among microbial spatial organization, metabolic
activity, and establishment of geochemical gradients by coupled sulfur cycling
communities. Together, the data from this combined laboratory and field study
will develop a new toolset that can be used to study tightly coupled sulfur
cycling on an unprecedented scale within microbially dominated sedimentary
environments.

This project will inform scientists about the fundamental chemistry and biology
governing sulfur in the environment, past and present. This is important because
sulfur plays a critical role in processes controlling not only how we view the
evolution of life on this planet, but also about ore deposits as sources of
metal resources, oil and gas formation and their economic recovery, soil
nutrient availability affecting crop yields and the quality of water resources,
and the transport of many contaminants in ground and surface waters.
Additionally this project will help train the next generation of scientists with
the scientific and technical knowledge to work in high tech and scientific
industry, research, and education fields.