* 1124776
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: A Comprehensive Computational/Experimental Analysis of the Hofmeister Effect
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Laurence Romsted, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 599,826.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry award, co-funded in France by the
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) and in the United States by the National
Science Foundation, through the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, supports an international
collaboration between Drs. Laurence Romsted, David Case, and Ronald Sauers, all
from Rutgers University, New Brunswick, and Drs. Reiko Oda, Michel Laguerre
(both from the Institut Europeen de Chimie et de Biologie, France), and Dario
Bassani (from the Institut des Science Molecularier CNRS, France). The
fundamental goal of the project is the characterization of ion-specific effects
on the properties of aqueous solutions of primarily gemini amphiphiles. The team
will systematically vary amphiphile structure and use a wide variety of
counterions to identify the shifts in the balance of forces controlling
aggregate structure from the molecular level to bulk solution properties.
Cationic gemini amphiphiles with decyl and dodecyl tails will be synthesized,
with fully and partially methylated headgroups and a variety of counterions,
e.g., the typical inorganic counterions of the Hofmeister series, but also
organic counterions, such as alkylcarboxylates and alkylphosphates of various
chain lengths. By using a combination of physical, chemical, and simulation
methods, the researchers will determine correlations between physical properties
(e.g., critical micelle concentration, ionization degree, and aggregation number
and interfacial concentrations of the counterions and water), as determined by
chemical trapping and by simulation using a combined molecular dynamics/density
functional theory approach. The simulations will also provide new information on
the overall organization of the tails, headgroups, counterions, and water within
the aggregate. Parallel studies on single chain analogs will highlight the
importance of the methylene bridge of the gemini surfactants. Because chemical
trapping and molecular dynamic simulations make no assumptions about aggregate
structure, correlations discovered between amphiphile structure, counterion type
and aggregate physical properties will deepen current understanding and provide
new insight into the delicate balance of forces that controls aggregation
behavior of association colloids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the oldest,
unresolved challenges in colloid and surface chemistry is a coherent explanation
for ion-specific effects on the properties of colloids and biointerfaces, first
demonstrated in 1888 by Hofmeister as a specific salt effect on the solubility
of a protein. Since then, many empirically observed orders have been published
including ion-specific effects on a variety of aqueous solution properties of
self-assembling ionic association colloids such as micelles, microemulsions and
vesicles. This collaborative project offers a systematic approach toward
understanding the interplay of intermolecular forces controlling amphiphile
aggregate structures. Results should have real-life impact by aiding in
selection of amphiphiles for particular applications (currently a trial-and-
error procedure) and should enhance the utility of soft materials, e.g., by
tuning their structures simply by changing the counterion. This project's novel
multidisciplinary approach benefits from the complementary expertise of six
collaborators in two countries: Drs. Oda and Bassani will obtain precise
physical property measurements on the aggregation; Dr. Romsted will use his
group's chemical trapping method to determine interfacial water and counterion
concentrations; simulations by Drs. Laguerre, Case, and Sauers should provide
new insight into specific interactions between headgroups, counterions, and
water at gemini micelle interfaces. This research collaboration will also
provide advanced training for undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows. They will be immersed in a fundamental and intellectually
challenging project that includes experience with a variety of experimental
approaches combined with simulations in laboratories in the US and France, and
in discussions on characterizing amphiphile solutions at the aggregate and
molecular levels.