* 1125963
* Collaborative Research: Measurement and Modeling Changes in the Quality and Productivity of Chinese Exports
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Mark Roberts, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 240,198.00

This award funds empirical research on international trade and competition
between manufacturing firms. The PIs will combine two existing data sources to
create a dataset with data on Chinese manufacturing firms from 2000 - 2006. The
data will include information on ownership type, production, financial/balance
sheet results, value of import/export transactions and quantity of import/export
transactions. The data set will be used to do two different things. First they
will study the relationship between firm productivity, investments, and export
sales and prices across a range of 'destination' (eg, non-Chinese) markets.
Second, the PIs will use the data to estimate a structural model of firm demand,
pricing and export supply. To do this, they will develop a modeling framework
that incorporates both demand side and production side firm level heterogeneity.
Third, they will estimate a dynamic structural model of firm investment in
R&amp;D and capital to study the importance of quality upgrades and productivity
improvement as sources of Chinese success in export markets. Finally, they will
use the full model to study the effect of possible changes in market conditions
such as trade liberalization on exports, investments, and firm
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include new insight for
economic policy by understanding the causes that make some manufacturing firms
successful exporters.