* 1125579
* RAPID: The Snowmastodon Project
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Kirk Johnson, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 06/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

The recent discovery on Oct. 14, 2010, of exceptionally preserved plant and
large mammal fossils at&lt;br/&gt;Zeigler Reservoir near Snowmass Village,
Colorado provides a brief opportunity to study an amazingly&lt;br/&gt;well-
preserved, sequence of high-elevation Ice Age ecosystems. In 18 days (Oct. 29 to
Nov. 17, 2010),&lt;br/&gt;the Denver Museum of Nature &amp; Science (DMNS)
excavated more than 600 bones comprising parts of 8-&lt;br/&gt;10 American
mastodons, 4 Columbian mammoths, 4 Ice Age bison, 2 deer, 1 Jefferson?s ground
sloth&lt;br/&gt;(the first record in Colorado and the highest altitude record in
North America), multiple Tiger&lt;br/&gt;salamanders, and exceptionally
preserved plant, insect and aquatic invertebrate fossils. As a whole,
the&lt;br/&gt;site represents the first relatively complete sequence of
lacustrine Pleistocene ecosystems at high&lt;br/&gt;elevation in the Rocky
Mountains. A number of key research questions and opportunities have
emerged:&lt;br/&gt;1) What does this site tell us about high elevation
Pleistocene climate and biota in the Ice Age Rockies?&lt;br/&gt;2) What is the
geochronology of the site? 3) What is the detailed history of lake in-filling?
4) What were&lt;br/&gt;the life histories of the site?s mammoths and mastodons?
5) Given the large number of specimens, can we&lt;br/&gt;undertake
metapopulation analyses of the bison, mammoth, and mastodon? And 6) what is the
relevance&lt;br/&gt;of this Rocky Mountain climate and biotic record to present-
day issues of climate change?&lt;br/&gt;To answer these over-arching questions
and other more specific questions, we have assembled a team of&lt;br/&gt;32
scientists from 15 institutions organized into six groups to undertake a
comprehensive multidisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;study of the Ziegler Reservoir fossil
lake. These groups are: 1) regional and local geology;
2)&lt;br/&gt;stratigraphy; 3) geochronology; 4) fossil vertebrates; 5) fossil
plants; and 6) fossil invertebrates. Using&lt;br/&gt;this approach, we are
designing a plan to: 1) excavate the remaining fossil resources from the dam
site in&lt;br/&gt;May-June, 2011, before the site is buried by planned dam
construction in July-September; 2) implement a&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive
scientific research plan to study and understand this site; 3) preserve and
conserve the&lt;br/&gt;fossils from the site; and 4) to use the results of this
discovery provide world-class educational&lt;br/&gt;opportunities to local,
regional, national, and international audiences. DMNS is planning
an&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive media and documentary plan for the 2011 excavation
and DMNS educators will return to&lt;br/&gt;the Roaring Fork Valley in Spring
2011 to provide free education programs for K-12 students in all of
the&lt;br/&gt;Roaring Fork Valley schools, including in-school assembly
programs, distance learning programs, teacher&lt;br/&gt;professional development
programs, and early childhood education resources available
on&lt;br/&gt;www.dmns.org. This grant will partially fund the fieldwork portion
of 2011 activities.