* 1125971
* RAPID:  Physical Behavior of Precipitation Extremes in CMIP5 GCMs and Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* William Gutowski, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2013
* USD 29,472.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines extreme
precipitation events in present-day climate simulations prepared for the AR5.
The central question motivating the project is this: to what extent do extreme
events simulated by the models result from physical behavior that occurs when
extreme events actually happen? This question is addressed through two main
activities: 1) extracting extreme daily precipitation events for select,
climatologically homogeneous regions in simulations and observations, and 2)
evaluating the behavior of the events as depicted in circulation, temperature,
humidity and water/energy flux fields on the days leading up to the extreme
event. The statistical analysis tool known as Self-organizing maps (SOMs) is
used to extract the spatial patterns and evolution of the synoptic conditions
that accompany extreme precipitation events in both simulations and
observations, so that the two can be compared for consistency. The region of
focus for the project is North America, where observations are dense enough to
allow in-depth physical comparison. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide
information on climate change and its consequences to decision makers worldwide.
The climate models evaluated in this study will be used for assessing projected
changes in extreme precipitation events due to global warming, and this analysis
is important for determining the level of confidence we can have in model
projections of future changes in extremes.