* 1125783
* BRIGE: Exploration of Chemo-Muscle Actuation in Active Above-Knee Prostheses
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Xiangrong Shen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2014
* USD 175,000.00

PI: Shen, Xiangrong&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1125783&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research in this BRIGE proposal explores Chemo-Muscle actuation as a novel
actuation approach for energetically-active above-knee (AK) prostheses. With the
high performance provided by this novel actuation approach, the resulting active
AK prosthesis is expected to generate sufficient power output to restore the
locomotive functions in energetically-demanding modes (such as upslope walking
and stair climbing). This research will lay a solid foundation for the PI's
long-term research goal of creating a practical powered-knee-and-ankle AK
prosthesis with comparable functionality, weight, and size as biological lower
limbs. &lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the research in robotic prosthetics, the PI will
also create a series of educational activities with the common theme of "Helping
Disabled Persons with Robotics!" These activities will develop a basis for the
PI's educational goal of broadening the participation in engineering research
and education among an increasingly diverse student population, leveraging the
biomedical robotics as an innovative educational
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;In the area of AK
prosthetics, the majority of state-of-the-art devices are energetically passive.
The inability to deliver joint power significantly impairs their ability of
restoring lost limb functions. To overcome this limitation, a novel Chemo-Muscle
actuation approach will be introduced. This actuation system enables high power
output and long duration of operation within a compact package. Two key elements
are incorporated, including: (1) a high-energy-density supply, achieved through
a special type of liquid fuel, namely monopropellant (e.g. hydrogen peroxide),
which decomposes instantaneously upon the contact with certain catalytic
materials and generates a large volume of gaseous mixture for pneumatic
actuation; and (2) a high-power-density actuator, namely pneumatic artificial
muscle, which emulates the functioning mechanism of biological muscles and
provides a large power output with a light-weight flexible structure. While
providing high actuation performance, Chemo-Muscle also provides adequate safety
and endurance features for prosthetic use, leveraging the inherently safe nature
of monopropellant in combination with proper design measures. &lt;br/&gt;To
explore the application of Chemo-Muscle actuation in active AK prostheses, the
proposed two-year plan is expected to achieve three objectives, including: (1)
Collect user inputs and create a design guideline for powered AK prostheses; (2)
Establish a flexible and compact actuation structure for Chemo-Muscle actuated
AK prostheses, and develop a tethered prosthesis prototype (with powered knee
and ankle joints) for performance evaluation; (3) Develop a robust control
algorithm to generate a smooth and natural walking
gait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there are more
than 357,000 above-knee amputees in the U.S., and this number is expected to
double by 2050. The proposed research has the potential to benefit society by
significantly enhancing these amputees' mobility and improving their life
quality. Furthermore, leveraging the interactive nature of biomedical robotics,
the PI will create a series of educational activities with the common theme of
"Helping Disabled Persons with Robotics!" (1) Recruiting, retaining and
mentoring disabled students for robotic prosthetics research, with the notion of
"Disability-related research conducted by disabled persons for disabled
persons." (2) Recruiting graduate student researchers from underrepresented
groups through a variety of routes. (3) Integrating undergraduate research with
the development of a robotic arm exhibit for a science museum. (4) Developing a
new graduate-level course "Biomedical Robotics." (5) Promoting science and
engineering in middle/high schools with robotic activities, with the emphasis on
the African American students in the nearby Sumter County, one of the lowest-
income school districts in the nation with 99% African American enrollment.