* 1125897
* Physics Frontier Center at the Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics:  Pushing Cosmology to the Edge
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2020
* Michael Turner, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* James Shank
* 02/29/2020
* USD 22,396,929.00

Cosmology and particle physics stand at a crossroads. In recent years,
scientists have put together a remarkably successful model of cosmic evolution
and the extraordinarily well tested Standard Model of elementary particles. In
the current cosmological model, a rapid burst of expansion - inflation -
occurred a tiny fraction of a second after the Big Bang, laying the seeds for
the formation of structure in the Universe. Those seeds have been observed as
hot and cold regions in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation. The
assembly of galaxies from those seeds and the vast web of large-scale structure
seen in galaxy surveys was shaped by dark matter, which dominates the mass in
galaxies and clusters of galaxies. Finally, the evidence that the cosmic
expansion is now accelerating has become incontrovertible, pointing to a
Universe dominated by dark energy or else to a modification of Einstein's theory
of General Relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of the current cosmology
rests upon its three mysterious pillars - inflation, particle dark matter, and
dark energy - mysterious because they lie outside the Standard Model of particle
physics. Cosmology has shown that the Standard Model is incomplete, and that
there is new physics waiting to be discovered. In the coming decade, cosmology
can help reveal the new physics underlying inflation, dark matter, and cosmic
acceleration, and thereby play a critical role in pointing the way to a new
paradigm for fundamental physics. The Physics Frontier Center at the Kavli
Institute for Cosmological Physics (KICP) will bring together astronomers and
physicists, theorists, observers and experimentalists, and early-career
scientists and senior researchers from across the cosmology community. Since the
complexity of these problems requires multiple, complementary approaches, the
Center will enable datasets from different experiments to be combined in
powerful new ways. As new discoveries are made, the Center will pursue new
directions to promptly follow them up. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon the
accomplishments, investments, and lessons learned over the past ten years of PFC
funding, the Center focuses upon reaping the science from the projects that were
initiated and developed at the KICP - South Pole Telescope (SPT), Dark Energy
Survey (DES), Q/U Imaging Experiment (QUIET), and Chicagoland Observatory for
Underground Particle Physics (COUPP) - and elsewhere to help solve these big
mysteries. Built around the projects, the Center includes eight Major Activities
(MAs), five research Hubs, an international Fellows exchange program, yearly
hands-on summer schools, and multiple Education &amp; Outreach partnerships.
Twenty-one key collaborators have committed to carrying out specific tasks
central to the Center. They come from local institutions, education and outreach
partners, institutions around the country, and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three science MAs are devoted to our research themes: the
Inflation MA will take advantage of dramatic advances in measuring CMB
polarization to pursue the "Bmode" polarization signature of inflation-produced
gravity waves, focusing initially on QUIET and SPTpol while laying the
groundwork for future experiments. It will also combine CMB and large-scale
structure measurements from DES to test whether the underlying density
perturbations are Gaussian, as predicted by the simplest models of inflation.
The Dark Energy MA will use the Dark Energy Survey (DES) and South Pole
Telescope (SPT) and other future projects to probe the physical origin of cosmic
acceleration and test the current paradigm - vacuum energy within Einstein's
theory of gravity. The Dark Matter MA will synthesize the upcoming wealth of
data from particle colliders, satellites, and ultra-sensitive dark matter
detectors to confirm or refute the weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP)
hypothesis for dark matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the three science MAs,
five research "Hubs" will bring people and projects together to focus on
specific challenges. The CMB Polarization Hub will facilitate coordination
between different polarization experiments, including joint analysis; the non-
Gaussianity Hub will bring together international researchers to constrain or
detect non-Gaussianity and test inflation. The Joint Analysis Hub will bring
together researchers on SPT and DES and other projects to develop and apply new
tools to exploit and optimize galaxy clusters as probes of dark energy; the
Supernova Hub will carry out a broad program to improve supernovae as
cosmological distance indicators and apply these techniques to new surveys. The
Dark Matter Hub will focus on particle theory and model building and signals for
dark matter from colliders and indirect detection experiments, complementing the
direct detection experiment COUPP and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellows
MA is the centerpiece activity of the Center. Mentored by the faculty of the
Center but given great independence, eleven early-career scientists will be able
to shape research programs of their own design, work with faculty, other
Fellows, students, and visitors in the interdisciplinary environment of the
Center. They can also participate in an international Fellows exchange program
and choose from a broad range of opportunities in education and outreach. All of
this is designed to prepare them to be future leaders in
cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two MAs are devoted to crosscutting, science-
enabling activities. Detector Development, strongly leveraged by partnerships
with Argonne, Fermilab, and other institutions, will develop innovative
detectors to position us to take advantage of early discoveries and to broadly
benefit cosmology and other areas of science. Computational Cosmology will
coordinate the high-performance computing resources, both human and hardware,
necessary to accomplish our science goals. The Conferences, Workshops, and
Visitors MA will provide a program of specialized workshops, large symposia,
yearly hands-on summer schools, and a visitors program featuring the David
Schramm Distinguished Visiting Professorship to engage and benefit the broader
cosmology community and further our science goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
design, the broader impacts of the PFC are woven throughout the Center
activities. More specifically, the Education, Outreach, &amp; Diversity MA, will
spearhead and coordinate a series of activities aimed at broadening the impact
of the Center. This MA is strongly coupled to the science in the Center,
involves 100% of the PFC faculty members, and has three overarching goals:
increasing the diversity of the STEM workforce through programs from K-12 to the
professoriate; educating and preparing the next generation of teacher-scholars
in an interdisciplinary environment by involving students and Fellows directly
in outreach and teaching activities; and advancing the public's understanding
and appreciation of science through collaborations with museums and
planetariums, and through public lectures and events. This approach to
broadening participation includes collaboration with Project Exploration working
with the Chicago Public Schools, continuation of the successful Space Explorers
K-12 program, partnering with the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge program
and the University of Texas El Paso to bring students to UChicago for research
experiences, supporting and mentoring undergraduate and graduate students, and
championing diversity in faculty hiring and retention within the Physical
Sciences Division at UChicago. The Center will also use technology, developing
visualization tools, to integrate research into the undergraduate curriculum and
will partner with the Adler Planetarium on cosmology visualizations for a
broader audience. Finally, the Conferences, Workshops, and Visitors MA will
promote dissemination of cutting-edge research to the broader cosmology
community and offer opportunities for those not currently engaged in cosmology
research to transition into the field.