* 1125998
* MRI: Development of an Electron-Beam based Instrument to Study Nanoscale Processes in Liquids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Douglas Strachan, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,261,069.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) development effort seeks to design,
construct, and validate an electron-beam based system that can both induce and
study nanoscale chemical and physical processes in bulk liquids. In addition to
performing electron-microscopy in liquids, the proposed instrument will enable
electron-beam based fabrication using liquid reactants while allowing one to
spectroscopically analyze the corresponding chemical reactions and fabricated
nanostructures. Moreover, the system will enable the study of both nanoscale
fluid transport and nanoscale functional materials in operational environments
with the added capability to modify those environments using electron-beam
induced processes. The nanoscale fabrication capabilities are based on a novel
technique in which a focused electron beam deposits or etches materials by
inducing localized chemical reactions in liquids. Many of the enabled research
efforts are only possible because of the high resolution and purity of these
new, liquid-phase processes. The new instrument will also advance understanding
in the wide ranging fields of nanoscale photonics (plasmonics and quantum dots),
electronics (graphene and semiconductor nanostructures), magnetics (spin-based
devices and patterned magnetic structures), fluidics (in situ electrokinetics),
and energy storage (in situ studies of battery electrodes). In addition, it
brings a new perspective and capability to radiation chemistry by providing a
means to studying radiochemical reactions in nanoscale volumes and at solid-
liquid interfaces. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a new
approach and a new instrument for studying nanoscale processes in liquids will
accelerate the scientific and engineering community's efforts to bring
nanotechnology to bear on pressing societal problems. Specific research projects
enabled by this instrument target medical diagnosis, environmental monitoring,
energy production and storage, and materials and devices for information
technology. The instrument promises new ways to prototype devices for use in
these fields while enabling fundamental discoveries in the underlying
disciplines of electrical, mechanical, chemical, materials, and manufacturing
engineering, radiation chemistry, and condensed matter physics. The project also
interfaces with a variety of educational and outreach efforts impacting students
from high school through graduate school, and will contribute to a well trained
workforce that is prepared to address highly interdisciplinary problems.