* 1125625
* Conference: 18th Annual Southeastern Regional Yeast Meeting; Mississippi State University
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Marta Piva, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2012
* USD 4,800.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award supports undergraduate and
graduate student attendance and participation in the 18th Annual Southeastern
Regional Yeast Meeting (SERYM) to be held on the campus of Mississippi State
University from March 11-13, 2011. This annual meeting provides a unique
opportunity for yeast researchers from states in the southeastern region of the
U.S. to come together to share their preliminary research findings and discuss
new research tools and emerging technologies. NSF support will be used to cover
the travel expenses of student participants in an effort to increase the number
of undergraduate and graduate students attending the meeting. Particular
emphasis will be placed on strengthening the participation of individuals
underrepresented in the sciences through the recruitment of both women and
minorities. This meeting, which is expected to attract between 100 and 125
participants, is an ideal venue for the inclusion of student presentations with
the ultimate goal of facilitating interactions and discussions between students
and senior scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The 2011 SERYM conference brings together scientists
studying basic biological processes in fungi by providing a forum for the
exchange of research results, ideas and technical expertise. A key strength of
this meeting is the opportunity for both undergraduate and graduate students to
present their research in oral and poster formats. The regional nature of this
meeting provides numerous opportunities for students to discuss their research
work with leading scientists, laying the foundation for future scientific
development and collaborations. The meeting also provides the undergraduate
attendees time to discuss graduate research opportunities directly with
potential major professors prior to applying to that program. In addition, the
diversity of topics covered exposes students to the current advancements in the
field of cell and molecular biology of fungi increasing the educational impact
of attendance.