* 1125157
* Collaborative Research: Pliocene Geology, Geochronology, and Paleontology of Woranso-Mille, Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Alan Deino, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 78,538.00

The research involves multidisciplinary field and laboratory work conducted in
the Woranso-Mille study area of the Afar Depression in Ethiopia. The Woranso-
Mille paleoanthropological project is relatively new and has started gathering
significant fossil hominid specimens from a time period poorly known previously
(3.6-3.8 million years ago). This funding supports collaborative research to be
conducted by paleontologists, geologists, geochronologists, and paleoecologists
from six institutions in the United States and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists from each institution will coordinate
their efforts to understand early hominid diversity between 3.0 and 4.0 million
years ago, early Australopithecus paleobiology, taxonomy, and phylogenetic
relationships, and establish their paleoenvironments. These will be attained by
conducting detailed comparative analysis of the Woranso-Mille hominids enhanced
by the use of High-resolution x-ray computed tomography, and isotope analysis in
order to test whether morphological differences observed for the Woranso-Mille
hominids correlate to isotopic variation that are indicative of behavioral and
physiological differences. The paleontologists will further conduct faunal
collection directed towards increasing the sample size of all fossil taxa at the
site to increase biostratigraphic control, refine paleoenvironmental context of
the associated hominids, and identify additional fossiliferous localities.
Geologists of the project will establish a refined stratigraphic context for the
fossils collected from all of the designated vertebrate localities in the
northern part of the study area, establish refined stratigraphy and chronometric
ages (using 40Ar/39Ar dating and magnetostratigraphy) for the vertebrate
localities and associated fossils, and determine stratigraphic correlations
across vertebrate localities within the study area and other paleontological
sites in the region. The scientific results from this study will answer
questions related to mid-Pliocene hominid diversity, generate new data on the
paleobiology of early hominids and their paleohabitat, and increase
understanding of mid-Pliocene African vertebrate evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project focus on creating training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.