* 1125290
* CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research: Dynamical processes in interdependent techno-social networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 09/30/2017
* USD 680,000.00

The significant advances realized in recent years in the study of complex
networks are severely limited by an almost exclusive focus on the behavior of
single networks. However, most networks in the real world are not isolated but
are coupled and hence depend upon other networks, which in turn depend upon
other networks. Real networks communicate with each other and may exchange
information, or, more importantly, may rely upon one another for their proper
functioning. A simple but real example is a power station network that depends
on a computer network, and the computer network depends on the power network.
Our social networks depend on technical networks, which, in turn, are supported
by organizational networks. Surprisingly, analyzing complex systems as coupled
interdependent networks alters the most basic assumptions that network theory
has relied on for single networks. A multidisciplinary, data driven research
project will: 1) Study the microscopic processes that rule the dynamics of
interdependent networks, with a particular focus on the social component; 2)
Define new mathematical models/foundational theories for the analysis of the
robustness/resilience and contagion/diffusive dynamics of interdependent
networks. This project will afford the opportunity of greatly expanding the
understanding of realistic complex networks by joining theoretical analysis of
coupled networks with extensive analysis of appropriately chosen large-scale
databases. These databases will be made publicly available, except for special
cases where it is illegal to do so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
important implications for the understanding the social and technical systems
that make up a modern society. A recent US Scientific Congressional Report
concludes ?No currently available modeling and simulation tools exist that can
adequately address the consequences of disruptions and failures occurring
simultaneously in different critical infrastructures that are dynamically inter-
dependent.? Understanding the interdependence of networks and its effect on the
system robustness and on the structural and functional behavior is crucial for
properly modeling many real world systems and applications, from disaster
preparedness, to building effective organizations, to comprehending the
complexity of the macro economy. In addition to these intellectual objectives,
the research project includes the development of an extensive outreach program
to the public, especially K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;