* 1125515
* GENI Project Office, Phase 2
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2017
* Brig 'Chip' Elliott, Raytheon BBN Technologies Corp.
* Cooperative Agreement
* John Brassil
* 12/31/2017
* USD 16,659,812.00

The Global Environment for Network Innovations? GENI ? is a suite of research
infrastructure rapidly taking shape in prototype form across the United States.
GENI aims to transform experimental research in networking and distributed
systems, as well as emerging research into very large socio-technical systems,
by providing a suite of infrastructure for ?at scale? experiments in future
internets.

GENI supports two types of experiments: (a) controlled and repeatable
experiments, which will greatly help improve our scientific understanding of
complex, large-scale networks; and (b) ?in the wild? trials of experimental
services that ride atop or connect to today?s Internet and that engage large
numbers of human participants. GENI will provide excellent instrumentation for
both forms of experiments, as well as the requisite data archival and analysis
tools.

GENI entered its prototyping phase in mid 2007 as NSF awarded the GENI Project
Office (GPO) role to BBN Technologies. Now, after several years of community
prototyping, a number of interesting research experiments are running across the
nationwide ?meso-scale? GENI prototype, built from GENI-enabled commercial
equipment, that spans 14 US campuses and the two national research backbones
(Internet2, NLR). GENI is being built by GENI-enabling existing testbeds,
campuses, regional and backbone networks, cloud computation services, and
commercial equipment. GENI can then incorporate these networks and services by
federation, rather than constructing and operating a separate set of
infrastructure for experimental research.

This award will fund the GENI project through its completion. During this
period, the GENI Project Office will: Complete the transition from building GENI
to using GENI for research experimentation; Phase in full-time, federated GENI
operations to support this rising experimentation; Grow to an ?at scale? suite
of infrastructure in hundreds of campuses and networks, and perhaps even one or
more cities; Transition to community governance; and Wind down the GENI Project
Office.