* 1125803
* SOLAR Collaborative: Designing and Modeling Advanced Nanostructure Based Hybrid Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2014
* USD 320,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, supported by the NSF CHE-DMR-DMS
SOLAR Initiative, PIs describe their vision for new hybrid photovoltaic
materials via nanoscale integration of organic and inorganic materials to
exploit the unprecedented high extinction coefficient of conjugated polymers and
high carrier mobility of the solid-state semiconductors. This study will address
many fundamental questions pertinent to organic-inorganic hybrid solar cells
that utilize nanoscale structures. Through unique world-class expertise in
chemistry, materials, devices and mathematics, this project explores the effects
of scale and structure as it applies to interface quality, material structure,
energy transfer and electronic behavior. This work includes simultaneous study
of polymer synthesis, polymer and nanostructure material as well as geometrical
parameter optimization and spectroscopic study and device development. One of
the compelling aspects of this work is the synthesis of polymers with
complementary absorption and band offset to III-As and III-P inorganic
semiconductors supported by mathematical calculations. In parallel, an in depth
study will be conducted in the development of optimal nanostructure design for
efficient light coupling, absorption and carrier extraction. A primary focus of
this work will be on the roles of surface states, surface passivation and
electronic coupling between organic semiconductors and inorganic nanostructures
in hybrid solar cells. Intrinsic to PIs efforts will be start-of-the-art
calculations on multiple conjugated polymer chains and surface passivation
agents that will point the way toward enhancing carrier mobility and long-range
energy transfer in these materials. Synthesis of new polymer materials to
effectively pair with available III-V materials along with optimized
nanostructure design will produce a new photovoltaic device fabric.
&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This program has been designed to
include several targeted efforts to directly impact society through
multidisciplinary, multi campus collaboration. At the core of this project is
integrated research and education for students at all levels (K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, postdoctorates). Through research involvement, summer
workshops and campus exchange, this SOLAR program will generate highly skilled
researchers and scientists. Direct outcomes of this project will be shared best
practices in K-12 activities, a co-developed graduate course in solar cell
development to emphasize organic synthesis/inorganic
materials/modeling/analysis, URM student involvement in SOLAR research along
with collectively strengthened industrial collaboration. In a more general
sense, this research will provide fundamental understanding of the organic and
inorganic material interfaces as well as electrical and optical properties of
the hybrid solar cells. This study will broadly influence the basic design of
future hybrid solar cells and their efficiency limits.