* 1125591
* SOLAR Collaborative: Multiplasmonic Light Harvesting for Thin Film Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Greg Barber, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,050,000.00

This project is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry, and
Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: A team of chemists,
materials scientists, and engineers at Pennsylvania State University is joined
by a mathematician at the University of Delaware to investigate light-harvesting
thin films for solar cells that contain plasmonic nanostructures coupled to
periodic dielectrics. The project links the concepts of strong light scattering
by sub-wavelength metallic structures with the light-trapping and light-guiding
properties of photonic crystals. These structures are called multiplasmonic
because they support the propagation of multiple surface plasmon-polariton (SPP)
modes and can utilize both s- and p-polarized incident light. They offer promise
for substantially increasing the utilization of light in thin film photovoltaic
cells. This concept is explored computationally and experimentally in thin film
semiconductor and planar dielectric light-concentrating architectures. The
Rigorous Coupled Wave Approach is used to simulate and optimize light scattering
and propagation. Because these calculations are time-intensive, mathematical
research is planned to develop more efficient algorithms that will incorporate
the optical properties needed to provide physically meaningful solutions. A
fully 3-D time domain simulation tool will then be developed to enable broadband
modeling of the multiplasmonic structures. In concert with the computational
effort, the multiplasmonic concept is tested and validated in several
experimental architectures. The simplest of these is a conventional SPP
scattering layer, consisting of a metal backing film with a grid of scattering
centers on a thin film multi-junction cell containing layers of polycrystalline
or amorphous semiconductors. This structure allows the computational model to be
validated in a photovoltaic cell and is expected to quantify polarization and
multi-mode effects. Planar concentrator architectures containing periodic oxide
or polymer dielectric layers with heterogeneously integrated silicon microcells
are studied as photovoltaic modules. These designs are extended to a spectrum-
splitting module that combines dye-sensitized solar cells and multiplasmonic
silicon cells. New optical nanostructures and new patterning techniques are
developed in order to fabricate these modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: The large-scale implementation of solar photovoltaic power, a
renewable resource that has the potential to dramatically impact the global
energy economy, is limited by cost. The goal of this project is to explore a new
principle for light trapping in solar cells. This approach could enable the
design of solar cells that contain five times less silicon than conventional
cells, while delivering the same amount of power. The concept is to couple two
kinds of optical nanostructures: (1) very small metal particles, which are well
known to scatter light strongly, and (2) patterned insulators that diffract
light - the same phenomenon that gives rise to the colors of opals and butterfly
wings. Theory predicts and preliminary experiments confirm that thin films of
these combined structures are particularly good at light trapping. The challenge
is to investigate the properties of different combinations, for which more
efficient mathematical tools as well as fabrication methods must be developed,
and to demonstrate that they can be integrated into solar cells in a
manufacturable way. This project, with its multidisciplinary nature, engage
graduate students in research that bridges topics in nanomaterials synthesis and
patterning, solar cell module design, optical and electrical measurements,
modeling, and mathematical algorithm development. Undergraduate honors students
are also involved in this project at both Penn State and Delaware.