* 1125756
* THE NEURAL BASIS OF METAPHOR
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Charles Epstein, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 640,705.00

Metaphors are not just ossified expressions in grammar books. Rather, they are
living, evolving expressions that pepper our language far more heavily than one
might think. Many expressions that we take for granted are actually
metaphorical, that is, they represent one concept by referring to another. For
instance, the sentence 'He was feeling down' actually involves metaphorical
usage of the spatial word 'down.' Given their ubiquity, processes in the brain
that mediate comprehension and production of metaphors are critically important
to human language. Dr. Krishnankutty Sathian of Emory University and his
colleagues are carrying out a project to determine how metaphors are processed
by the brain. It turns out that metaphors very often represent a somewhat
abstract concept by implicitly invoking similarity to a more concrete concept
that is grounded in our sensory experiences. For example, in the sentence, 'She
had a rough day,' the word 'rough' connotes something unpleasant, similar to the
way a rough surface feels unpleasant. Much research has already established that
various sensory domains, such as color, shape, texture and spatial location, are
each processed in relatively distinct sectors of the brain (specifically, within
parts known collectively as "sensory cortex"). Dr. Sathian's project is testing
whether or not understanding metaphors involves activation of those particular
sensory cortical regions (e.g. the region specialized for processing texture in
the case of metaphorical usage of 'rough'). In order to do this, brain scans
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) are being carried out while
healthy volunteers listen to sentences containing metaphors. The brain responses
to metaphors are being contrasted with responses during presentation of
sentences of similar difficulty but lacking metaphors. How different brain
regions interact is also being examined using measures of neural connectivity.
Even if the predicted sensory cortical activity is found, it does not mean that
the activity is actually necessary for metaphor comprehension. To test the
necessity of cortical activity, another technique known as 'transcranial
magnetic' stimulation (TMS) is being used. Tiny magnetic pulses are applied to
specific brain regions to transiently disrupt their function. If TMS over
particular sensory cortical regions affects understanding of the corresponding
metaphors, then those sensory regions are truly necessary for understanding
metaphors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will enable new insights into the
basis of metaphorical thought. Especially because the use of metaphors in
language is pervasive, this research is contributing to fundamental
understanding of human cognition. This research is helping to answer the
question whether comprehending metaphors requires activity, not only in classic
language regions of the brain, but also more widely in other sensory regions.
The findings are providing evidence concerning theories (so-called 'grounded
cognition' theories), which argue that knowledge is grounded in basic sensory
and motor experiences (as first theorized by Greek philosophers like Aristotle
and Epicurus). The project is also showing how different brain regions,
specialized for different purposes, interact during high-level thinking. This
research is relevant to a variety of human activities, including literary
writing, pedagogical teaching, political speeches, and product marketing, in all
of which the best expositors typically make innovative and highly effective use
of metaphors. It is also relevant to many neurological disorders such as autism,
stroke and Alzheimer's disease, which impair communication between brain
regions, resulting in problems with figurative thinking.