* 1125423
* CDI-Type II: Acoustic Sensor Arrays for Understanding Bird Communication
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Kung Yao, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,499,673.00

CDI-Type II. Acoustic Sensor Arrays for Understanding Bird Communication

The intent of this project is to permit humans to understand the grammar and
meaning of bird songs. Recent advances in sensor arrays, computation, and
computational linguistics finally make this long-sought goal achievable. The
approach taken in this proposal is to: (1) collect very large amounts of bird
song recordings from acoustic sensor arrays in a variety of natural settings;
(2) process the data by software, some of which is recent and some of which will
be developed using new advances in localizing source with beamforming, then
filtering out noise, identifying events of interest, and then classifying them
according to species and individual, and combining that with behavioral
observations; (3) this information/knowledge will then be stored in a large
database that can be shared among the collaborating research groups; and (4) it
will be analyzed by computational-linguistic tools to identify the syntax of the
songs, and combined with information about the context in which it occurred,
then analyzed by new software methods to identify the meaning of those songs.
The project begins testing inferences from those inferences and explore
consequences for individual and community ecology.

The research will be transformational in several ways. First, it will contribute
to a profound transformation that is already underway: the recognition of very
sophisticated signaling strategies and syntactic structures in non-human
species. The new tools and methods for collecting and analyzing bird song now
allow a level of observation that previously would not have been possible.
Scientists are now collecting truly vast amounts of data from previously
inaccessible settings and subjecting data to previously undiscovered
sophisticated structural analyses. It will be transformational to computational
linguistics if the natural world beyond humans were shown to have languages that
are radically different from our own (as seems quite likely). In addition, the
project will radically expand the range of engineering with voice recognition
and classification, which so far has been restricted almost exclusively to
humans.

Other contributions will come from the database that will comprise huge amounts
of data pertaining to bird songs and the environmental/behavioral context in
which it occurs. Offering both thematic and outreach contributions, the project
will bring together people from engineering, ecology, linguistics and art -- and
from the US, Mexico and Japan. The educational part will bring together
underserved K6-12 students with the research community and will involve them
with well-established educational programs in engineering, biology and art |
science. While the science portion of this project is high-payoff --- high-risk,
the outreach portion will certainly be effective at furthering appreciation and
learning of science.