* 1125165
*  Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: VolcanoSRI: 4D Volcano Tomography in a Large-Scale Sensor Network
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* WenZhan Song, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2016
* USD 805,819.00

This project will create a new paradigm, VolcanoSRI (Volcano Seismic Realtime
Imaging), for imaging 4D (four-dimensional) tomography of an active volcano in
real-time. VolcanoSRI is a large-scale sensor network of low-cost geophysical
stations that analyzes seismic signals and computes real-time, full-scale,
three-dimensional fluid dynamics of the volcano conduit system within the active
network. The computed 4D tomography model will illuminate complex, time-varying
dynamics of an erupting volcano, providing a deeper scientific understanding of
volcanic processes, as well as a basis for rapid detection of volcanic hazards.
VolcanoSRI will potentially make the fictional holographic projector known as
Virgil in the film "Supervolcano" a reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realizing the
VolcanoSRI system requires a transformative study on the science of complex
volcano systems and the design of large-scale sensor networks. Our approach
integrates innovations on distributed tomographic algorithms, collaborative
signal processing, and situation-aware networking technology for large-scale
real-time sensor systems. The distributed tomography algorithm disperses the
computational burden to the sensor nodes and performs real-time tomographic
inversion within the network. Such an approach has never been attempted before
and represents a major achievement for both earth and computer science. The team
is composed of computer and earth scientists including early pioneers of
wireless sensor networks as applied to volcano monitoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VolcanoSRI holds vast potential for real-time risk
monitoring and development of early-warning systems for volcanoes and other
earth hazards. The new approach taken in VolcanoSRI is general, and can be
implemented as a new network paradigm for other sensor-network applications,
including oil-field exploration and structural and biomedical-health monitoring.
The educational activities of this project include enhancing undergraduate and
graduate curriculum and research programs at the three collaborating
universities. Through this project, we plan to broaden access to these course
materials by providing the course lectures, all readings, and assignments online
to the public. This project provides many opportunities for collaborations of
students across earth and computer science, increasing involvement of women and
minorities, at the three collaborating universities.