* 1125844
* JILA PFC: Bridging theGap from Few-Body to Many-Body through Quantum Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2018
* Deborah Jin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 20,045,000.00

The primary theme of the JILA PFC is to address the challenge of bridging the
gap from few-body physics to many-body physics through quantum control. The
central scientific objective is to extend the remarkable level of control and
understanding that physicists have for few-body systems to many-body quantum
systems. Quantum systems made up of many particles and their interactions play
an essential role in much of physics, including condensed matter physics,
material physics, nuclear physics, high-energy particle physics, astrophysics,
biophysics, and chemical physics. The JILA PFC will focus upon the challenge of
controlling and understanding multi-particle quantum systems using the tools and
ideas of atomic, molecular, and optical (AMO) physics, which, ironically, is a
field of physics for which many-body physics has not traditionally been
emphasized. AMO physics is in the midst of a revolution, evidenced, for example,
by the remarkable accomplishments in recent years of experiments on ultracold
gases, ultrafast laser technology, and ultraprecise spectroscopy. This
revolution affords a new approach for confronting the behavior of complex multi-
particle systems using control at the quantum level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the period 2011- 2016, the JILA PFC investigators will apply the tools of modern
AMO physics to tackle the challenge of bridging the gap from few-body to many-
body quantum physics from both sides, using cutting-edge techniques to study
few-body problems beyond current understanding and many-particle ensembles in
regimes beyond the limits of a mean-field description. Specific questions to be
addressed are (1) What new insights can one bring to quantum many-body physics
using ultracold atom and molecule gases as model systems? (2) Can one extend
AMO's measurement and control techniques to create new types of many-body
systems using coherent light-matter coupling? (3) Can one understand and
address, in the few- to many-body problem, the physics of molecule formation
and, more generally, chemical reactions by applying cutting-edge technologies to
control and probe simple molecular systems? (4) What are potential high impact
research directions that are closely tied to this work? The research will take
place at JILA, a multidisciplinary research institute located on the University
of Colorado campus in Boulder, and builds upon the extensive results achieved
under the present PFC funding. Significant results in nanokelvin molecular
physics, in non-classical behavior of nano-oscillators and microwave fields, and
in various probes of solid and liquid dynamics across timescales that span
twelve orders of magnitude, all set the stage for rapid future progress in four
major activities:.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major Activity 1: Building complex
matter from the ground up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work in this area will explore
the rich phenomena arising in novel quantum many-body systems that are assembled
from ultracold atoms and molecules. This major activity, which has strong
connections to condensed matter physics, will include research in dipolar
molecular quantum gases and strongly interacting atomic quantum gases. Specific
research goals include exploring the boundary between gaseous and liquid
behavior in gases of strongly interacting particles, and realizing novel states
of quantum matter using the long-range and anisotropic interactions between
ultracold polar molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major Activity 2: Engineering
quantum many-body systems using light-matter coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
activity will extend quantum control to increasingly complex systems by
exploiting coherent light matter interactions. Projects will explore collective
light emission from cold atoms, the quantum motion of nano-mechanical
oscillators, and light-induced coherence in material systems. An example project
is an ambitious effort to map non-classical photon states in the microwave onto
corresponding states in optical modes and vice versa, using a nanomechanical
"diving board" as the coupling medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major Activity 3:
Confronting molecular transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the most basic
level, reactions proceed via the interaction between electrons and the coupling
between electronic and nuclear motion. JILA PFC investigators will explore the
physics of reactions at this fundamental level, with the goal of understanding,
and learning to control, energy flow in small systems such as triatomic and
tetratomic molecules. They will focus on three projects: studying cold and
ultracold reactive molecular scattering, probing time-resolved nuclear and
electronic dynamics, and developing coherent UV to IR molecular
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major Activity 4: Exploring high impact
synergistic research directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential aspect of
JILA's center philosophy is that one should be alert to opportunities to
"export" interesting ideas and technologies to activities outside the central
focus of the center, and to import these as well. JILA will explore a few of
these opportunities, investing a small fraction of center resources in
facilitating this trade in ideas and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
activities share a common focus, and therefore have substantial intellectual and
scientific overlap, and, if, anything, still stronger technological overlap.
Prior experience has shown that the extraordinarily challenging goals envisioned
for the JILA PFC are best tackled with fluid collaborations that can draw on a
range of capabilities, such as laser frequency combs, ultracold atoms, advanced
VUV sources, quantum and ultrafast optics, the sensitive detection methods of
chemical physics, and theoretical methods, both computational and analytic. This
diversity of expertise cannot readily be synthesized in an individual
investigator's group. In addition, the JILA PFC relies on and continuously
upgrades a shared technical infrastructure including a world-class machine shop,
as well as electronics and computational support, and engages in a collective
program of education and outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The JILA program
will have many different broader impacts. It will enhance the nation's technical
infrastructure by developing many new laser-based tools and techniques, and by
producing many graduates who are highly trained not only in AMO physics but also
in technical communication and teaching skills. It will connect with the science
community around the world and foster field-wide frontier research through
organization and hosting of topical workshops, through a short-term and long-
term JILA visitor program, as well as through the many undergraduate students,
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers who participate in the
collaborative and interdisciplinary research at JILA. As discussed above, the
proposed work connects to many different areas of physics, including applied
areas such as materials physics, biophysics, and nanotechnology. Extending
understanding and quantum control from few- to many-body systems will certainly
impact many applications, such as photosynthesis, design of catalytic materials,
and new techniques in renewable energy. The proposed program will also attract
more students into science, particularly from under-represented groups, through
a vigorous undergraduate research program and a predominantly minority-serving
middle-school after-school enrichment program. It will contribute to general
science interest and literacy through a variety of programs that include the
very popular "Wizards" show for school children, the University of Colorado
Saturday Physics public talks, and suitably trained graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers who present science topics to Colorado middle-school
and high-school students. It will also research, develop, and broadly
disseminate better ways to teach AMO science to all students, better ways to
teach AMO science to all students, particularly through on-line interactive
simulation.