* 1125261
* RAPID: Prediction and Predictability for the Multi-decadal Variability in a Changing Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Peter Webster, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2012
* USD 29,962.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.

Research conducted in this project examines decade-to-decade natural variability
in the ensemble of simulations of 20th century climate prepared for the AR5. Key
questions addressed are 1) What portion of the observed global warming can be
explained by natural decadal variability? In particular, to what extent was the
mid-20th century warming anthropogenically induced or the result of natural
variability? 2) How are decadal oscillations interlinked and how do they
modulate extreme climate events such as heat waves and drought, floods and
tropical cyclones? 3) How well do the models simulate the decadal variability of
late 19th-20th century? One reason these questions are important is that the
20th century record of global-mean temperature contains prominent decadal
fluctuations, and the extent to which these occurred as the result of natural
variability rather than anthropogenic activity (changes in aerosol forcing, for
instance) is not known. Natural decadal fluctuations will continue to be
superimposed on anthropogenic warming, and the extent to which these
fluctuations are predictable is an important question for understanding and
predicting both changes in mean climate and changes in the risk of extreme
climate events. Decadal climate variability patterns will be derived from
climate model output and related to extreme climate risk using statistical
methods, and the potential predictability of the fluctuations will be assessed
through calculation of signal-to-noise ratios, composite and regression
analyses, and other statistical methods.

The broader impact of the project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is
intended to provide information on climate change and its consequences to
decision makers worldwide. Decadal climate variability affects people all over
the world, and a better understanding of decadal variability would thus be of
great societal benefit.