* 1125585
* BRIGE:  Functionalized electrospun membrane development and characterization for water disinfection
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Caryn Heldt, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2014
* USD 174,175.00

PI: Heldt&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1125585&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The World Health Organization estimates that 1.7 million people
die each year due to infectious diarrhea that is transmitted through the
drinking water supply, demonstrating the need for improved disinfection
technologies. The long-term goal is to create inexpensive, functionalized
membranes that will remove viruses and bacteria by adsorption onto large pore
size membranes to allow high water fluxes. The large pore size membranes will
decrease membrane fouling and transmembrane pressure. As a first step to
attaining this long-term goal, the objective of this NSF-BRIGE grant is to
create peptide-functionalized electrospun membranes and quantify their flux,
transport properties, and virus removal capacity. This is based on the
hypothesis that peptide-functionalized electrospun membranes will adsorb virus
particles and retain them during filtration without the need of a purely size-
based separation. This hypothesis is supported by (i) the desirable properties
of electrospun chitosan membranes, and (ii) experimental evidence obtained by
the PI that small peptides capture and remove viruses from solution. The
substantial increase in mechanistic understanding of virus removal created
during this grant period will allow the PI to undertake exploratory research in
her newly developed laboratory and foster new collaborations. The specific goals
to be accomplished that test the hypothesis are: Goal 1: Analyze and model the
virus capture of electrospun chitosan membranes and Goal 2: Enhance virus
capture with addition of small virus-binding peptides. The proposed research is
innovative and novel because it analyzes and models unique virus removal
membranes for water disinfection by adsorbing virus with multifunctional
peptides instead of removing the virus purely by size exclusion. This will
increase the water flux, decrease the transmembrane pressure, and decrease
membrane fouling. In addition, the ability to add functionality to the membrane
surface allows other functionality to be added in the future to increase the
disinfection capacity, including antimicrobial peptides. The expected outcomes
of this research are to analyze and compare the adsorption and flow properties
of electrospun chitosan membranes (Goal 1) and peptide-functionalized membranes
(Goal 2). This will produce membranes that reduce the viral load of PPV (a model
virus) in drinking water by greater than 99.99%, an EPA regulated virus
reduction minimum. Development and characterization of this novel membrane will
be a substantial step toward the long-term goal of creating a portable, high
flux, and sustainable water disinfection process. This proposed research is
expected to bring in-depth knowledge of (i) the mechanism of small peptide
affinity adsorption of viruses, (ii) the flow properties of electrospun
membranes, and (iii) the stability of electrospun chitosan membranes as
filtration media while (iv) educating young engineers to tackle global problems
with innovative and multidisciplinary approaches. This membrane development and
characterization is significant because it will lead to new water purification
technologies that will save lives in underdeveloped countries as well as here in
the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities
in this grant will strengthen the research, education, and outreach at Michigan
Tech, the local Great Lakes region, and throughout the underdeveloped world.
Clean water is a natural resource that we must manage properly so that it will
be available for generations to come. This proposal will bring new insight into
environmentally friendly and low energy water purification systems that can be
used in underdeveloped nations, municipal water treatment and rural communities
that could save millions of lives. The included education and outreach plan will
introduce students from primary education up to graduate students to the STEM
fields and the need to produce clean water for the poorest people in this world.
Participation in SYP, MiCUP, and the Western U.P. Science Fair will attract
underrepresented and economically disadvantaged groups and bring them to
Michigan Tech to experience handson science and engineering programs and
encourage them to pursue a career in a STEM fields.