* 1125386
* Tracing Processes of Genome Evolution Using Plantaginaceae
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Mower, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2016
* USD 594,190.00

Intellectual merit: There is extraordinary genomic diversity across all domains
of life, yet little is understood about the evolutionary processes that shape
genome structure and function. The mitochondrial genomes of plants are
remarkable among eukaryotes: they are extremely large and highly recombinogenic,
their nucleotide sequences evolve very slowly, their genes are intron-rich and
occasionally undergo horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and their transcripts
experience numerous modifications due to RNA editing. In contrast to most
plants, the mitochondrial genomes from species in genus Plantago
(Plantaginaceae; Lamiales) exhibit drastic deviations in structure and content
including highly elevated substitution rates, unprecedented reductions in intron
and RNA editing content, and increased susceptibility to HGT. These events have
occurred within the last few million years, providing a rare opportunity to
trace their evolution and to evaluate their effects on genome structure and
function over a short evolutionary timescale. A comparative genomics study will
be performed within the Plantaginaceae, and in comparison to other plants, to
reveal the full diversity in substitution rates, intron content, edit site
content, and HGT across the family. This project will provide greater
understanding of the causes and consequences of the unusual evolutionary trends
in Plantago mitochondria, and these results should provide significant insight
into the evolution of genome structure and content in all living
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The PI is committed to training
scientists of all backgrounds and skill levels including women, minorities, and
rural students from the high school to the postgraduate level. This project will
involve high school students, who will participate through a summer research
experience. In addition, research training will be provided for undergraduates,
a graduate student, and a postdoctoral researcher. A foreign student exchange
program will provide opportunities for US students to do international field
work and for international students to visit the PI's lab to learn molecular
techniques. Results of the project will be widely disseminated through journal
publications, in presentations at national and international conferences, and as
part of a series of public presentations at the University of Nebraska State
Museum.