* 1125412
* CDI-Type II: Optimization of Engineered Tissue Growth by Active Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Ali Cinar, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,339,229.00

Tissue engineering has shown promise for providing alternatives to traditional
surgical methods for reconstruction of damaged or resected tissues, but a number
of fundamental issues remain before tissue engineering achieves routine clinical
application. The study and design of engineered tissue necessitates the
investigation of integrated tissue growth and neovascularization within a
biopolymer scaffold. This system illustrates the complexity of natural and
engineered systems critical to the survival of living species. The tissue
engineering system must be studied in its entirety in order to assess its
resiliency and fragility to external environmental changes and internal
variations in the decision functions of its elements, to analyze and predict its
growth, self-organization and sustainability, and to forecast the emergence of
new behavior in its upper levels of hierarchical organization based on the
decisions/behavior of its elements. While several individual aspects of tissue
engineering have been studied rigorously and detailed models have been developed
for these individual components, agent-based modeling provides an integrated
framework for studying the interactions among these individual parts that
typically invoke a response more complicated than the sum of the individual
parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed multidisciplinary research
is to integrate experimental and computational studies in an evolutionary active
learning framework to optimize engineered tissue growth. Simulations will be run
in parallel with experiments to enable adjustments of experimental conditions
for improving the growth process based on model predictions of final tissue
properties. Three synergistic research activities are integrated. The first is
to develop an active learning framework to coordinate the collection and
interpretation of experimental and simulation results, refine simulation
studies, develop a feedback loop between simulations and experiments, and enable
modification of the conditions of ongoing experiments to optimize functional
tissue growth. The second is to develop an open-source stochastic multiscale
heterogeneous agent-based modeling framework in Java and Repast for modeling
tissue growth and develop tissue engineering strategies based on agent-based
model predictions. The third is to conduct experimental studies guided by active
learning for engineering vascularized bone. The outcome will be a learning-
decision-execution environment for integrated computational and experimental
research to develop tissue engineering systems studied in their entirety by
considering the interdependencies of vascular and tissue growth while tracking
variations in individual cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformational
research in this project is the development of an iterative "modeling-
simulation-experiment" cycle guided by active learning (AL) to optimize
engineered tissue properties by making adjustments both prior to and during
tissue growth. One goal of this project is to develop an open-source agent-based
modeling (ABM) environment to use agent-based models and experimental data for
the development of tissue engineering strategies that can be rapidly screened by
simulations to guide experimental work, with a particular emphasis on tissue
engineered bone. The second goal is to develop an evolutionary AL framework and
batch process supervision and control strategies for conducting realistic
simulations and prediction of complex adaptive systems for engineering
vascularized tissue. In vitro and in vivo (animal studies) engineered tissue
formation will be modeled, with a particular emphasis on tissue engineering
vascularized bone. Research results will contribute to the knowledge base in
simulation-based engineering science and computational thinking, and in
modeling, simulation and control of complex biomedical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This iterative comprehensive "modeling-simulation-
analysis-experimental validation" approach will provide ultimately a powerful
method for healthcare providers to design better strategies for tissue
regeneration and engineering. The proposed activity also contributes to
promoting education and training in modeling of complex dynamic stochastic
systems, hierarchical agent-based models, and tissue engineering for students at
multiple levels, including K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students. The
techniques for model development and assessment of the effects of stochastic
variations can be used in complex adaptive systems in many fields central to
national and global concerns - energy distribution systems, ecosystems,
epidemics, and supply chains. Vascularized tissue growth presents an ideal
testbed for computer science research in active learning of complex living
systems. It also provides valuable material for STEM education at secondary and
college levels. Modeling activities appropriate for middle, secondary, and
collegiate students will not only introduce students to simulations that can be
used to understand and contribute to solutions of complex problems, but will
also contribute to the process of developing understanding of the nature of
models and abilities to generate models. Further, the agent-based modeling and
active learning that are core to this proposal will provide the need to go
beyond the learning of equations that govern physical systems to adapting,
revising and combining models for the purpose of addressing the functionality,
precision and granularity needs for their intended use.