* 1125696
* BRIGE: Engineering the Mechanisms Controlling Durability of High Temperature Ceramic Coatings for Energy Efficiency
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Seetha Raghavan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 07/31/2014
* USD 180,936.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering (BRIGE)
award provides support to meet goals to control and enhance the durability of
high temperature ceramic coating systems or thermal barrier coatings for
advanced turbine technology. Advances in high efficiency power generation
systems that produce lower emissions must be accompanied by enhanced durability
of these coatings to higher turbine temperatures and fuel impurities. This will
be achieved through in-depth studies on degradation mechanisms from thermo-
mechanical and contaminant environments, leading to the development of
mitigation solutions. Recent advances integrating high-resolution synchrotron
X-ray diffraction and piezospectroscopic techniques in situ with operational
environments will be utilized to study the evolution of strain within the
multilayered high temperature ceramic coatings. Selected mitigation solutions,
with a focus on overlay coatings to prevent contaminant infiltration, will be
explored to assess effects on the strain compliance of the multi-layer coating
system. The outcome of the novel studies will unravel the immediate and long-
term effects of thermo-mechanical environment and contaminants on the coating
compliance and life. Results will enable mitigation through material and process
modifications, to achieve durability and reliability of these coatings for
energy applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the proposed work
is in the potential for enabling a new class of ceramic coatings applicable to
the clean and efficient operation of turbines with alternative fuels. Through
the advancement of high temperature coatings to meet these operating
environments, the research has far reaching societal benefits in achieving
reliability and energy efficiency goals for the next generation turbine
technology. Research goals will be integrated with efforts aimed at broadening
participation and encouraging early interest in engineering research through
unique research experiences at a synchrotron facility as well as
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;