* 1125485
* Behavioral Mechanism Design
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Jeffrey Ely, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 217,828.00

This award funds research in economic theory that develops methods for
incorporating behavioral ideas about individual preferences into formal
mechanism design models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanism design is a formal
framework for analyzing the design and operation of social and economic
institutions. It is a central tool in microeconomic theory applied in contexts
as varied as organizational design, personnel management, auctions, matching
markets etc. A cornerstone of mechanism design theory is the analysis of
incentives and how institutions are designed to manage
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Behavioral economics has identified a number of
important deviations from standard theories of individual behavior and
researchers have begun to revisit mechanism design problems in their presence. A
theoretical hurdle exists because many of these theories give rise to
preferences under which the standard tools for characterizing the constraints
imposed by incentives no longer apply. In this project the PI is investigating a
generalization of the classical revenue equivalence property and accompanying
analytical techniques. Applying these techniques allows the PI and future
researchers to study how behavioral assumptions alter the normative and positive
theories of institution design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; An important behavioral
finding is loss aversion. Losses relative to a reference level of consumption
are amplified by comparison to gains. This is a finding that is documented at
the level of individual behavior and the next step for research is to understand
its impact on markets. In this project the PI reformulates a classical problem
of monopoly price discrimination to investigate how a seller leverages a buyers'
loss aversion in order to increase profits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
methodology developed here can also be applied to develop new insights into the
design of auctions, insurance, and other contracts. Finally, a related
behavioral phenomenon, inequality aversion, lends itself to a similar analysis.
Conflict resolution, contract settlement, and other bargaining protocols can be
analyzed from mechanism design standpoint when the affected agents have
preferences that respond to inequality.