* 1125927
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope to Enhance Undergraduate Research Training in the Natural Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Victor Townsend, Virginia Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 242,502.00

This Major Research Instrumentation grant supports the acquisition of a
variable-pressure scanning electron microscope (SEM), an effective, modern
research tool that provides high quality imaging of surface features of
specimens that are too small to be observed with the unaided eye or a
traditional light microscope. This SEM also contains a microanalysis system
which when used in conjunction with the SEM can determine qualitatively the
elemental composition of a specimen. The instrumentation will enhance faculty
research in the fields of biology, geology and atmospheric sciences. Faculty and
undergraduate research students will investigate the elemental composition and
surface morphology of cuticular structures of arthropods (i.e. reproductive
anatomy of Neotropical spiders and harvestmen), gastropod radulae, vertebrate
teeth, clays, sandstones, and particulates from aerosols (soot vs. salt
crystals).

Virginia Wesleyan College (VWC) is a small, liberal arts college with a diverse
student body. The acquisition of the state-of-the-art SEM will increase the
quality of undergraduate research training opportunities at the college for
minorities, women and physically-challenged students. The SEM will substantially
improve the visibility of the natural science programs at VWC, supporting
collaborations between the college's faculty, students, and other scientists in
southeastern Virginia. The SEM will be used in an upper level research methods
course to be offered during the college's three week Winter Session. One of the
goals of this course will be to attract and introduce students to SEM early in
their educational career. Subsequently, as juniors and seniors, these students
can use the instrumentation in their undergraduate research projects. In an
effort to bolster recruitment of students into STEM disciplines, the SEM will
also be used during the summer months in programs designed specifically to
provide exposure for local high school students to the scientific research
enterprise.