* 1125532
* Collaborative Research: Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Cuatro Cienegas, Mexico, a Hotspot of Endemism in North America
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2014
* USD 229,414.00

Sediments in lakes and wetlands preserve important evidence of changes in
Earth's climate, vegetation, and ecological dynamics over the past 20,000 years.
In this project, researchers will study sedimentary archives to document the
ecological and environmental history of the Cuatro Ciénegas valley in the
Chihuahuan desert of northern Mexico. Cuatro Ciénegas is home to a unique desert
spring system that supports North America's highest concentration of endemic
species, garnering comparisons to the Galapagos Islands. The high endemism of
the Cuatro Ciénegas biota has been explained as a consequence of long-term
isolation and environmental stability in the valley. A pollen record from a
sediment core analyzed in the 1970s was originally interpreted as supporting
this hypothesis, but recent reevaluation of the original record, along with new
pollen data from a nearby packrat midden, challenged the assumption of long-term
environmental stability within the valley. A complication with the old record is
uncertainty over early radiocarbon dates on bulk sediment. This research project
will make use of two new sediment cores that contain macrofossils suitable for
AMS dating along with abundant pollen and charcoal that will provide information
on both vegetation and fire history. The researchers will test the hypothesis of
long-term stability in the Cuatro Ciénegas valley by documenting, with secure
dating and at higher resolution, past environmental conditions in Cuatro
Ciénegas. The cores were recovered in 2008 from wetlands in the Reserva Privada
Pozas Azules, which contains a large assemblage of sinkhole ponds, or pozas, in
various stages of succession. The 12.3 m profile from Poza Cortador spans over
14,000 years and shows evidence of succession from a deep-water poza to a marsh
with emergent wetland vegetation. A profile from nearby Poza Tule covers the
last c. 5000 years. Continuous depositional environments suitable for pollen
preservation are exceptionally rare in the arid regions of North America. The
sediment records to be analyzed will provide important evidence of Late Glacial
and Holocene conditions in the Chihuahuan Desert and provide insight into the
environmental changes that occurred outside of glaciated regions of North
America.

The Cuatro Ciénegas valley has become a natural laboratory for studying
fundamental issues in biogeography, ecology, and evolution, and this research on
long-term history will increase the value of this natural laboratory. The
results of the research project will inform paleoclimatology and biogeography,
and will provide crucial context for the many studies of speciation,
coevolution, microbial evolution and astrobiology that focus on the unique
species and species assemblages of the Cuatro Ciénegas valley. Project results
will also inform ongoing efforts to manage, conserve, and restore the natural
resources and endemic biodiversity of Cuatro Ciénegas. The research project will
provide educational opportunities for several graduate and undergraduate
students, and for K-12 students and others served by project outreach. This
project is jointly supported by the Geography and Spatial Sciences Program and
the Population and Community Ecology Program.