* 1125181
* Collaborative Research:  CDI-Type II: 4 Dimensional Visualization of Past Ocean Circulation from Paleoceanographic Data
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Lorraine Lisiecki, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2016
* USD 303,207.00

One of the fundamental challenges in the study of past climate change in Earth
history is how to reconstruct and compare past ocean circulation (as derived
from sparse geochemical data collected from fossils in deep-sea sedimentary
cores) with modern ocean circulation (as constructed from modern oceanographic
observations and computer simulations) to yield insight into the differences and
processes governing ocean circulation throughout the last glacial cycle from
150,000 years ago to the present. Similarly, a major challenge in computer
science is how to extract information from sparse datasets, and how to
effectively combine computational thinking with automated data analysis, to
extract new knowledge about features and processes. Our multidisciplinary and
multi-institutional project brings together a team of computer scientists,
physical oceanographers, paleoceanographers, and computational geophysicists to
address these challenges. We are developing an innovative suite of computational
tools to explore past changes in global ocean circulation by allowing
researchers to interact with data in a 3-dimensional environment across a
geologically relevant time domain (the 4th dimension). This project will merge
analysis of ocean flow with 40 years of previously-collected geochemical data
from deep-sea sedimentary cores in order to gain new insights into past ocean
circulation change. Our research will take advantage of the unique analytical
resources and interdisciplinary collaborative environment provided by the UC
Davis KeckCAVES (W.M. Keck Center for Active Visualization in the Earth
Sciences). The KeckCAVES provides immersive interactive visualization
technologies that help scientists identify meaningful patterns in complex
datasets. In this unique collaborative environment, we are developing methods to
improve data interpolation, to extract ocean flow patterns, and to characterize
ocean flow over time for potential change detection, along with interactive
means of visualizing and interacting with those large and time-dependent
datasets. The computational methods developed in this project are adaptable to a
wide range of visualization and data-analysis applications for analysis of flow
fields. The scientific visualization methods we develop will be used to develop
innovative, provocative, and intuitive instructional materials for undergraduate
and graduate education; for making other researchers familiar with new
scientific methodology (visually-aided analysis); for bringing science and
scientific results to the public; and for bringing interactive scientific
visualization technology to all of the partner institutions in this
collaborative project.