* 1125996
* Workshop: Digital Repatriation and the Circulation of Indigenous Knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Kimberly Christen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 25,038.00

Dr. Kimberly Christen (Washington State University), Dr. Joshua A. Bell
(National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution), and Dr. Mark
Turin (University of Cambridge and Yale University) will convene an
international workshop on the impact of digital repatriation on knowledge
creation, revitalization, and distribution within Indigenous communities.
Digital repatriation refers to the return of digital images of objects and
digital copies of recordings by museums and other repositories to groups from
which they originated rather than return of the objects themselves or the
original recordings. The workshop will bring together scholars from diverse
anthropological fields, indigenous communities, and collecting institutions to
document sets of best practices and case studies of digital repatriation in
order to theorize the broad impacts of such processes in relation to: linguistic
revitalization of endangered languages, cultural revitalization of traditional
practices and the creation of new knowledge stemming from the return of
digitized material culture. Invited participants all have expertise in both
applied digital repatriation projects and the theoretical concerns that locate
knowledge creation within both culturally specific dynamics and technological
applications.

Documenting the process and practices of digital repatriation to indigenous
communities globally contributes to a broad understanding of the possibilities
and limits of digital repatriation for knowledge revitalization, preservation,
and production. The workshop will result in three key products all aimed at
broadening the public and scholarly understanding of digital repatriation: 1) an
edited collection of essays based on the themes of the workshops panels, 2) a
dedicated project website with informational materials, a space for dialogue
pre-and post conference and an interactive database aggregating the results of
digital repatriation projects globally with a focus on outcomes, best practices
and partnerships, and 3) a set of white papers to be made freely available
online with suggestions for best practices, international standards, and
practical guidelines for researchers, indigenous communities and collecting
institutions.