* 1125523
* Ritual Formation Processes at Bronze Age Mt. Lykaion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Mary Voyatzis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 134,348.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Mary Voyatzis and David
Gilman Romano, together with a multinational interdisciplinary team, will
analyze the evidence for early cult and ritual practice at the ash altar of Zeus
at Mt. Lykaion in Arcadia, Greece. Central to the project is the investigation
of the ways in which systems of belief serve to anchor and provide social
stability in traditional societies over extended periods of time. It is clear,
looking at societies and nations in the world today that identities are in
significant measure forged around ideologies, both religions and other, which
incorporate a society?s core values and which provide both cohesiveness and a
base for decision making. To be effective over the long run such core values
must be flexible enough to adapt to changing circumstances and archaeology has
the potential to examine how such belief systems function over extended periods
of time. The Mt. Lykaion site assumes significance in this context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeological research at the site indicates that ritual
offerings took place over a period likely of more than one thousand years and
the stratified layers are composed of burnt animal bone and other remains. Over
the course of two field seasons, trenches have been placed through the deposit
and this award provides funds to study of the formation processes and chronology
of the ash altar and its contents, integrating various scientific techniques
such as carbon-14 dating, ceramic analyses, geoarchaeology, the study of animal
bones (zooarchaeology), chemical residue analysis and paleoethnobotany. One of
the many research objectives is to evaluate the zooarchaeological,
ethnobotanical and ceramic evidence for continuity and change in ritual
activities and other types of human behaviors from the Final Neolithic through
the Archaic periods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of the project
includes field training of undergraduate and graduate archaeology students. The
NSF grant will support a post-doctoral fellowship at the University of Arizona
for Dr. Britt Starkovitch, who will institute and develop laboratory protocols
for the pre-treatment of calcined bone samples. Dr. Starkovich's work will
enable the NSF-Arizona Accelerator Mass Spectrometry Laboratory to radiocarbon
date calcined bone samples from Mt. Lykaion and from other projects in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A proposed (privately funded) research center in
Megalopolis, near Mt. Lykaion, will create a permanent facility in the
Peloponnese to enhance and promote international research for students and
scholars in a variety of fields. Broader benefits include the creation of a new
archaeology program for underserved high school students at Mt. Lykaion, and
importantly, the establishment of a 550 square kilometer Parrhasian Heritage
Park in the area of Mt. Lykaion. The park will create hiking trails linking the
ancient sanctuaries and cities within it, and include signage relating to the
antiquities and the natural flora, and fauna. The chronological and other
results of the project will be detailed on park signs located near the mountain
summit.