* 1125840
* The Environmental Impact of Gateways and Hubs in International Air Transportation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Morton O'Kelly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

International air transportation is fundamental to the integration of global
economies. The ability to connect far flung cities depends on an elaborate
system of airline interconnections. Geographers have long had an interest in
describing and modeling the networks of links and the resultant levels of
accessibility and their importance to global systems. Concepts such as hubs and
gateways are in everyday use and indicate places that have developed special
infrastructure to permit handling of long distance interactions.

The purpose of this research project is to develop a linkage between the spatial
organization of air networks and the possible implications of that structure for
the environment. The project will examine the costs and benefits in variants of
such arrangements: patterns that are often referred to as hub and spoke systems
(which channel flows between major hubs) and point to point systems (which
provide more convenient direct linkages). At base, the contrast between heavy
flows between hubs and more direct but necessarily thinner flows between point
to point pairs, poses a complex set of trade-offs. The purpose of this research
project is to develop measures of the relative merits of alternative network
arrangements. The project will examine the tension between efficient flows from
a transport cost point of view, and the potential for such flows to impose
rather heavy environmental impacts. The project will examine the fuel efficiency
of various aircraft range and size configurations. The topic has ramifications
for the location of hubs, and ultimately may have implications for the best way
to select an air passenger fleet to accommodate the preferred patterns of
interactions. The project aims to synthesize two contrasting views, one from the
energy consumption of individual aircraft and the other from the overall network
viewpoint. Research to date has tended to come at this problem from one side or
the other and the research will develop an increased understanding of the
interdependence between systems and their elements. To achieve the project's
objectives, innovative linkages between operational and network efficiency
points of view will be developed and tested in models of a simulated network.

Because of the penetration of air transportation into everyday life, this
project has several societal implications. The impacts of the project will range
from educational ones to heightened awareness of the prevalence of economies of
scope and scale in transportation. Specifically the results will provide a more
complete understanding of the environmental and economic costs of air passenger
interaction. The project will also bring the examination of fuel use and
emissions more centrally into models of the operation and planning of air
transport systems. The research will contribute to explanations of the ways that
a hub serves as a focal point for interactions, and for models of diffusion
which have implications for a range of application from improving airline
security to understanding disease epidemiology. These topics have proven quite
difficult to pin down quantitatively, and a transport network analysis will
provide the tools to measure these elements in a spatial context. The project is
likely to influence the way networks are assessed and measured.