* 1125949
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Real Time PCR System for Research and Education at an Undergraduate Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Dana Ward, Mount St. Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2012
* USD 33,325.00

Characterization of the regulatory events that lead to changes in gene
expression and function is key to understanding the molecular mechanisms by
which biological processes are governed. To address questions aimed at defining
these regulatory interactions, it is necessary to accurately quantify changes in
gene expression that result in downstream effects on cell/organism function. To
that end, real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) analysis provides a method
by which changes in gene expression can be quantified. This approach allows
precise assessment of transcriptional targets whose gene products are
responsible for modulating adaptive responses. This grant will support the
purchase of a Polymerase Chain Reaction machine that will be enable real-time
PCR methodology to investigate multiple projects centered on examining diverse
biological processes including immunology, cell survival, inflammation, tissue
repair, differentiation, and smooth muscle cell biology. Projects of note
include characterization of the effects of mechanical forces and extracellular
matrix interactions on modulating function of smooth muscle cells and
differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells. In the area of inflammation, the
processes that regulate inflammatory responses in immune cells and brain as well
as the downstream transcriptional targets of immune modulators will be
investigated in macrophage and glial cell lines. These studies will be aimed at
understanding the molecular mechanisms that result in initiation of cell
survival and tissue repair in glial and neuronal cells. Finally, this technique
will also be applied to study the role of the unfolded protein response during
immune response, with a focus on cytokine production by B
lymphocytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment of gene expression patterns will
allow the faculty at Mt. St. Mary's University to make more significant
contributions to their research fields and will directly impact the training of
students by enhancing the undergraduate educational experience. The current
proposal describes a total of 11 research and educational projects to be carried
out by four faculty members. Importantly, several of the projects address
approaches for incorporation of real-time PCR methodology into both the
undergraduate curriculum and outreach educational programs aimed at local high
schools. This instrumentation provides a means by which to incorporate an
inquiry based approach to science instruction. Rapid advances in the
understanding of cellular and biochemical processes as a result of genetic and
genomic research have generated considerable demand for individuals trained in
biotechnology, genetics, biochemistry, and cell biology. Funds from this grant
will be used to meet the challenge of improving undergraduate education in STEM
areas and enhance student preparation for successful careers in the life
sciences.