* 1125775
* BRIGE: CZTS Thin-Films and Solar Cells by Liquid-Based Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Deidra Hodges, Southern Polytechnic State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2014
* USD 175,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The research objective of this BRIGE award is the
fundamental developmental of Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin films and solar cells by non-
vacuum, liquid-based techniques. Expensive materials and processes limit the
potential for future long term cost reductions in photovoltaics. Thin film
polycrystalline low cost solar cells have emerged as a significant step in
reducing the materials cost in photovoltaics. CZTS has recently emerged as one
of the most promising absorber layer materials for low-cost thin-film solar
cells, providing both an economical and green solution to the current thin-film
technologies, consisting of abundant, low-cost, non-toxic elements. CZTS has a
suitable optical band gap of ~1.5 eV and a large optical absorption coefficient
of over 104 cm-1. This research will develop a solution-particle (hybrid slurry)
approach using the CTZS constituents to fabricate the CZTS thin films.
Characterization and analysis of the thin films will focus on the composition
ratios with the objective of growing Cu-poor and Zn-rich CZTS thin films, the
formation of a stoichiometric compound, growth of large grains, and a stable
crystal structure. High residual stress in the thin films can trigger
significant undesirable consequences including deformation, fracture,
delamination and device failure. This research will perform CZTS thin film
adhesion and stress analysis and employ techniques and mechanisms that alleviate
stress, promote adhesion and improve the overall quality of the films. This
research will establish a relation between thin film deposition conditions, and
electrical, optical and structural properties of CZTS thin films that will
enable the fabrication of high efficiency solar cell devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research of CZTS thin films
enabling high efficiency solar cell devices will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in an emergent area of national need ? alternative
renewable energy sources. This project will implement educational and outreach
activities including research experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students. The outcomes of this research will be integrated into a new course,
?Fundamentals of Solar Power and Renewable Energy?. This course will be
developed during the proposed project and offered to students in all science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. This research will
be integrated into the outreach and educational activities beyond training of
undergraduate and graduate students. Early awareness outreach programs that
stimulate interest in science, engineering and solar energy will be developed.
Outreach activities will include solar energy summer camps and programs targeted
to young girls in middle school. In addition to supporting and mentoring
undergraduate researchers, a postdoctoral researcher will be supported and
mentored.