* 1125743
* BRIGE: Transition Metal Oxide Based Multifunctional Nanoelectronic Memristor Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Rashmi Jha, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2014
* USD 233,089.00

PI: Rashmi Jha Institution: University of Toledo Title: BRIGE: Transition Metal
Oxide Based Multifunctional Nanoelectronic Memristor Devices

ABSTRACT

Intellectual Merit: The two terminal nanoelectronic memristor devices offer an
attractive solution for addressing the needs of high-density non-volatile data
storage beyond the fundamental limits of Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor
(CMOS) technology. The unique charge-flux characteristics of memristor devices
offers applications in several key areas including high?density and high-
performance digital data storage, digital computing, analog non-volatile memory,
adaptive neural circuits, and energy-efficient massively parallel neuromorphic
computing. This BRIGE project experimentally investigates memristive devices
with Hafnium dioxide (HfO2) based switching layer and metal electrodes such as
Tungsten (W), Nickel (Ni), Titanium Nitride (TiN), and Ruthenium (Ru). The
research develops a fundamental knowledge about the charge transport mechanisms
responsible for the switching behavior and how it depends on several process and
device parameters such as the composition and thickness of the switching layer,
electrodes, and oxygen vacancies concentration in the switching layer. Finally,
the project seeks to demonstrate the application of these devices for high-
density and high-performance digital and analog memory by systematically
studying the switching speed, non-volatile resistive states, reliability,
durability, and data-loss effects.

Broader Impacts: The project on memristive devices is expected to have
significant impact in the areas of consumer electronic products, energy-
efficient extreme-scale computing, and development of self-learning adaptive
circuits. The research will be tightly integrated with education at graduate,
undergraduate, and high-school levels. The graduate and undergraduate students
will gain significant experience in the areas of fabrication and electrical
characterization of nanoelectronic devices, which will prepare them to address
the challenges of nanoelectronics in 21st century. A course in the area of
emerging memory devices will be developed by integrating lectures with hands-on
laboratory experience for graduate and undergraduate students. An educational
module with live demonstrations to teach the basics of semiconductor devices
will be developed for the high school students. Participation in engineering
research will be broadened at all levels through activities including research
experience for undergraduates, and outreach activities focused on increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering through summer camp for
the high school girls, lab experience for the high school girls, active
mentoring, and recruitment of the underrepresented students.