* 1125144
* Musical and Lexical Tone Deafness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Patrick Wong, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 434,472.00

Perception of speech and music is known to rely to some extent on shared brain
resources, but the extent to which those resources are shared, and how they are
orchestrated is not known. With funding from the National Science Foundation,
Dr. Patrick C. M. Wong and colleagues of Northwestern University, and Dr. Alice
H. D. Chan of Nanyang Technological University of Singapore are investigating
relationships between speech and music for perception and production. In the
past, research in this area has focused on individuals with typical abilities
and on individuals with extensive musical training. The current project examines
the speech-music relationship from a different point of view. Namely, it
considers what perceptual disorders in processing pitch reveal about speech and
music. Pitch is ubiquitous in our environment. We rely on pitch to classify
different types of environmental sounds, differentiate vocal sounds such as
various patterns of crying, distinguish who is talking, identify the emotion of
talkers, track the speech signal in adverse listening conditions, perceive
musical melodies, and distinguish musical instruments. However, pitch perception
can be difficult for an estimated 5% of the population in the Western world.
This deficit, known as 'amusia' or 'musical tone deafness' (mTD), occurs in the
absence of other known neurological or psychiatric disorders. Whether this
deficit also affects other auditory domains is important to understand for its
implications concerning the neural architecture of auditory perception. This
project involves participants in the U.S. and in Singapore whose native language
uses tone (pitch) contrasts to signal differences between words. If the brain
resources required to process pitch are shared between speech and music, tone
language speakers who suffer from mTD should show deficits in perceiving and
producing linguistic pitch and musical pitch. The project is intended to expand
our understanding about the organization of music and speech processing by our
nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to basic scientific information
regarding speech and music, the research could lead to clinical applications.
Tone deafness is not classified as a disorder by any medical or professional
groups. The real-world impact of tone deafness has yet to be documented, and
treatment research has not begun. This research could allow for a better
understanding of the communicative consequences of tone deficits, which could
ultimately lead to formal clinical recognition and treatment. Tone languages are
estimated to be spoken by at least 1.66 billion people in the world, most of
whom live in lower-middle income countries as classified by the World Bank. In
the U.S., over 26% of non-native English or Spanish speakers (over 3.4 million
total) speak a tone language, and this number is growing. Research into pitch
perception and its communicative consequences has the potential to benefit large
groups of individuals. The findings from this research are relevant to public
and global health concerns and will be of interest to many individuals outside
the English-speaking world, potentially increasing interest in international
collaboration.