* 1125672
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Scanning Spectral Confocal Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research, Teaching and Outreach
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Philip Yund, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 433,938.00

The scanning spectral confocal microscope (SPCM) is a highly versatile
instrument suited to many research projects designed to characterize biological
processes within organisms and their cells. The NSF MRI award has allowed the
University of New England to acquire this microscope as the anchor for a core
microscope facility that is enabling faculty, staff, and students in the basic
sciences departments to expand their research programs. Significantly the SPCM
can elucidate structural details in a variety of biological systems that
previously could only be obtained indirectly, if at all. The projects supported
by this facility are wide-ranging and address a broad diversity of important
biological questions. The primary users examine signal transduction, the effects
of steroids on nervous systems, the integrity of the blood-brain barrier,
biofilm formation, characterization of fecal pathogens in the environment, and
protein-protein interactions. The acquisition of the microscope is leading to
the development of many additional areas of research as the capabilities of the
core facility are accessed by the larger UNE research community. The microscope
contributes to the educational programs at the University, as the advanced
imaging capabilities provide excellent opportunities to demonstrate a variety of
biological processes to the students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Microscopy is an
important research tool for examining the intricacies of both biological and
non-biological materials. Because of its unique ability to look into the three-
dimensional structure of a material, confocal microscopy has emerged over recent
years as a tool that can be used to examine the connections between the
structure of a material and its function. For example, we can stain specific
components of a material to see if they are active participants in a biological
or chemical reaction. Researchers at the University of New England use this
facility to advance their understanding of how cells interact in order to better
understand basic biological processes. The microscope is the centerpiece in the
universities outreach and education activities, as pictures and movies of
biological (and non-biological) processes are streamed to remote locations to
provide, for example, K-12 students with a unique look at biology at the
microscopic scale, helping to stimulate the next generation of biological
scientists.