* 1125596
* Insight and Resting-State Brain Activity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* John Kounios, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 288,436.00

Creativity is an important and essential human ability. Cognitive neuroscientist
Dr. John Kounios of Drexel University, with funding from the National Science
Foundation, is investigating the brain mechanisms that enable creative problem
solving, especially those underlying what psychologists call "insight,"
colloquially known as the "Aha" or "Eureka" phenomenon. This project
investigates three questions. What is the relationship between "resting-state"
brain activity, that is, brain activity when a person daydreams with no task to
perform, and the experience of insight during a later test? Can samples of such
resting-state brain activity be used to identify brain states that lead to
insightful problem solving and individuals who tend to solve problems
creatively? What environmental or contextual factors can influence such brain
states to enhance creative thought? The investigator hypothesizes that there is
a relationship between brain activity during daydreaming and later creative
performance during problem solving and other tasks. This relationship can be
used to develop a brain-based test of creative ability and can be used to
identify target brain states for future training protocols for increasing
creativity. In one study, the investigator is recording participants'
electroencephalograms (EEGs) during multiple sessions on different days and
measuring participants' creative problem-solving performance to examine whether
differences in brain activity among individuals are associated with higher and
lower creativity. Other studies modify brain activity by giving participants
different kinds of cognitive tasks to perform; these brain-activity changes are
expected to influence later problem-solving performance and other measures of
creative thought, in some cases, enhancing creativity.

What are the origins of creative thought? This question is not merely academic.
Economic success depends on flexible, creative thought and the innovation it
empowers. Widespread concerns about waning innovation, fueled by recent research
showing that creativity-test scores in the U.S. are decreasing, have brought to
the forefront questions concerning the nature of creativity, and how it can be
enhanced. Educational, business, and government organizations have focused on
enhancing creativity, often without realizing that psychological and
neuroscience research has begun to yield evidence concerning which strategies
are effective for improving creativity and which are not. In particular,
cognitive neuroscience, through new, advanced methods for measuring brain
activity, has begun to focus on the topic of creativity, especially the
phenomenon of sudden insight, a process that suddenly confers a new perspective
or solution to a problem through an "Aha moment." The current NSF-funded project
is isolating and analyzing brain states conducive to creative insight and
investigating techniques for enhancing creativity by facilitating these brain
states.