* 1125719
* The Cerebellum and Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Julie Fiez, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 593,228.00

This research project is investigating the role of the cerebellum in language
processing. The cerebellum, which is Latin for 'the little brain,' sits below
the left and right hemispheres of the cerebrum (the largest and most commonly
depicted part of the brain). While the cerebellum may be small, it is densely
packed with brain cells, and it is thought to play a crucial role in motor
control and learning. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Julie Fiez of the University of Pittsburgh is using functional brain imaging to
identify specific regions in the cerebrum and cerebellum that are important for
processing phonological (word sound), semantic (word meaning), and articulatory
(speech production) attributes of spoken and written words. The research builds
on evidence that portions of the cerebellum are expanded in humans, and that
these newer portions of the cerebellum are interconnected with portions of the
cerebrum that support human thought and language. But scientists still have a
poor understanding of exactly how the cerebellum contributes to cognition, in
part, because the prior research on this brain structure has focused mainly on
its motor functions. This project is using cutting-edge brain imaging techniques
to address the gap in current knowledge. A newly developed technique (diffusion
weighted imaging) for studying the neural fiber pathways of the human brain is
being used to determine whether regions with the same functional specializations
are interconnected with each other, forming cerebro-cerebellar processing loops
that are dedicated to different language functions. The research is being
carried out with healthy young participants and then with participants who have
a history of a stroke that has damaged part of their cerebellum. The project is
examining whether damage to specific processing loops for language cause
corresponding problems with specific types of language
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research are diverse.
First, the methods being used are still under development, and their use in this
project provides an opportunity to validate them as research tools and to push
the technology forward. These methods are a major scientific breakthrough,
because until now there has been no suitable technique for studying, with high
definition, the fiber pathways of the human brain. The specific application of
these methods to the cerebellum is expected to have a significant impact. For
more than 20 years scientists have speculated about what the cerebellum
contributes to cognition, but the results across different research labs have
been inconsistent, and existing theories are overly general. By gaining a more
solid understanding of specific processing loops within the cerebellum, apparent
discrepancies within the scientific literature can be resolved and more accurate
and precise theoretical models can be developed. While the research is not
directed towards a clinical application, it is important to note that the
cerebellum has been implicated in several clinical disorders, such as autism,
dyslexia, and schizophrenia. An increased understanding of the cerebellum's
contributions to human thought and language could point the way towards more
effective clinical diagnoses and treatments. The project is also providing an
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students interested in cognitive
neuroscience to gain experience in this field of study, and efforts are being
made to communicate the results to both the scientific community and lay
audiences.