* 1125100
* Ecological Health and the Embodiment of Nature:  Environmentalism, Social Class and Nature Cure in Modern India
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Joseph Alter, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 120,851.00

Dr. Joseph S. Alter (University of Pittsburg) will conduct research on an
alternative medical system in India currently gaining in popularity. The project
is designed to understand the correlation between ecology and alternative
medicine as an embodied practice, and to analyze the relationship among class
status, health and environmentalism in a context of significant social
difference and economic disparity. As a popular, broad based form of alternative
medicine, Nature Cure involves the therapeutic embodiment of earth, air, water,
sunlight and raw foods, thus linking individual biology to the ecology of nature
in various ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the social, political and
economic structure of these links, field research will be conducted over
thirteen months at three Nature Cure facilities, a training college and two
regional libraries in India, where Nature Cure is an authorized, state funded,
popular form of alternative treatment. Research will involve participant
observation at each treatment facility as well as participant observation in
group health regimens established by client/patients in their respective
communities. Interviews will be conducted with resident client/patients before
and after scheduled therapy sessions. Data will be analyzed by coding interviews
for content analysis and comparing the answers given by patients whose economic
and occupational status, and specific disease diagnosis, reflects significant
differences within the range of "middle-class" distinctions. Data analysis will
focus on the question of how "environmentalism" as articulated and practiced in
the therapy, is embodied and in what ways embodied environmentalism is
understood and experienced differently by different sectors of the
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the research lies in two
areas: examining the cognitive and physical impact of the therapy and
determining if its affects are differentially received and experienced by
members of different classes and therapeutic settings. The research will be of
great interest to those involved with identifying alternative therapies.