* 1125928
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced X-ray Diffraction System for the Brown University X-Ray Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Eric Chason, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2014
* USD 466,612.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
proposal requests funds to acquire a Bruker D8 Discover X-Ray Diffraction system
that will serve the crystallographic characterization needs of the Brown
research community. The instrument will be used for phase identification, single
crystal orientation, grazing incidence diffraction, and reflectometry, and will
enable a variety of ongoing research efforts in engineering, physics, chemistry,
geology, biology and medicine, and the Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and
the Ancient World. The relevant project portfolio includes work on conducting
oxides, Pb-free solders, high-strength steels, magnetic materials, composites,
Li-ion battery anodes, natural rock textures, new graphenic carbon structures,
archeological samples, and newly synthesized nanomaterials for which sample
volumes are limited and high XRD sensitivity is needed. The instrument will be
also integrated into crystallography laboratory exercises for undergraduate
instruction, and will be used in existing K-12 outreach programs that involve
student groups from local stressed urban districts, in which students
participate in age-appropriate learning modules. The instrument will be housed
in the Brown University X-ray Facility, which will be operated and
administratively managed as a cost-center within the Brown Institute for
Molecular and Nanoscale Innovation, which promotes nanoscience and materials
science research and education across the Brown campus and also coordinates
outreach to local industry, government, and educational institutions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Major
Research Instrumentation proposal requests funds to acquire an X-Ray
Diffractometer to study the atomic structure and properties of solid materials.
This technique is an essential work-horse tool in the development of new
materials for applications that range from lightweight vehicles, to batteries
for renewable energy storage, to non-toxic lead-free solders, to magnetic hard
drives and memories. The new instrument will also be employed at Brown for the
study of natural rock textures in geological and planetary studies, for the
examination and analysis of archeological samples, and for the development of
new ultrafine materials made using the tools of nanotechnology. The XRD
instrument will enable a wide variety of ongoing research efforts at Brown in
programs that include engineering, physics, chemistry, geology, biology and
medicine, and the Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World. The
instrument will also be integrated into laboratory exercises for undergraduate
instruction, and will be used in existing K-12 outreach programs that involve
student groups from local stressed urban districts, in which students
participate in age-appropriate learning modules. The instrument will be operated
and administratively managed as a cost-center within the Brown Institute for
Molecular and Nanoscale Innovation, which promotes nanoscience and materials
science research and education across the Brown campus and also coordinates
outreach to local industry, government, and educational institutions.