* 1125561
* RAPID: Predictability of Atmospheric Teleconnections in Initialized Decadal Forecasts
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Amy Solomon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2012
* USD 29,951.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers the
potential predictability of decadal climate variabiality in hindcast simulations
prepared for the AR5. These 10-year hindcast experiments are performed with
models in which ocean properties, principally sea surface temperature (SST), are
initialized using observations every five years starting in 1960, with
additional 30-year hindcasts starting in 1960, 1980, and 2005 (actually a
forecast in the later years). The hindcast experiments are a novel feature in
AR5 with no counterpart in the Fourth Assessment Report, and they are designed
to determine the extent to which decadal-scale climate changes of relevance to
policy makers are predictable given the state of the ocean and the beginning of
the forecast period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted in this project
assess the skill of atmospheric teleconnections forced by SST anomalies in the
Pacific and Indian Oceans that are predictable on decadal timescales in the
hindcast ensemble. Skill is assessed by comparisons between observed and
hindcasted patterns of rainfall, air temperature, and circulation anomalies.
Additional comparisons are performed with uninitialized simulations of the 20th
century forced by greenhouse gas increases and other external forcings (e.g.
volcanos, aerosols, and solar variability), so that the extent to which
predictability depends on external forcing rather than initialized internal
variability can be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide
information on climate change and its consequences to decision makers worldwide.
Successful decadal climate forecasts could be of value to to resource managers
developing informed adaptation strategies, but first the degree to which such
forecasts are achievable must be determined.