* 1125788
* Electrophysiological and Computational studies on action monitoring
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Frank, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 643,675.00

How humans regulate their behaviors is a fundamental question. With funding from
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Michael Frank of Brown University is
investigating interactions between different brain regions involved in how
people monitor, learn, and control their actions. This research project focuses
on how humans accomplish restrained control over behavior when confronted with
difficult decisions. Theoretical models and empirical results suggest that the
prefrontal cortex and the basal ganglia interact during these motivated
behaviors, and that the neurochemical dopamine plays a central role in both the
prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia brain regions. Using electroencephalography
(EEG), the investigators are measuring participants' brain waves associated with
prefrontal cortex activity, while they perform computerized cognitive tasks that
assess learning and decision making in difficult circumstances. The brain wave
activity is expected to predict participants' cognitive performance on these
tasks. Critically, this brain-behavior relationship is predicted to differ as a
function of genetic variants in dopamine function in both the prefrontal cortex
and basal ganglia. In another experiment, researchers are directly manipulating
dopamine pharmacologically in order to determine how these brain and behavior
relationships are causally altered by dopamine levels. In all of their studies,
the investigators use detailed mathematical models guided by contemporary theory
to isolate specific brain-behavior relationships. It is theorized that both
genetic variants and pharmacological manipulations affect the way that the brain
monitors, learns, and controls actions. The brain wave measures are allowing the
research team to define how neurochemicals modulate the processes of large
neural systems.

This research has the goal to substantially advance our understanding of how
humans are able to regulate their behaviors as a function of motivation and
cognitive control. Scientists widely appreciate that there are large individual
differences in these types of motivated behaviors, but only recently have they
begun to understand some of the factors governing these differences. By
combining multiple research approaches, this project is posed to reveal the ways
in which genetic and neurochemical factors alter activity in brain areas that
are critically involved in such behaviors. The project also has the potential to
identify mechanisms that disrupt brain circuitry and lead to disorders in
motivated behavior and cognitive control, including addiction and obsessive
compulsive disorder among others.