* 1125858
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Empire of Purity: Making the Modern Sugar Economy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* David Kaiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,813.00

Introduction

This award supports doctoral dissertation research on changes in the notion of
sugar that resulted from new modes of sugar production that were first
implemented in the late 19th century. Between 1875 and 1925, in response to
massive competitive pressure, the nature of sugar production in the Caribbean
and throughout the cane-growing world was radically transformed. New sources and
systems of free and coerced labor took the place of slavery, and small animal-
powered plantations gave way to huge, technically sophisticated factories. The
dramatic political, social, economic, and environmental changes brought by
industrialization and centralization have been extensively studied. Yet the most
remarkable change of all was perhaps the most subtle, a transformation of the
very idea of sugar itself and what it meant for sugar to be pure. Until the end
of the nineteenth century, "sugar" denoted a natural substance, something that
could only be valued through the knowledge and skill of experienced individuals
using all their senses and their judgment. But during the last decades of the
19th century and first decades of the 20th, this kind of evaluation of sugar's
quality was superseded in commerce and production by a new concept of value, the
chemical determination of its sucrose content. This dissertation explores the
effect of this change in the meaning and nature of sugar and purity on the
global production, labor, and trade in sugar; and how the sugar economy itself
shaped those new ideas of value.

Intellectual Merit

The project focuses on two particular economic and intellectual relationships:
first between the United States and Cuba, the source of half of US-consumed
sugar; and second between Cuba and Glasgow, which provided the heavy equipment
and expertise for modern sugar factories in Cuba and around the world. By
analyzing published books and journals, factory production records,
correspondences, and especially legal and trade disputes, in Cuban, British, and
American archives, this project will demonstrate how this shift from sensory to
scientific knowledge reshaped the nature of trade, production, and the
organization of work in the world of sugar. The project will reconsider
commodities and processes of commodification in history. Unlike the mechanical
commodification of cotton, wheat, and other well-studied examples, sugar became
a globally tradable item through the standardizing power of science. This
research will clarify how natural products become globally exchangeable goods,
and how that process affects the people and places touched by exchanges. It will
use the history of science, especially science and empire, to understand the
history of global trade; conversely, it will use the history of commodities and
trade to help understand how science is contested and stabilized across vast
distances.

Potential Broader impacts

This dissertation project will be of interest to scholars of business,
economics, and trade as well as to historians of science. In addition to
publishing a scholarly book and articles based on the dissertation and
delivering presentations at professional scholarly meetings, the Co-PI intends
to publish two articles aimed at nonspecialist audiences. These articles would
use the sugar example to emphasize challenges facing all modern commodity
exchanges, such as determining when dispersed producers, traders, and consumers
should trust what they are buying and selling when such trusts depend on
scientific measurements made on the far side of the planet.