* 1125565
* Institute for Quantum Information and Matter (IQIM)
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2018
* John Preskill, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 14,250,000.00

The Institute for Quantum Information and Matter (IQIM) is a center-level
activity that spans Quantum Information Science (QIS), Condensed Matter Physics
(CMP), Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics (AMOP), and the emerging field of
Mechanical Quantum Systems (MQS). The unifying theme for the IQIM is the
exploration of collective quantum phenomena that endow physical systems of many
interacting constituents with astonishing properties that in effect transform
the weirdness of the microscopic quantum realm to macroscopic scales. The
principal motivations for the creation of the IQIM are the extraordinary set of
scientific opportunities associated with the study of exotic quantum states of
matter and the potential for discovery brought by newly developed tools from
Quantum Information Science. The IQIM ties together the diverse Caltech
community of researchers, from physics to applied physics, to computer science,
who focus on emergent quantum phenomena and provides a sustaining base for the
scientific development of a new field of research that will actively involve
national and international communities of researchers in QIS, CMP, AMOP, and
MQS. By way of extensive programs in education and outreach, the IQIM will
impact high school and college education and will engage the general public with
the "mind boggling" nature of the quantum realm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has
long been known that individual atoms and electrons, as well as electromagnetic
and mechanical oscillators (i.e., photons and phonons), obey laws of quantum
physics that in many respects defy common sense. Under the right conditions,
interactions among many such quantum objects can lead to remarkable quantum
phenomena that have heretofore not existed in nature. Advances to create,
characterize, and utilize such exotic quantum phenomena have been made in
condensed matter physics (CMP), atomic-molecular-optical physics (AMOP), and at
the interface between these areas. In conjunction with parallel developments in
quantum information science (QIS), a revolution is underway in the study of
exotic quantum systems that is the unifying theme and driving motivation for the
IQIM. Progress in the experimental realization and theoretical understanding in
this area will surely have profound implications for basic physics. The IQIM
will merge insights and analytic tools from QIS with advancing laboratory
capabilities in CMP, AMOP, and MQS for the discovery and characterization of
exotic quantum states of matter, and will thereby shed light on issues at the
core of physics. Eventually, the ability to manipulate exotic quantum systems
may lead to new technological capabilities, including methods for designing and
exploiting quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute for Quantum
Information and Matter will have the following scientific
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Information: Investigators at the current
NSF-sponsored Institute for Quantum Information (IQI) have made Caltech a
recognized world leader in theoretical QIS. IQI faculty are integral members of
the IQIM and conduct research that is closely allied to the IQIM, e.g., the
application of topological principles to quantum phase transitions and the
discovery of universal features of entanglement that that distinguish quantum
phases of matter. Research at the IQIM includes investigations of the
connections between quantum information science and other aspects of basic
physics. IQI scientists will lead the quest to apply insights into the
properties of quantum entanglement for the study of quantum many-body systems
and quantum phase transitions, as well as to apply quantum information theory to
illuminate how information is encoded in spacetimes subject to strong quantum
fluctuations. The IQI will also continue its world leading programs on quantum
computation and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Many-Body Physics:
Caltech has world leading programs in the quantum physics of strongly
interacting many-body systems (e.g., superconductors, exotic magnets, strongly
correlated electron systems, etc.). Research thrusts in this area will emphasize
emergent quantum phenomena, including quantum Hall physics, topological states
of matter, exotic magnetic systems, and ultra-cold atomic gases, and with strong
connections to powerful theoretical techniques from QIS. These studies will
involve some of the most fascinating and puzzling manifestations of many-body
quantum mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Optics: Another area of great
strength at Caltech is the study of optical interactions at the level of one
atom and photon, where seminal advances in the realization of new paradigms for
light-matter interactions by way of micro- and nano-scopic optical cavities have
been made. Within IQIM, existing capabilities for quantum control of strong
interactions of single atoms and photons will be extended to explore quantum
many-body systems composed of 1- and 2-D arrays of atoms whose interactions are
mediated by photons in microscopic quantum optical
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Mechanics of Mechanical Systems: Faculty
in the IQIM in will build upon recent advances in opto- and electro-mechanics 1)
to achieve quantum control of single phonons in simple material systems, thereby
enabling lithographic fabrication of quantum many-body systems with phonon
mediated interactions, and 2) to create human-sized objects in entangled quantum
states within the setting of LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IQIM has many facets
beyond fundamental research to explore exotic quantum states of matter and the
interface with QIS. With the end of scalability of conventional silicon-based
information technology on the horizon, it is vitally important to explore
aggressively new paradigms for information technology. By attracting and
training top students and postdoctoral scholars in QIS, CMP, AMOP, and MQS, the
IQIM will significantly strengthen the US presence in these areas and will
broaden the nation's technical base. A particularly important aspect of the
IQIM?s broader impact is a vibrant visitor program, which fuels intellectual
excitement, facilitates collaborations and exchanges of scientific ideas, and
performs a highly valued service for national and international communities at
the interfaces of QIS, CMP, AMOP, and MQS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IQIM will
also undertake extensive programs for outreach and the development of human
resources. The goal is to use the public's fascination with the mysteries of the
quantum realm to engage a broad community in basic science and education.
Activities include the following:&lt;br/&gt;The Caltech Precollege Science
Initiative (CAPSI )- In collaboration with CAPSI, IQIM will develop high school
curricula for one to two week instructional modules related to the scientific
activities of the Institute, &lt;br/&gt;Summer internships for high school
teachers and students from multiethnic LA regional high
schools,&lt;br/&gt;Caltech MURF program for undergraduate research experience of
minority students in IQIM laboratories,&lt;br/&gt;Disseminating science via a
science and entertainment partnership in collaboration with The Science and
Entertainment Exchange (SEE),&lt;br/&gt;Development of university curricula
related to IQIM fields of research,&lt;br/&gt;Public presentations via the
Caltech Watson Lectures and YouTube videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
activities will be accessible via an interactive IQIM
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding is provided by the Division of Physics in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Division of
Computing and Communication Foundations in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering.