* 1125659
* Collaborative Research: The Devolution of Immigration Enforcement in the U.S. South and Its Impact on Newly Established Latino Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Mathew Coleman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 51,261.00

This project considers the impacts and consequences of non-border policing and
immigration enforcement by non-federal law enforcement agencies (LEAs) in the
U.S. South. U.S. immigration authorities have historically focused on the
U.S.-Mexico border as a priority enforcement site, but today immigration
policing extends deep into the U.S. interior. Indeed, since the late 1990s and
especially since 2001, non-border policing has emerged as a mainstay of U.S.
immigration enforcement. Moreover, experimental federal initiatives to devolve
immigration enforcement to non-federal LEAs such as municipal police and county
sheriffs through the 287(g) and Secure Communities programs have become standard
practice.

The growth of U.S. immigration enforcement in non-border spaces is particularly
acute in the U.S. South, which has been fundamentally transformed by the large-
scale recruitment of new immigrants into a wide range of labor markets over the
past two decades. The 'nuevo New South' comprises a disproportionate share of
immigration enforcement initiatives by non-federal LEAs and as such produces a
disproportionate share of detention and deportation cases, relative to
traditional immigrant destination sites in the U.S. Southwest and Northeast.
Critics argue that the devolution of U.S. immigration enforcement in the U.S.
South is rolling back new immigrants' civil rights, employment and education
opportunities, access to housing, and physical mobility. Despite this is little
social science research on non-federal immigration enforcement practices and its
effect in the region. This project starts to fill this gap by a) exploring the
genesis and mechanics of non-federal immigration in the U.S. South; b) analyzing
the effects of 287(g) and Secure Communities on new immigrant populations in the
U.S. South; and c) examining the political mobilization of immigrant rights
groups in the region in response to non-federal immigration enforcement. The
research site comprises all 287(g) and Secure Communities jurisdictions in the
Atlanta GA metropolitan statistical area. Methodologically, the project employs
archival research, public records analysis and mapping, interviews, and in-depth
ethnographic fieldwork with police and immigrant rights groups. The project
draws on the PIs' prior fieldwork in the U.S. South on 287(g) and race,
immigrant integration, and political mobilization in new immigrant destinations.

This research promises two major contributions. First, it will advance
scholarship on local immigration enforcement by providing spatial and
ethnographic contexts to 287(g) and Secure Communities enforcement. To date
research on this topic has centered on litigation and legislation, and as such
does not explain how context, i.e. agency-specific police practices, local legal
and political contexts, and community experiences and impacts, shape and are
shaped by programs such as 287(g) and Secure Communities. Second, it will also
advance scholarship on Latinos in the U.S. South, which is mostly descriptive
research on migration patterns and experiences, by exploring the racialized
practices related to local immigration enforcement that structure Latinos'
social, political, and economic exclusion. The PIs will consider how the
historical and contemporary political, economic, and cultural logics of race in
the region are shaping and are shaped by the implementation of programs such as
287(g) and Secure Communities, as well as the role of immigrants in challenging
and reworking racialized power relations in the region.