* 1125331
* STEP Center: InTeGrate: Interdisciplinary Teaching of Geoscience for a Sustainable Future
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2019
* Cathryn Manduca, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 11/30/2019
* USD 10,199,976.00

This STEP Center project is a collaboration between partners at Carleton
College, Stanford University, North Carolina State University (NCSU),
Pennsylvania State University (PSU), the University of New Orleans (UNO),
Central Washington University (CWU), the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL),
the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), Columbia University's Lamont Doherty
Earth Observatory (LDEO), the University of Akron, Pasadena City College, the
Incorporated Research Institutions of Seismology (IRIS), and the Council of
Environmental Deans and Directors of the National Council for Science and the
Environment (NCSE/CEDD). Additional collaborations are being made through the
National Association of Geoscience Teachers (NAGT), the American Geological
Institute (AGI), the American Geophysical Union (AGU), the Geological Society of
America (GSA), the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) and the Consortium
for Ocean Leadership (COL), among others. It is estimated that 1400 faculty and
59 geoscience departments, and potentially half a million undergraduate
students, will be affected by this Center's activity over the lifetime of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread geoscience literacy and a robust
geoscience workforce are increasingly important for addressing grand societal
challenges including resource issues (e.g. minerals, energy, water, food) and
environmental issues (e.g. climate change, hazards, waste disposal,
environmental degradation). The InTeGrate STEP Center is engaging a broad,
interdisciplinary community in the development of materials and model programs
that increase the geoscience literacy of undergraduate students, including the
large majority that do not study geoscience, and also increase the number and
diversity of students prepared to bring geoscience approaches into
interdisciplinary teams confronting important societal challenges. Center
activities are focused through two main strategies of piloting more effective
undergraduate core curricula that serve both STEM and non-STEM students and
improving pre-service teacher training. In developing more effective
undergraduate curricula, attention is being given to both production of
pedagogically appropriate teaching materials, demonstration of implementation
programs, and professional development in their use for faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project-related, inter-institutional curriculum
development teams are creating and testing materials for use in geoscience
courses, interdisciplinary courses, and courses in non-STEM majors - such as
business, economics, and education - that address other aspects of these grand
challenges. A set of implementation programs is demonstrating departmental,
institutional and multi-campus approaches to curriculum and program structures
that enroll diverse students, address the preparation of the geoscience
workforce, and integrate geoscience into general education and teacher
preparation curricula, as well as into a variety of STEM, environmental, and
social science majors. An integrated assessment program is measuring the impact
of new course materials and programs on students' 1) geoscience literacy,
including their understanding of the role of geoscience in addressing the grand
challenges facing society, 2) ability to address interdisciplinary problems, and
3) understanding of the process of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A professional
development program integrated with activities of the On the Cutting Edge and
Building Strong Geoscience Departments programs, geoscience professional
societies, and the National Council for Science and the Environment is
supporting widespread adoption and adaptation of course materials and program
structures. Program evaluation is assessing the impact of InTeGrate at the
course, departmental and institutional levels, with a focus on understanding how
the program is influencing changes in instruction and program design, and
subsequently impacting enrollments and student learning in courses that
incorporate the role of geoscience in solving societal grand challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Directorate for Education and Human Resources Division
of Undergraduate Education and the Directorate for Geosciences Office of the
Assistant Director are jointly funding this STEP Center project.