* 1125937
* SOLAR Collaborative: Photonic Enhancement of Organic Photovoltaics to Enable Higher Efficiencies and Novel Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sean Shaheen, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

This collaborative project brings together faculty and scientists at the
University of Denver and the University of Colorado at Boulder to study new
materials and concepts in organic photovoltaics (OPV). It combines new
mathematical methods to describe photonic processes with novel plasmonic
nanostructures for enhancing optical absorption and new organic semiconductors
for control of exciton flow and charge carrier dynamics. The theoretical
foundations of linear and nonlinear processes in surface plasmons and their
interactions with organic chromophores are explored, and the interplay between
surface plasmons and FÃ¶rster Resonant Energy Transfer (FRET) is investigated.
New organic molecules are synthesized that incorporate graphenic and other
moieties with exceptional charge transport and excited-state properties along
with liquid-crystalline functionality for improved molecular ordering. The
overall goal is to enhance the density of excitons created in OPV devices to
enable higher efficiencies as well as coherent control of excited state dynamics
and multiexciton phenomena. The work entails significant collaborations with the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory and the University of
Toronto.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance the fundamental
knowledge of OPV materials and mechanisms and to provide impetus for moving OPV
to the broader market as a low-cost solar energy technology that can be produced
on a truly large scale. The interdisciplinary nature of the project gives
graduate students and postdoctoral trainees exposure to a variety of research
settings and fosters their learning and career growth. The project generates
educational materials that are broadly disseminated through websites and through
the National Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education Digital
Library (NSDL). Outreach activities for local high school science teachers in
the Denver and Boulder areas enable hands-on experience with intensive workshops
on solar energy and nanotechnology. Demonstrations, exhibits, and instructional
materials are provided to Colorado institutions such as the Wings Over the
Rockies Air &amp; Space Museum and the Mamie Dowd Eisenhower Library.