* 1125997
* MRI:   Acquisition of a seed x-ray machine
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Pati Vitt, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 136,597.00

The Chicago Botanic Garden will acquire a seed x-ray machine to advance research
in its seed/reproductive biology laboratory. A center for processing, testing,
storing, genetically analyzing, and germinating seeds, this laboratory supports
research and conservation efforts, as well as educational programs spanning from
middle school through PhD programs. The Garden's seed-related research falls
into three broad categories: ecological and restoration research, research on ex
situ (off site) conservation methods, and horticultural research. Addition of an
x-ray cabinet will serve research programs in all three areas by greatly
expanding the lab's analytical capabilities. The Garden's studies encompass the
biology of small, fragmented populations; the genetics and demography of both
rare and invasive plant species; plant responses to climate change and to
ecosystem management; and spatial and temporal patterns of molecular genetic
diversity in populations. The Garden is also conducting restoration genetics
studies that address seed transfer zone delineation and genetic erosion during
seed storage and the process of ecological restoration. The Garden is a founding
partner in Seeds of Success, the US native seed banking program, and partners
with the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew and USDA National Center for Genetic
Resources Preservation to provide redundant storage for its Dixon National
Tallgrass Prairie Seed Bank which currently holds over 1600 wild-collected,
native species and will ultimately hold samples from multiple populations of the
entire Midwestern flora (approximately 3000 species). The Dixon seed bank also
holds multiple accessions of the twelve globally rare species we curate for the
Center for Plant Conservation (CPC). Additionally, the Garden conducts research
on perennial plant breeding to develop landscape plants adapted to the
conditions of the Midwestern U.S. Research to assess the invasive potential of
plant introductions to the Chicago region is also conducted. To date studies
have examined fecundity and seed viability of potentially invasive ornamental
taxa, having implications for the nursery industry and home
gardeners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of additional equipment for the
seed/reproductive biology laboratory will result in an increase of the number
and diversity of seed studies undertaken which have applications beyond the
Garden. Seed banking of globally imperiled plant taxa and of the entire flora of
the tallgrass prairie ecosystem benefits society at large. The seed bank serves
as a genetic safety net, preventing extinction and mitigating against genetic
erosion in wild populations. Several studies at the Garden address restoration
genetics and the development of seed transfer zones. Federal, state and regional
agency partners including the Bureau of Land Management, the USDA Forest
Service, and Chicago Wilderness are implementing the seed transfer guidelines
that the Garden develops in a variety of large-scale restoration projects. The
results of our research will be disseminated not only to the scientific,
conservation, and horticultural communities, but also to the general public
through our on-site scientific interpretation (reaching over 900,000 visitors
per year), membership publications (sent to over 48,000 members) and Web site
that receives over 19 million hits per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Garden has
a comprehensive education program in plant conservation biology, serving middle
and high school students in our College and Science First programs and hosting
several internships including an NSF-REU (Research Experiences for
Undergraduates) program. The Garden also serves graduate students in a Master's
program in partnership with Northwestern University and Ph.D. programs with both
Northwestern University and University of Illinois Chicago. Professional
training in conservation through workshops, short courses and continuing
education classes are also offered. Perhaps most importantly, the seed x-ray
equipment will fill a national infrastructure need. Currently, similar
laboratories are primarily limited to U.S.D.A facilities in Fort Collins, CO,
Beltsville, MD, Columbus, OH and a few other germplasm repository sites. The
U.S.D.A. facilities focus almost exclusively on crops, crop relatives and
ornamental plants. The Garden's proposed seed storage and research facility will
build much-needed capacity in Chicago and the upper Midwest to conduct seed
related research and germplasm preservation for native plants, including those
that are rare.