* 1125722
* BRIGE: Hindered-Diffusion Grayscale Surface Functionalization
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Christine Trinkle, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 12/31/2014
* USD 174,644.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
provides funding for the development of a novel nanoscale surface fabrication
and patterning technique. This method utilizes the hindered diffusion of
chemicals through a three-dimensional polymer mesh to create pseudo-grayscale
functionalized surface patterns; the three-dimensional polymer substrate serves
as a mask to control the diffusion path length of molecules from a liquid
reservoir to the target patterning surface. In this manner, both the placement
of surface-functionalized chemicals and the local density of these chemicals can
be controlled. Experiments will be conducted in order to characterize mesh
density and solute transport rates through polymers and this information will be
used to derive predictive relationships correlating hindered diffusion rate to
basic polymer and solute properties. These relationships will be used to
generate numerical computer models of the described patterning mechanism, and
the results will be validated experimentally. Finally, the combined numerical
and experimental results will be used to create deterministic algorithms for
selecting optimized polymer geometry and mesh density for any desired
chemical/pattern combination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selective deposition of
chemicals can be used to modify a number of surface properties, including
binding affinity, manufacturability, hydrophobicity, and immune response. The
current state-of-the-art in surface patterning only enables the user to make
microscale binary patterns, where regions are either completely absent of
chemical modification or contain a single uniform chemical density. If
successful, this research will represent an inexpensive method for producing
surface patterns in a highly accurate manner with a level of geometric
complexity that is unattainable with current methods. The focus on low-cost,
widely-available materials would make this process immediately accessible to a
large number of manufacturers and researchers. Applications for grayscale
surface patterning are numerous and varied, including high-throughput binding
studies for pharmaceutical development, portable biosensors for medical testing,
control of fluid movement for microfluidics and self assembly, and quantitative
studies of cell behavior. In addition, the hindered-diffusion studies and
analytical models developed in this research will provide invaluable tools in
the large number of fields governed by this transport mechanism, including
tissue engineering, targeted drug delivery, and medical diagnostics.