* 1125171
* CDI Type II: Cyber-Enabled Understanding of Complexity in Socio-Ecological Systems via Computational Thinking
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2017
* J.Daniel Rogers, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,946,568.00

This project will advance understanding of complexity in climate-societal
dynamics by applying cyber-enabled multiagent systems models integrated with
evolutionary computation algorithms. The research will develop, validate, and
analyze new computational agent-based models as transformative tools for
simulating human societies spatially situated in regions with diverse ecosystems
and explicit climate dynamics. The new suite of models will focus on two
geographic regions where climate change has significant consequences for humans
and ecosystems: Sub-Saharan Africa (over a billion people at high risk of
displacement, disease, starvation) and the Arctic Circumboreal region (where the
fastest ecological changes are now occurring with shifting patterns comparable
to earlier major climate events).

The project forges interdisciplinary collaboration among anthropologists,
political scientists, earth scientists, and computer scientists to advance the
science of complex adaptive systems. The core intellectual merit of the project
is its contribution to basic understanding of multiscale complexity in climate-
society dynamics, by creating a cyber-enabled integrated computational framework
for modeling, simulating, and exploring scenarios. Spatial multiagent systems
will be created that include climate dynamics as well as other natural hazards
and stressors with direct and indirect effects on social dynamics composed of
households and governance institutions.

Broader impacts from this project will include (1) new cross-disciplinary
understanding of climate-society dynamics, (2) new computational tools; (3) new
policy-relevant insights derived via scenario analysis with such tools; (4)
innovations in new advanced forms of hybrid computational modeling, enabling new
collaborations across disciplines; (5) new support for innovative forms of
teaching, training, and learning through computational modeling of complex
socio-ecological systems; (6) and multi-institutional opportunities for students
from underrepresented groups via classroom visits and museum exhibits. Perpetual
archiving of all electronic materials (code and data) will be implemented
through the Smithsonian data archiving initiative.