* 1125675
* QMHP: Entanglement and Coherence Decay in Nanosystems and Applications to Quantum Information Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Robert O'Connell, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 346,754.00

ENTANGLEMENT AND COHERENCE DECAY IN NANOSYSTEMS AND APPLICATIONS
TO&lt;br/&gt;QUANTUM INFORMATION SYSTEMS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives and
Approaches: Entanglement is at the heart of the vast&lt;br/&gt;improvement in
encryption systems and will hopefully provide the backbone&lt;br/&gt;of quantum
information systems in general, particularly quantum&lt;br/&gt;computing.Since
the Josephson System arrays, being pursued experimentally&lt;br/&gt;by the Yale
and Santa Barbara groups, show great promise, a theoretical&lt;br/&gt;analysis
of this work will be carried out, using exact methods, as distinct from the
master equations presently being used by others.In particular,the effect of
temperature on large systems will be emphasized since,even for small systems, it
has been found that moderate temperatures can cause disentanglement and that the
effect is constant for all times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :
Understanding the physical world relies heavily on Quantum Mechanics. But, many
questions remain concerning its foundations. In particular, the heart of quantum
mechanics is entanglement but, as emphasized by Feynman, among others, its
nature essentially remains unknown .Thus, a strong effort will be made to
understand it more deeply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Benefits: Ironically,
entanglement is a tool which is essentially used in all modern quantum systems,
despite being poorly understood. Thus, greater knowledge of its fundamental
characterestics should have significant impact on the design of future
information systems with clear economic and social impact. Its study will
present a very interesting attraction and challenge to graduate students and
should be a great stimulus in course discussions. Attempts will also be made to
interest students , not only at LSU, but also at Southern University (an HBCU).