* 1125553
* Self- and Other-Knowledge of Dynamic Personality Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Simine Vazire, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,999.00

The aim of this proposal is to examine how much people know about the
fluctuations in their own personality. Do people know how much their personality
fluctuates? Do they know how their personality has changed? Are others sometimes
more accurate at detecting these fluctuations than we are ourselves? These
personality processes are at the core of who a person is -- to understand
someone (or oneself) is to understand the psychological dynamics that make a
person who she is. Personality research, however, has focused almost exclusively
on global dispositions -- what a person is typically like. This overlooks the
nuances of personality -- how people vary across situations and over time. How
much insight do people have into these dynamic personality processes? When and
why do others sometimes have greater insight into these aspects of personality
than does the person him- or herself? The research proposed here will compare
self- and other-perceptions of these core aspects of personality with objective,
naturalistic criterion measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One unique feature of the
research proposed here is that it will capitalize on technological advances to
include naturalistic measures of behaviors and situations. Naturalistic, non-
reactive measures of everyday behavior can be obtained using the Electronically
Activated Recorder (EAR). The EAR consists of a small, pocket-sized digital
audio recorder worn by participants that periodically records snippets of
ambient sounds, resulting in an objective, ecologically-valid measure of
everyday behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study 1 will examine the accuracy of
people's own views of their personality fluctuation and of ratings of their
personality fluctuation by people who know them well (i.e., friends and family).
This study will then use the EAR and Experience Sampling Methods (ESM) to obtain
objective measures of participants' actual fluctuations in personality. These
results will shed light on whether people are aware of the variability in their
own and others' thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Study 2 will follow a group
of participants over four years to examine the accuracy of their own and close
others' perceptions of how their personality changes. By using repeated EAR and
ESM assessments, this study should reveal whether people are aware of changes in
their personality over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here
has important theoretical implications. Determining how well people understand
their own personality processes will help scientists understand the extent to
which these processes operate at a conscious or unconscious level. Questions
about when one should or should not trust self-perceptions are of abiding
interest to our social species. In addition, this research could ultimately help
psychologists design interventions to improve self-knowledge, a central goal of
psychological inquiry and practice. Finally, this research will have important
implications for anyone relying on self-reports to measure behavior. This line
of research should lead to an empirically-validated model to guide researchers'
and practitioners' decisions about when to use self- or informant-based
reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant would help promote the involvement of
underrepresented groups in scientific research by supporting a research team
from a wide variety of backgrounds.