* 1125684
* BRIGE: Modeling metabolism in embryonic stem cell growth and differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mark Styczynski, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 182,127.00

PI: Styczynski, Mark&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1125684&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this proposal is to measure and model the metabolism of
embryonic stem cells during proliferation and differentiation. The PI's group is
dedicated to understanding and controlling metabolism by studying and modeling
metabolite concentrations. Here, we apply metabolite profiling and machine-
learning techniques to create the first-ever descriptive models of metabolism in
embryonic stem cell differentiation. We will also study the regulatory potential
of metabolites we identify as significantly correlated with cellular
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Stem cells
are poised to make a revolutionary impact on modern medicine. Given recent
successes, attention has begun to turn to the looming biomanufacturing problem
inherent in developing stem cell treatments. Difficulties expanding stem cell
populations from small numbers and controlling their differentiation are such
significant roadblocks to scale-up that stem cell therapies may be technically
or economically infeasible on a large scale. One promising route for controlling
stem cell behavior during scale-up is monitoring and manipulating metabolism and
metabolic signals in these cells -yet there has been little research in this
area. This transformative research plan will help fill this knowledge gap,
specifically addressing three key issues in the field of stem cell culture and
engineering. By performing a pioneering longitudinal metabolomics study, we will
(1) establish an initial dataset and models demonstrating the importance of
metabolism in stem cell expansion and differentiation, and that can be used in
guiding culture scale-up. By identifying metabolites capable of promoting
specific differentiation lineages, we will (2) enable more precise control of ES
cells during expansion and differentiation, also facilitating scale-up. Finally,
our extracellular metabolite profiling techniques and models will (3) provide
non-invasive, non-destructive methods for stem cell culture monitoring and
quality control that are capable of detecting changes in cell state long before
morphological changes are evident.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;By expanding capabilities in controlling stem cell fate using
our systems-level analysis of metabolism, we will enable development of novel
and more complex stem cell engineering therapeutics that can save or greatly
improve the lives of people facing debilitating diseases. The direct application
of our research results to the scale-up of stem cell culture technologies to
industrial production levels will circumvent a critical economic roadblock in
the field, enabling the development of therapeutic candidates into products that
can heal not just those who are rich or fortunate, but anyone facing such a
disease regardless of socioeconomic status. Such systems level analysis also has
the potential to make a significant impact on future engineers; in this vein,
the PI proposes a broadening participation program with a primary focus of
encouraging female participation in engineering. The centerpiece of this effort
is the development of an activity and event for Girl Scout troops that stokes
interest in engineering and introduces them to the systems-level mindset that
defines engineering. The PI will collaborate with a local teacher to develop
this activity and align it with Georgia state educational standards. Female
undergraduates and graduate students will help develop and implement this
activity. Other key activities planned by the PI include continuing work with an
all-female dormitory, collaboration with the campus Society of Women Engineers
chapter in developing outreach activities, and recruiting and mentoring female
students. Additionally, the PI's group will host underrepresented minority
undergraduate students through an REU program; the first and third aims have
been formulated to easily integrate undergraduate researchers in a rewarding
project.