* 1125676
* BRIGE: Computational Identification of Gene Regulatory Networks in Microalgae
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Haiyan Hu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2014
* USD 174,654.00

PI: Hu, Haiyan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1125676&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research and education goals of the project are to: (1) propose a computational
framework to systematically study gene regulation in microalgae towards in-
silico modeling and bioengineering applications; (2) educate college students
and general public about microalgae gene regulation; and (3) expose women and
girls to interdisciplinary science and engineering through mentoring and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;Research Activities: The research objective is to create
novel computational approach to perform genome-wide identification of DNA
regulatory elements and their patterns in microalgal model organism C.
reinhardtii. The planned activities include: (1) genome-wide identification of
DNA regulatory regions in C. reinhardtii by creating new strategy to measure
sequence conservation; (2) identification of candidates for DNA regulatory
elements via novel machine learning algorithms; and (3) identification of
interacting DNA regulatory elements in C. reinhardtii through frequent pattern
mining and statistical modeling. The longer-term goal of this project is to
develop statistical and computational algorithms to model gene regulatory
network of microalgae, and to integrate gene regulation information into in-
silico modeling of microalgae for microalgae engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Education
Activities: The educational objectives are to introduce students at multiple
levels to the exciting area of bioinformatics; disseminate the knowledge
obtained from the proposed study and develop outreach activities to attract more
girls and women into science and to broaden participation of underrepresented
groups. The planned activities include: graduate/undergraduate mentoring,
curriculum development, and outreaching/mentoring women and girls by
collaborating with the UCF office of Undergraduate Research and National Girls
Collaborative Project. The education activities will be tightly integrated with
the research activities. A combination of metrics will be employed to evaluate
the education activities.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Understanding how genes
are transcriptionally regulated in microalgae is an important problem in both
biology and microalgae engineering. The proposed work aims to advance our
understanding of gene regulation in microalgae by computationally identifying
DNA regulatory elements at the genome-scale in microalgae model organism C.
reinhardtii. There is as yet no broadly applicable method and no systematic
study to comprehensively identify DNA regulatory elements and characterize gene
regulatory mechanisms in C. reinhardtii. By creating novel computational
algorithms such as alignment-free methods to identify regulatory regions in the
entire C. reinhardtii genome and enumerative Gibbs sampling approach to de novo
identify DNA regulatory elements, the proposed work will be able to
systematically discover DNA regulatory signals in C. reinhardtii, and will lay
the ground for genomescale gene regulatory network construction in C.
reinhardtii and other microalgal organisms in the near future. The gene
regulatory information gained from the proposed research has the promise to
facilitate integrative in-silico modeling of microalgae and microalgae
bioengineering in the subsequent research. The prior work on data integration
and knowledge discovery from large scale biological data, machine learning and
data mining techniques, and software development put the applicant in a unique
position to perform the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed research will have great impact on education at multiple levels. The
research will be incorporated into the graduate and undergraduate education by
graduate/undergraduate mentoring and curriculum development. The knowledge
resulted from the proposed research will be disseminated to the research
community and the public to enhance scientific understanding through a website.
In addition, mentoring and outreach for women and girls will create a positive
cycle in attracting more women into interdisciplinary science.