* 1125616
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Facilitate Faculty Research and Improve Undergraduate Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Kevin Hoke, Berry College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 258,971.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Professor
Gary Breton from Berry College and colleagues Kevin Hoke, Theunis Van Aardt and
Dominic Qualley will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The proposal is aimed
at enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) synthesis of strained dinitrogen heterocycles, (b) stepwise assembly
of coordination complexes on electrode surfaces, (c) characterization of the
nucleic acid binding activity of the bovine leukemia virus NC protein, and (d)
stereoselective synthesis of pterocarpans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research at Berry College and neighboring institutions such as Shorter
University.