* 1125210
* CDI-Type II: GLOBE: Evolving New Global Workflows for Land Change Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Timothy Finin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,982,753.00

This project focuses on Land Change Science (LCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Land
Change Science is an emerging field of study, aimed at understanding
interactions among human systems and the terrestrial biosphere, atmosphere and
other Earth systems as mediated through human use of land. Advances in LCS are
needed to better quantify, predict, mediate, and adapt to global climate change,
biodiversity loss, and other consequences of land use and land cover
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite vigorous efforts by a broad array of social
and natural scientists, the cross-scale synthesis of multidisciplinary
observations, models and theories on coupled human and natural systems (CHANS)
that are required to advance LCS has yet to emerge. A major obstacle is the
tremendous challenge in global integration and synthesis of local and regional
CHANS case studies. This project will accelerate the emergence of new global
workflows in land change science through GLOBE: an online collaboration
environment combining quantitative real-time global relevance assessment,
geovisualization, social-computational structures and machine learning
algorithms. This will be accomplished in collaboration with international LCS
institutions and experts, enabling researchers and institutions to rapidly
share, compare, and synthesize local and regional studies by combining these
with global datasets for human and environmental variables using a combination
of machine learning, advanced visualization, semantic analysis and social
networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four core objectives that will
be achieved through three integrated activities, as follows:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Create an online collaboration environment
leveraging real-time global relevance analysis, geovisualization and social-
computational knowledge generation towards the generation and sharing of new
global workflows for land change science.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Understand how
to build effective social media tools organized around structured and informal
scientific workflows.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Develop evaluation methods and
metrics and use them to demonstrate the utility of workflow-based social media
tools in the context of scientists testing LCS hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;Objective
4: Leverage GLOBE to characterize and optimize global knowledge generation in
LCS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this team will engage in the
following activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activity 1: Develop the social-
computational infrastructure for GLOBE.&lt;br/&gt;Activity 2: Establish GLOBE as
a means for social-computational knowledge generation. Characterize, share and
optimize knowledge generation workflows for global synthesis and collaboration
across CHANS studies and data collections.&lt;br/&gt;Activity 3: Test hypotheses
and identify new research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand
anthropogenic global changes in the Earth system, scientists must generalize
globally from observations made locally and regionally. This project will make
fundamental hypotheses on the nature of human interactions with earth systems
more readily testable by scientific methods, enabling major advances in land-
change science and theory. Moreover, this project will engage the computing and
social sciences in developing interactive online tools for scientific
collaboration and data synthesis that will help identify knowledge gaps in LCS
science. The tools will result in new ways of visualizing, communicating,
connecting, comparing and synthesizing observations and models of land change
processes at global, regional and local scales. Empirical investigation of GLOBE
in use will advance our understanding of scientific collaboration more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop, enhance and support long-term research collaborations across a broad
set of scientific disciplines. It will support education and skill building for
interdisciplinary collaboration by seasoned faculty, postdoctoral researchers,
graduate students and undergraduate students. The project will design, host and
disseminate advanced tools for cross-scale data and knowledge sharing,
synthesis, and design of globally representative observing systems. By creating
a new environment for sharing and integrating local knowledge, data and ideas
across the social, biological and geophysical sciences, land change science will
have greater potential to inform the sustainable stewardship of earth systems.