* 1125228
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: BirdCast: Novel Machine Learning Methods for Understanding Continent-Scale Bird Migration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,000,865.00

An interdisciplinary team of computer scientists, statisticians, and
ornithologists will develop novel computer science methods and apply them to the
challenge of understanding the annual migration of birds across North America,
which is one of the most complex and dynamic natural phenomena on the planet.
While direct observation of migrating birds is limited to a handful of birds
wearing tracking devices, other sources of data provide partial information
about migration that, when appropriately combined, will provide insight into
migration at a scale previously unimaginable. These sources include a continent-
wide network of volunteer bird watchers, night flight calls captured by a
network of acoustic monitoring stations, continent-scale weather patterns
gathered by a network of weather stations, and clouds of migrating birds
detected at night by WSR-88D weather radar stations. To analyze these data, the
team will develop two innovative machine learning techniques-Collective
Graphical Models (CGMs) and Semi-Parametric Latent Process Models (SLPMs). The
resulting model will be able to identify the complex conditions governing the
dynamics of migration behavior including the choice of migratory pathways, the
factors that influence when birds migrate, and the speed and duration of each
night's movements. CGMs greatly extend the scope of phenomena that can be
captured with graphical models. Under suitable conditions, a CGM is able to
recover a model of the behavior of individuals using only collective
observations.

For BirdCast, it will construct a model of individual bird dynamics from the
collective observations provided by birders, acoustic and weather stations, and
weather radar. Once the model is constructed, it will be applied to live data
feeds (bird sightings, acoustic detections, radar detections, and weather
forecasts) to predict bird migration in real time. SLPMs are an extension of
latent process models, such as the CGM for bird migration, in which the dynamics
of a process is represented by latent variables that are observed only
indirectly. In an SLPM, the conditional probability distribution of each
variable is modeled using flexible, non-parametric methods from machine
learning, such as boosted regression trees. Introducing such flexible methods
such as CGMs and SLPMs into latent variable models raises difficult challenges
for model fitting and validation. Preventing over-fitting will require the
creation of novel information regularization and latent model cross-validation
methods to enforce latent variable semantics.

The proposed work will allow, for the first time, real-time predictions of bird
migrations: when they migrate, where they migrate, and how far they will be
flying. Accurate models of migration have broad application for basic research
by allowing researchers to understand behavioral aspects of migration, how
migration timing and pathways respond to variation in climatic conditions, and
whether linkages exist between annual variation in migration timing and
subsequent inter-annual changes in population size.

BirdCast will expand opportunities for the public to participate in the
gathering of data and its analysis. The existing data set has more than 60
million observations, and the size is growing exponentially. Last year,
volunteers contributed more than 1.3 million hours observing birds. Student
engagement in the research is significant as well.