* 1125558
* Collaborative Research: Precision Array for Probing the Epoch of Reionization (PAPER)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Christopher Carilli, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,841,992.00

This award is for continuation of the development of the Precision Array to
Probe the Epoch of Reionization (PAPER). The focus of PAPER is the statistical
detection of HI 21-cm signals from the neutral intergalactic medium (IGM) during
cosmic reionization, an event corresponding to the transition from a fully
neutral IGM to a highly ionized IGM caused by the UV radiation from the first
stars and supermassive black holes. Probing this last unexplored phase of cosmic
evolution has been called out by the Astro2010 Decade Survey as the primary area
with extraordinary discovery potential in the study of cosmic structure
formation, and this constitutes the main intellectual impact of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the previous award period, under
AST-0804508 and AST-0804523, PAPER established observing sites with 32 antenna
elements at both NRAO Green Bank and in the Karoo Desert of South Africa. The
current proposal will expand the SA deployment of PAPER to 128 elements and will
support on-going observations and analysis using both the GB and SA deployments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the program include advancement of
techniques in low frequency radio astronomy, and a strong educational emphasis
through training of graduate students and postdocs. The project is a major
stepping stone toward a future Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Array (HERA), as
recommended by A2010. PAPER has directed fabrication funds where possible to
local small businesses, thus providing economic stimulus in the US. Outreach
activities have included a number of public talks on the project by graduate
students.