* 1125683
* The influence of attention on associative memory in the young and old
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Audrey Duarte, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 446,849.00

Not all of what is experienced can be consciously remembered later. These memory
failures become increasingly common with age. With funding from the National
Science Foundation, Audrey Duarte, Ph.D., of the Georgia Institute of
Technology, is conducting research using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) and event-related potentials (ERPs) to understand the neural mechanisms
by which attention affects the encoding and retrieval of details associated with
previously experienced events (what is known as 'associative memory'). The
cognitive processes and underlying brain regions that support the ability to
remember some aspects of previously experienced events (e.g., spatial, and
perceptual details) but not others are not well understood. Previous research
suggests that directing one's attention toward particular event features
facilitates memory accuracy for the attended features in both the young and old.
How the brain carries out this memory facilitation is unknown. Dr. Duarte is
investigating the spatial and temporal characteristics of neural mechanisms
supporting associative memory encoding and retrieval using fMRI and ERP. This
research project is also testing the possibility that in the presence of
distracting stimuli, the attention-induced facilitation of associative memory
accuracy and supporting neural activity is reduced in older adults compared to
younger adults. Results from this project are expected to contribute to a deeper
understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying the attentional control of
memory in the young and old, as well as the underlying cause of memory failures
across the lifespan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associative memory integrity is
important for nearly all aspects of a person's life, from remembering the
location of one's parked car to remembering the names of one's co-workers. It is
therefore of great interest and importance to understand the neural mechanisms
supporting associative memory and the factors underlying associative memory
failures. With an understanding of how aging impacts these neural mechanisms, we
can envision the development of simple learning techniques and interventions to
improve memory functioning across the lifespan. To facilitate this translational
process, the research is being broadly disseminated by the investigators at
professional conferences and public lectures given to young and older adults in
the community. The community presentations are part of a larger program
organized by the investigators aimed at educating the public about the latest
advancements in cognitive aging research. One of the major goals of this
community outreach is to involve a more diverse population of researchers and
research participants. This research program also provides unique educational
and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. Importantly,
undergraduate and graduate students are being trained in research that has both
scientific merit and real-world relevance. Students receive educational training
in the cognitive neuroscience of memory and aging. Students receive hands on
training in all aspects of conducting cognitive neuroscience research (i.e.,
experimental design, data acquisition, analysis and interpretation) using
complementary and innovative neuroimaging methods. All the educational and
research training activities associated with this project are aimed at
increasing the students' potential for success in their future careers in
research, academia, or industry.