* 1125846
* Center for Ultracold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* John Doyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 14,275,000.00

Understanding and controlling the quantum world are among the great challenges
of physical science. Meeting these challenges can open the way to the design of
new forms of matter and possibly new paths to information processing. In this
quest, strongly interacting systems present both the current greatest scientific
challenges and also the highest potential rewards. Ultracold atoms provide a new
medium for pursuing this quest because they can be controlled and manipulated
with a precision never previously possible, and observed with a clarity that can
be breathtaking. The intellectual merit of this work is the quest to discover
how natural and artificial materials work, to understand complex quantum
systems, and to explore the basic physics and potential applications of
engineered quantum systems. As of now, the nature of many strongly correlated
systems, their dynamical behavior, and the fundamental and practical limits of
quantum control over complex quantum systems are not well understood.
Furthermore, only very few practical applications of controlled quantum systems
are known, despite the great promise they hold. The work of the Center will
attempt to uncover these mysteries. This may lead to the creation of new quantum
phases of matter, to a better understanding and greatly improved control over
many-body quantum systems, and to new applications of such systems.

Motivated by these considerations, the Center for Ultracold Atoms carries out
research guided by the two themes of: Many-body systems and strongly correlated
states; and Quantum coherent control of few-body systems. These scientific
themes are complementary. In particular, within the first theme, strongly
correlated systems can be realized by engineering the interactions and motion of
large clouds of dilute ultracold gases. This kind of top-down approach to
quantum systems is matched in the CUA with the second theme, where a bottom-up
approach uses coherent quantum control of individual particles; controllable
sets of quanta can be connected to build up increasingly more complex quantum
systems. In what is now the third phase of the CUA, we retain focus on these two
key scientific themes, but with a major addition to our spectrum of research to
include new atom-like and hybrid quantum systems. Specifically, we use and study
atom-like solid-state impurities, nanoscale photonic and plasmonic cavities and
waveguides, as well as superconducting and nano-mechanical resonators in order
to obtain quantum control and manipulation at a new, previously inaccessible
level. These systems share with cold atoms the property that they can be
precisely prepared and manipulated using the concepts and tools of atomic
physics. Our key motivation for adding these new approaches is to extend the AMO
techniques for precise quantum state control to completely new parameter regimes
not accessible with "real" atoms. At the same time we will use these systems to
explore new scientific directions and potential applications.

Within theme 1, the area of many-body systems, projects include microscopic
control and probing of strongly correlated states using a quantum microscope or
single atom impurities, the study of many-body dynamics far away from
equilibrium, and the realization of new systems with strong correlations, in
particular the study of quantum magnetism and spin-lattice systems simulated
using polar molecules. Within theme 2, the area of few-body systems, we continue
our work on quantum state control of strongly coupled atom-photon systems, as
well as add a major extension to the CUA by shifting focus towards atom-like and
quantum hybrid systems. Recent pioneering work (with major contributions from
the CUA) has shown that the precise methods of cold atom science can now be
applied to certain solid-state quantum systems. This allows for the creation of
long-lived coherent superposition states and the generation of quantum
entanglements at previously inaccessible length and energy scales (e.g. between
those of dilute atomic gases and solid matter). In addition, novel strongly
interacting AMO systems such as Rydberg atoms, polar molecules and ion crystals
will be explored, sometimes as part of a hybrid system. These new systems offer
avenues to access new parameter regimes and new approaches to device
integration. A major new focus will be on hybrid systems, where disparate
quantum platforms are coupled (e.g. solid-state spins and photons, molecules and
superconductors, isolated atoms and nanoscale waveguides). Such avenues may
result in major advances towards scalable quantum systems, and in the
development of new classes of applications. In the course of this work a new
scientific interface between AMO physics and nanoscience will be explored.

The broader impacts of this work span a wide range of areas, including materials
science, metrology, sensing, communication and computation, chemical physics,
biological science and energy research. Some possibilities include: The quantum
simulation possible with lattice confined atoms or polar molecules could shed
light on materials such as high-Tc superconductors, and eventually result in
development of new materials with custom-designed properties. Work on quantum
interfaces between light and matter may allow us to develop practical systems
for long-distance quantum communication and cryptography. Robust generation of
correlated atomic states, such as spin-squeezed states in systems compatible
with optical clock transitions, can potentially extend clock performance to
unprecedented levels. Quantum controlled atom-like and hybrid systems such as NV
centers in diamond may yield unique probes for magnetic fields in biological
systems at the nanoscale. Work on quantum nonlinear optics at low light levels
could result in new approaches for energy-efficient all-optical switching and
computation. Understanding and control of light-matter interaction at nanoscales
could eventually result in novel approaches for energy harvesting and
conversion.

As well as being a research center, the CUA will continue its focus on education
and outreach, using both existing and new efforts. A full spectrum of well-
supported activities will continue to make an impact at the K-12, undergraduate
and graduate levels (both inside and outside the CUA core institutions), as well
as the broader research community and the public. Examples of successful
continuing activities include the TOPS program for future high school teachers
and the intensive summer course in atomic physics (open to students and other
researchers worldwide). An example of a new activity we begin in phase 3 is the
production of explanatory videos that describe CUA research, aimed at students
and the public. We are also initiating programs to bring to the CUA, for summer
research, interested undergraduates from minority serving institutions and
programs to expose high-school students to CUA research. A hallmark of the CUA
has been the flexible addition of new outreach and education programs as they
are conceived, and we will continue this tradition. A major impact of the CUA is
through its education of graduate students and postdocs. A large number of young
CUA researchers have advanced to leadership positions in academia and industry.
Through sponsorship of workshops, the biannual Atomic Physics summer school, the
Virtual Journal of Atomic Quantum Gases, and its visitors program, the CUA
shares its vision and expertise with the scientific community.