* 1125713
* BRIGE: Redox Noninnocent Ligands - Application to the Reductive Transformation of Veterinary Pharmaceuticals Containing Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Huichun Zhang, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2014
* USD 180,997.00

PI: Zhang, Huichun J.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1125713&lt;br/&gt;Research
Objectives and Approach: Redox noninnocent ligands (RNILs) have been extensively
studied by inorganic chemists on the redox-nature of the complexes formed with
many transition metals. Yet, little information is available regarding the redox
activity of RNILs, particularly as it pertains to the fate and transformation of
emerging contaminants. On the other hand, soluble Fe(II) complexes with organic
cathechol- and thiol-ligands, considered only as redox ligands in the
literature, have been recently recognized for their ability to reduce a number
of organic contaminants. Given the ubiquitous presence and fast redox reactivity
of Fe(II) complexes in the environment, this lack of understanding of the nature
of the ligands (., redox innocent versus noninnocent) will significantly prevent
accurate estimation of the fate and transformation of emerging contaminants in
reducing environments. For this reason, the proposed study will apply the
concept of redox noninnocent ligands to the overall reductive transformation of
a group of veterinary pharmaceuticals (VPs) containing carbon-nitrogen double
bonds; the role and transformation of both the VPs and RNILs will be
investigated from mechanistic perspective. Based on our preliminary results and
the literature, we hypothesize that this group of VPs will undergo fast redox
reaction with Fe(II) complexes with a number of RNILs including -catecholate,
o'diaminophenylene, o-aminophenolate, o-dithiolene, and o-aminothiolate ligands.
To test this hypothesis, a series of experiments have been structured (1) to
illustrate the redox noninnocent nature of the complexes, (2) to determine the
reaction kinetics and mechanism of the selected VPs and structurally related
model compounds, and (3) to develop quantitative structural-activity
relationships (QSARs) that can be used to predict reductive transformation of
other structurally similar contaminants. Methodologically, the study will rely
on diverse methods including but not limited to cyclic voltammatry, FTIR, HPLC,
LC-MS-MS, NMR, and UV-visible measurements coupled with analytical
determinations. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This study is one of the first to
examine the redox noninnocent behavior of environmentally relevant Fe(II)
complexes. Advanced experimental and interpretative methods will be used to
generate knowledge that is critical for accurate modeling of environmental fates
of an important group of VPs containing carbon-nitrogen double bonds, which are
also a common structural moiety for many other emerging contaminants such as
human pharmaceutical and personal care products and pesticides. The intellectual
merit of this project is based on: 1) fundamental understanding of the redox
noninnocent behavior of a number of Fe(II) complexes; 2) mechanistic
understanding of the reduction reaction between the complexes and a group of
VPs; and 3) development of QSARs that can be used to estimate the fate of other
structurally related contaminants beyond VPs. On the basis of this project, the
PI will be able to systematically study the role of many other metal(II)-RNIL
complexes in the fate and transformation of a variety of emerging contaminants.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results of this project can be used by environmental
scientists/engineers to develop environmental fate models to accurately predict
the fate and transformation of organic contaminants in redox-active
environments. Moreover, this project will contribute to training, mentoring and
overall development of our graduate, undergraduate and high school students.
Underrepresented minority and female students will be particularly encouraged to
participate through a variety of activities planned with the pioneering CEET
(Chemistry for the Environment - Education and Training) program, the Chapter of
the Society of Women Engineers, College?s senior design course, Alliance For
Minority Participation program, one-week residential summer program "Women's
Engineering Exploration" and Department?s weekly seminars. Results and
techniques of this study will be integrated into the environmental curriculum at
the Temple University through a combination of lectures, experiments and
demonstrations. In addition, findings from this project will be broadly
disseminated to over 30 industrial partners at the annual industrial advisory
board meetings of the Water and Environmental Technology (WET) Center at the
Temple University.