* 1125235
* CDI-Type II: From Simulation Data to Mechanistic Understanding: Applications to Clathrate Hydrate Nucleation Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* David Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2014
* USD 608,625.00

Amadeu Sum and David Wu, Colorado School of Mines (CSM), Gregg Beckham, CSM and
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Baron Peters , University of
California, Santa Barbara and Valeria Molinero, University of Utah are supported
by a CDI-TYPE II award to develop novel path sampling methods, based in
statistical mechanics and information theory in order to collect and analyze
data from large scale molecular simulations. These new techniques are being
developed with the ultimate goal of elucidating the mechanism of clathrate
hydrate nucleation. The specific aims are 1) to develop order parameters to
identify ice and clathrate hydrate structures; 2) develop the Packet Evolution
Path Sampling (PEPS) method; and 3) apply PEPS to simpler systems to demonstrate
the utility of the method. The order parameters are a key component this effort
as they provide physical insight and quantify the mechanisms of nucleation. The
new sampling method (PEPS) provides a more efficient method of sampling and
extracting mechanistic details on nucleation by harvesting the evolution along a
'reaction coordinate.' Lennard-Jones liquid-to-solid nucleation and water-to-ice
nucleation are the testing systems to demonstrate the first application of the
methods which will then be applied to clathrate hydrates nucleation. The methods
themselves, however, are generally and may be used to gain understanding from
molecular simulations of a variety of complex phenomena.

Understanding transition mechanisms in real systems is a daunting problem for
molecular simulation, both in terms of efficient data collection and analysis.
There is a need for transformative new methods that can be applied to realistic
systems and huge data sets that are now commonplace with increasing computing
power. One specific motivating problem where new path sampling methods can be
applied is to the mechanism of clathrate hydrate nucleation. Clathrate hydrates,
ice-like compounds formed from hydrogen-bonded water cages surrounding small
non-polar molecules such as methane or carbon dioxide, have gained interest for
their importance in energy (hydrates are present at the ocean floor in
quantities estimated to be at least twice that of known oil and gas reserves;
conversely, plugging of pipelines by gas hydrate formation poses the primary
flow assurance problem to the oil and gas industry, as well as an impedance in
the containment of a deepwater oil/gas blowout) and the environment (carbon
sequestration and methane release from natural hydrate deposits). In a broader
context for the application to hydrate nucleation, fundamental knowledge will be
gained in nucleation theory, understanding arising from hydrophobic and
hydrophilic interactions, and new approaches for structural quantification.
Insight into the molecular mechanism for hydrate nucleation may be
transformative because it will be constructing knowledge from microscopic
interactions to macroscopic behavior, as opposed to current approaches where the
reverse is predominant.