* 1125317
* Collaborative Research:   CDI-Type II:   Probing Complex Dynamics of Small Interfering RNA (siRNA) Transfection by Petascale Simulations and Network Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Aiichiro Nakano, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,080,000.00

The discovery of RNA interference mediated gene silencing by double-stranded RNA
is one of the most exciting recent developments in the biological and biomedical
sciences. RNAi utilizes a pathway whereby a double-stranded small interfering
RNA (siRNA) targets and destroys complementary mRNA in eukaryotic cells to
regulate gene expression. Since its discovery just over a decade ago scientists
have investigated the potential use of siRNA-based treatment of many diseases
such as cancer, liver cirrhosis, hepatitis B, human papillomavirus, and
hypercholesterolemia. In principle, siRNA has much broader therapeutic
applications than other types of drugs because siRNA can be synthetically
designed to silence any gene via the RNAi machinery. Therefore, the primary
challenge for therapeutic applications is efficient and non-toxic delivery of
siRNA to cells within tissues of interest. The research goal of this CDI project
is to design efficient delivery systems for siRNA via supercomputer simulations.
Multimillion-atom simulations are performed to study: (1) the effect of siRNAs
on the molecular structure of lipid membranes and how structural changes affect
the membrane permeability; (2) molecular mechanisms by which siRNA molecules
attached to gold nanoparticles cross the membrane and go into a cell; and (3)
delivery of siRNAs encapsulated in liposomes by ultrasound. Computational
technologies will be used to enable automated design of efficient siRNA delivery
systems. This project is promoting scholastic and professional excellence among
students. A dual-degree program has been established which gives students the
opportunity to obtain a Ph.D. in the physical sciences or an engineering
discipline and an M.S. in computer science with specialization in high
performance computing and simulations. This research team will also organize
computational science workshops for undergraduate students and faculty mentors
from Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Minority Serving
Institutions.