* 1125145
* BRIGE: Novel Bimetallic Catalysts for Advanced Biofuels Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Jason Hicks, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2014
* USD 174,947.00

PI: Hicks, Jason&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1125145&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological advancement in the area of energy
production from sources other than fossil fuels is a critical need facing the
world. As such, this topic is of great interest to students and scientists from
all segments of society. One attractive alternative energy technology is
biofuels derived from biomass, but the most important aspect currently missing
in the quest to generate economical, stable, useable biofuels is the development
of highly active and selective heterogeneous catalysts.1, 2 The experimental
focus of this proposal is the determination of the mechanisms for
hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) of lignin-based model compounds using novel supported
bimetallic FeMo phosphide catalysts for use in advanced biofuels processes using
a detailed experimental approach. Once the reaction mechanisms are clearly
determined, catalyst synthesis can be tailored to maximize activity and
selectivity for use in next-generation biofuels processes. Pyrolysis GC/MS
experiments with an in-line catalytic reactor to upgrade the vapor phase product
and batch reactions in a stirred vessel to compare vapor phase upgrading and
liquid phase upgrading will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Ultimately, the results of this proposal will provide evidence of lignin
upgrading to fuels for potential industrial scale operation. This work will
expand existing lignin HDO understanding from studies on simple, substituted
phenol compounds to more complex lignin-based model compounds, for which studies
are lacking. In addition, we will synthesize and characterize new bimetallic
catalytic materials for HDO of lignin-based compounds. This work will
significantly advance the understanding of this process by providing key
fundamental information on the reaction mechanisms, which will subsequently lead
to better catalytic processes for biofuels production. In addition to biofuels
production, this knowledge could be used to increase fundamental understanding
of specialty chemicals syntheses from lignin-based
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Advancement toward the
effective use of biomass as a resource for energy production will move society
closer to the goal of meeting the world?s energy needs in a sustainable manner.
The determination of the foundational knowledge of reaction mechanisms will
enable the creation of new catalysts with high selectivity towards biomass
liquefaction and deoxygenation, which will expedite biofuels- usability. Through
membership in the Notre Dame Energy Center and Sustainable Energy Initiative,
the results from this proposal will be disseminated across a wide audience. The
annual Energy Week at Notre Dame is an opportunity to present research solutions
to energy problems to groups across campus as well as alumni and the local
community. Targeting this broad audience spurs student inquiry, attracts student
researchers, and increases public awareness and knowledge of energy research at
Notre Dame and energy issues in general. Also, the results obtained from this
BRIGE proposal will be incorporated into current and future
graduate/undergraduate courses, and specifically into a special topic in
catalysis course that is currently being
designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation: This proposal seeks to
integrate research in energy, biofuels, and catalysis with educational efforts
targeted at high school groups in the community at large and female
undergraduates from St. Mary's College, specifically seeking to mentor
underrepresented students. A "Catalysis and Biofuels" laboratory open house day
will be held every year for local high school students to spend a day in the lab
assisting with biofuels experiments and learning about energy issues and
research. In addition, female undergraduates from St. Mary's College will be
recruited to conduct research in the PI's lab as part of the dual degree program
offered with the University of Notre Dame. Lastly, diversity will be modeled in
our research group and will be a key goal of the PI?s group over the coming
years.