* 1125069
* RAPID: Pyroclastic Surge Dynamics in the 2010 Merapi Eruption
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Barry Voight, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2014
* USD 49,472.00

This is a RAPID award to investigate the dynamics of pyroclastic surge deposits
created by the catastrophic 2010 eruption of Merapi volcano, Indonesia.
Pyroclastic flows and surges cause most casualties in volcanic eruptions but
understanding of surge processes is lagging due to the paucity of major events
such as the one displayed by Merapi during its recent eruption phase. This
investigator and his team have developed a statistically constrained procedure
for lava dome-collapse type pyroclastic flows to estimate areas of inundation
following an active event. Dynamic behavior of associated surges can be included
by consideration of the physics of surge flow, mass flux and air entrainment,
and local topography. The method has been applied to several volcano crises,
notably the 2006 eruption of Merapi and 2007 and 2010 crises at Montserrat. It
is also being used for hazards evaluations at other locations worldwide, but
while of proven utility it is restricted to a particular type of flow process.
The recent Oct-Nov 2010 eruption at Merapi offers a rare "Once-in-a-Century"
opportunity to extend and constrain physics-based modeling to column-collapse
type pyroclastic flows with associated ash-cloud surges. This Merapi eruption
started in its traditional dome-collapse mode but developed into a major VEI~4
explosive eruption, the largest eruption there since (at least) 1872. The
likelihood of an explosive eruption on this scale was forecast by the PI and his
team, and now that it has occurred it is incumbent to maximize the scientific
and other impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to further refine the
surge model for Merapi that would carry over to other flow modeling methods such
as Titan2D which inadequately address the surge issue. The proposed study of the
surges addresses a target of opportunity and needs to be carried out soon
because the thin deposits are perishable and key information would be lost. Thus
a RAPID award is the most appropriate mechanism for supporting the proposed
work. The broader impacts are many and include as beneficiaries of this research
organizations that foster risk mitigation planning and crisis response, such as
volcano observatories worldwide, academic advisors to crises, and those such as
the World Organization of Volcano Observatories (WOVO) that often aid crisis
responses generally. Ultimately it is the often-large populations living on the
flanks of dangerous volcanoes who may benefit most. Findings are expected to be
disseminated to academics and practitioners through rapid communication at
international and national scientific meetings and workshops, lectures at
academic and government institutions and local observatories, abstracts of
presentations in published works, and articles in peer-reviewed high-profile
scientific journals, and electronic media.