* 1125620
* Systems Approaches to Identify Gene Regulatory Networks in the Grasses
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Erich Grotewold, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 12/31/2016
* USD 4,234,908.00

PI: Erich Grotewold (The Ohio State University)&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Andrea I Doseff
(The Ohio State University and John Gray (University of
Toledo)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing the architecture of gene regulatory
networks and linking system components to agronomic traits is an emerging theme
in plant systems biology. This project provides a concerted effort to
comprehensively dissect the gene regulatory networks that target the metabolism
of maize phenolic compounds, such as phenylpropanoids and flavonoids, of
fundamental agricultural importance. This study combines the discovery of novel
transcription factors (TFs) that control maize phenolic accumulation, with the
identification of their interaction partners and of direct target genes for
individual and TF combinations. The investigation of allelic TF preference to
gene regulation will provide insights that will be applicable to grasses
irrespective of ploidy level. The evolutionary conservation/divergence of
identified TF-DNA complexes will be evaluated in other grasses, providing an
unparalleled understanding of how evolution impacted plant gene regulatory
systems, and resulting in knowledge directly applicable to cereal breeding.
Together with the generation of a comprehensive and centralized maize
transcription factor open reading frame (ORF) collection and antibodies to
several regulatory proteins, these studies will significantly advance
understanding of the regulation and evolution of one of the most important plant
metabolic pathways in plants. The resources generated will be useful in
accelerating the study of the regulation of other important metabolic and
developmental pathways in maize and other grasses. The deployment of the data
here generated through the Web-accessible knowledge base GRASSIUS
(www.grassius.org) and MaizeGDB (www.maizegdb.org) will continue to ensure that
the findings derived from this project will have the broadest possible
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates genetics, molecular
biology, biochemistry, mathematics, and bioinformatics for the comparative
transcriptional genomics of phenolic compounds in grass crops. Its
interdisciplinary nature provides unique opportunities for the training of
students and postdocs across several disciplines. The strong history of
involvement of students corresponding to underrepresented groups by the PI/co-
PIs will be further expanded through the synergy provided by the interaction
between Ohio State University, a land-grant university with a leading research
component, and University of Toledo, a multicultural research extensive
university with a strong education mission. Ongoing training will be
complemented by the application of tools and resources developed here in
workshops at Ohio State University and the University of Puerto Rico Mayag√ºez.
The inception of SIGuE (Success In Graduate Education) program, specifically
designed to increase the recruitment and success of underrepresented minorities
in graduate education, provides a natural continuum in efforts to better connect
undergraduate and graduate instruction.