* 1125540
* Dissertation Research: Religious Organization and Political Structure in Pre-Hispanic Southern Costa Rica
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, Felipe Sol will carry out an
archaeological survey in the Upper Térraba Basin of southern Costa Rica in order
to study the relation between religious organization and political structure in
the region's ancient societies. Religion was often an important political
element in early complex societies, but the role that religion played in the
initial establishment of centralized political organization seems highly
varied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Upper Térraba Basin was apparently integrated
into a society of regional scale during the Chiriquí period (around 1000 AD).
Its principal center was a large community at the archaeological site of Rivas,
an extensive complex of ceremonial and residential platforms with associated
cemeteries. The survey that Mr. Sol will carry out will document the patterns of
residence and the distribution of ritual and economic activities across the
region in which Rivas emerged as a major center. The regional distribution of
settlements - and especially the patterns of change through time in this
distribution - are sensitive indicators of the relationship of a hinterland
population to a political center, and of the centripetal forces that draw a
regional population together. The artifacts recovered in different occupation
zones across the region will provide indicators of the distribution of both
economic and ritual activities and help to identify what kinds of activities
were especially centralized at Rivas. The results of Mr. Sol's survey will place
the emerging political center in a broader regional context, and enable him to
assess the role that religion played in the emergence of one complex society in
the past. It will thus help to understand more generally the ways in which
politics, economy and religion connect in the large-scale complex societies in
which most of humanity lives today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have
broader impacts as well. As dissertation research it is vital to the training of
the doctoral candidate. It will also enhance public understanding of science by
collaborating with the Tropical Science Center in its work with local
communities to increase appreciation of the natural and cultural resources of
the region and of the opportunities that these present for scientific research.
As a regional survey it will also make a major contribution to the registration
of the region's archaeological remains and aid in the protection and
preservation of Costa Rican cultural heritage.