* 1125872
* EAGER: Engineering for Regenerative Medicine
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Yuan-Shin Lee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2013
* USD 155,497.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will investigate the
requirements for manufacturing systems to support regenerative medicine.
Regenerative medicine creates living, functional tissues to repair or replace
tissue or organ function lost. This field holds the promise of regenerating
damaged tissues and organs in the body either by stimulating previously
irreparable organs to heal themselves, or by growing tissues and organs in the
laboratory for safe implantation. Importantly, regenerative medicine has the
potential to solve the problem of the shortage of donor organs compared to the
number of patients that require life-saving transplantation, as well as solve
the problem of organ transplant rejection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus in the
initial effort will be to translate the recipes and protocols used in the early
production of regenerative tissue and organs into manufacturing engineering
terms and specifications. The major result of this early bridging research will
be translating the biological and medical requirements that have been developed
for one specific organ (bladders) into the kinds of engineering process
definitions and resource requirements needed to develop full scale
manufacturing. Formal engineering models that will explicitly define the
resource requirements for the bioreactors used to produce tissue and organs will
be developed, along with process models that characterize the transformations
that take place both outside and within the bio-reactors. The intent of the
formal model development is not simply to chart the current methods used to
produce regenerative products but rather to define the basic transformations
that take place as well as to try to identify early constraints on the resources
and process methods used in their manufacture. These process models will then
become a key resource in developing manufacturing system models for efficient,
cost effective production systems for regenerative products.