* 1125490
* BRIGE: Engineering-Science of Gastrointestinal Motility Induced Permeability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Leonard Pease, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2015
* USD 186,998.00

PI: Pease, Leonard&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1125490&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
gastrointestinal (GI) tract plays a key role in the processing of nutrients,
absorption of pharmaceuticals and protection of the body from disease. Despite
the importance of GI tract permeability to each of these processes, very little
is understood about how mechanical motion of this organ (e.g. peristalsis)
affects its permeability. Here we address this gap in our knowledge by
systematically studying the influence of peristalsis on molecular and
nanoparticle transport through the esophageal wall. Although our long-term goal
is to understand permeability throughout the GI tract and its role in disease
and disease interventions, our initial focus and the focus of this BRIGE
application is on permeability of the esophagus because the esophagus is
chronically understudied relative to other portions of the GI tract, yet
relatively more accessible through esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD or
endoscopy). We evaluate the hypothesis that peristalsis enhances permeability
and that esophageal permeability is size
dependent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This application is
intellectually meritorious because it provides the first quantitative and
mechanistic framework to evaluate the influence of pressure driven &amp; stress
driven pericellular perfusion (associated with peristalsis) on the transit of
disease markers (e.g. the protein MBP-1), pharmaceutical agents, and
nanoparticles of various sizes through the esophageal wall. The proposed
systematic treatment couples experimental exploration with quantitative theory
to provide comprehensive and quantitative insights into the biophysical
mechanisms governing esophageal permeability. This work is critical to
understanding the role of peristalsis in the etiology and pathogenesis of
gastrointestinal diseases including eosinophilic esophagitis, a rapidly emerging
orphan disease. The PI has full access to the resources of affiliated
departments, the Health Sciences Core Facilities, and Center for Comparative
Medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research program
will have a variety of broad impacts.&lt;br/&gt;First, the proposed project will
provide a quantitative infrastructure to design treatments to a variety of GI
tract diseases ranging from esophageal diseases to autoimmune diseases including
Crone?s diseases, where the esophageal lining is also compromised. The program
will begin to elucidate the scientific principles necessary to understand the
biological fate of environmental nanoparticles within the GI tract and the
potential of nanoparticles as oral medicinal agents. The improved understanding
of esophageal function will be broadly disseminated through high impact factor
journal publications and public presentations. A key feature of the broadening
participation plan is the inclusion of aspiring women and minority engineers,
who will be invited to present their research at national meetings to reward
their efforts, stimulate their excitement toward future research, and recognize
their connectivity to other women and minorities in science. The graduate and
undergraduates students funded through this proposal will be selected from
underrepresented groups to broaden their participation. Women, Black, Hispanic,
and Native American students will be specifically invited to apply for the
positions this proposal creates. They will be asked to present their work in
courses taught by the PI and to MESA clubs to provide direct role models for
other underrepresented students. The proposed research will enhance the
partnership between Chemical Engineering and the Schools of Medicine and
Pharmacy. The proposed effort enlightens medicine by providing a better
understanding of the function of normal and diseased esophageal models and
enhances engineering by providing quantitative analysis of mass transport of
biological