* 1125782
* MRI: Acquisition of an electron microprobe for research in Earth sciences, materials science, and applied physics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jonathan Stebbins, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 761,133.00

This grant will fund the acquisition of a new Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer
(EPMA), which will replace an aging and malfunctioning instrument and thus
greatly enhance the capabilities of a facility critical to research and
scientific training in the Earth and Materials Sciences. This instrument focuses
a narrow beam of electrons onto the surface of a solid material such as a rock
or mineral, an experimental product, or an electronic component. It then
analyzes the emitted X-rays and provides precise chemical analyses on spots as
small as one micrometer. Images and maps of composition can also be produced to
visualize the complex spatial variations that are captured in both natural and
laboratory-grown materials, which reveal details of processes and history. A
fully-functioning EPMA with state-of-the-art capabilities will be essential to a
wide range of research programs in the Earth sciences, ranging from experimental
studies of the minerals of the planet's deep interior, to samples obtained from
the mantle and crust that reveal the intricate processes of the growth of
continents and ocean basins, to studies of fluid flow in fractures near the
surface and chemical weathering. In the fields of Applied Physics and Materials
Science, the EPMA will provide critical and unique data for a variety of
research on complex electronic and superconducting materials, on ceramics, and
on glasses for applications such as display screens and solar cells. In all of
these fields, most of the research is funded by grants from NSF or other U.S.
government agencies. The EPMA facility will be synergistic with a number of
other world-class analytical instruments at Stanford such as ion microprobes,
electron microscopes, and geochronology labs. Besides being a major contribution
to the research infrastructure of the University, and being key to the research
of at least five women faculty in our Department of Geological and Environmental
Sciences, the new EPMA will provide wonderful opportunities for scientific
training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students.