* 1125063
* Conference:  FASEB Conference on Mobile DNA in Mammalian Genomes to be held August 7-12, 2011 in Snowmass, CO
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Mark Batzer, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2012
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The FASEB summer research conference on "Mobile DNA in
Mammalian Genomes" will take place in Snowmass, Colorado on August 7-12, 2011.
The continued development of high throughput DNA sequencing, as well as other
high throughput techniques, is revolutionizing the understanding of genomics and
leading to rapid advances in understanding of the interplay of mobile elements
and their host genomes. Mobile elements have been shown to have a major role in
the genetic instability, evolution and function of genomes. Mobile elements
represent almost half of mammalian genomes, and therefore often represent
confusing and difficult to analyze portions of these genomes. As in previous
years, sessions will focus on all of the major types of mobile elements found in
mammals, as well as their evolution, and impact on genomic structure and
function. This year will specifically highlight the importance of comparative
genomics and epigenetics to the mobile element field. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Bringing scientists together in this area is
critical to the exchange of new information to the education of young scientists
on the unique aspects of this field. Emphasis has been placed on including
younger scientists among the speakers and on encouraging female scientists,
students and postdoctoral researchers to attend. All attendees will have the
opportunity to present their work at either a poster or a talk. This year there
will also be a 'meet the speaker' session to provide young scientists with
dedicated time to meet and discuss science with successful senior scientists and
luminaries in the field. The conference format and location are designed to
foster scientific exchange among participants. A special issue in the new
journal, Mobile DNA, has been proposed to help disseminate our results more
broadly. Analysis of mobile elements using bioinformatics approaches has been a
particularly rich area of research and is especially effective as a research and
teaching tool within an undergraduate environment. Thus, a number of meeting
participants will be from institutions with heavy undergraduate exposure, and
many opportunities will continue to develop to engage students in this field.