* 1125789
* BRIGE: Nanocrystal Probes for Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 210,331.00

Intellectual Merit: Nanoscale metal tips behave like optical antenna to
facilitate near-field amplification of scattered light and are being explored as
high-resolution scanning probes for ultrasensitive vibrational spectroscopy. To
obtain the highest signal gain from each probe, the metal tip must be designed
with highly regulated size and shape. Current fabrication methods produce tips
with a range of nanoscopic features that are difficult to characterize and
suffer from both mechanical and thermal damage upon use. The research objective
of this BRIGE project is to fabricate metal tips by assembling colloidal metal
nanocrystals onto an atomic force microscope tip. This proposal will evaluate
the optical response of nanocrystal-based tips as a function of nanocrystal
shape, size, and assembly geometry. Nanocrystal assemblies will be engineered to
achieve specific near-field electromagnetic properties, including tunable
plasmon excitation wavelengths, electromagnetic coupling between multiple
nanocrystals, and optimal evanescent field decay lengths. Finally, this project
will seek to integrate these nanocrystal assemblies with scanning probe
instrumentation and to demonstrate tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy for
applications such as chemical identification, detection, and mapping.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed research will lead to the
development of robust, tailored, and ultrasensitive nanoscale probe tips for
tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and other near-field optical measurements. An
optical technique that is able to pair quantitative chemical analysis with
spatial resolution beyond the diffraction limit would have a tremendous impact
in a broad range of fields that require surface characterization, including:
chemical sensing and molecular identification, heterogeneous catalysis,
nanostructure characterization, biomaterials development, and basic life
sciences research. This research project will make broad impacts by integrating
research with mentoring, education, and social outreach. The research outcomes
of this proposal will be introduced to undergraduates within the NanoEngineering
curriculum at UC San Diego as an example of how basic research in
nanoengineering can drive technological innovation. Work will be conducted with
community-based organizations to promote nanoscience education at the precollege
level, with particular attention given toward broadening participation through
the inclusion of underrepresented minorities and women. In addition, the
proposed efforts include the development of online wikis for the dissemination
of research results beyond the nanomaterials community. These different
educational components will be designed to engage engineers at all levels of
education, encouraging open lines of scientific discussion with their peers,
mentors, and community.