* 1125535
* BRIGE: Microfabricated Bacterial Environments with Integrated Nanofluidic Electrochemical Sensors for Systems Biology Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Edgar Goluch, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 190,719.00

PI: Goluch&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1125535&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; New tools
are enabling unprecedented advances in biology and medicine. This proposal
describes an interdisciplinary research program that aims to create, test, and
disseminate micro and nanofluidic technology for quantitative biological
studies. Specifically, the behavior of individual bacterial cells will be
investigated using nanofluidic electrochemical sensors in combination with
traditional optical techniques. Initial experiments are focused on detection of
quorum sensing (or auto-inducing) molecules which are small electroactive
molecules that are excreted by many bacterial cells, including several involved
in human diseases. The platform will be used to investigate effects of external
stimuli, static heterogeneity, and the role of chemical communication in
bacterial populations. &lt;br/&gt; This approach will utilize nanofluidic
electrochemical sensors that are microfabricated on large silicon substrates.
These nanofluidic sensors allow for real-time electrochemical detection of
concentrations as low as 100 nM and can be easily integrated with larger fluidic
systems. A microfluidic architecture, complete with control valves, will be
aligned over the nanofluidic sensors on the silicon substrate to allow transport
and trapping of individual bacterial cells near the sensors. The microfluidic
architecture will be constructed using a photo-curable transparent polymer
(polydimethylsiloxane) via soft lithography. The transparent nature of the
microfluidic channels will allow for optical monitoring of the cells. The
assembled system will allow the simultaneous real-time electrochemical and
optical characterization of individual cells. Of particular interest are the
physical and biochemical changes the cells will undergo when exposed to various
external factors, such as pH, temperature, buffer concentration, surface
modification, and drug molecules. &lt;br/&gt; Initial electrochemical testing
will be conducted with known commercially available quorum sensing molecules
(e.g. autoinducer-2, pyocyanin) and validation of the microfluidic architecture
will utilize microscale beads to simulate bacterial cells. In the final stage of
this project, bacterial cells (e.g. E. coli, P. aeruginosa) will be transported
and trapped next to the nanofluidic sensing elements using a microfluidic
platform. The generation of quorum sensing molecules by the cells will be
monitored electrochemically while the cellular response to the molecules will be
observed optically. The long term objective for this research is to provide an
integrated chip-in-a-lab platform for systems biology experiments where
researchers will be able to stimulate and monitor hundreds of individual cells
simultaneously. &lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: Few alternatives exist for
monitoring single cells. The proposed work will investigate the feasibility and
practicality of electrochemical detection as a technique for studying the
behavior of individual cells in conjunction with existing optical techniques in
a high-throughput manner. The proposal will also investigate microfluidic
systems for handling of individual bacterial cells with diameters of 1-2
micrometers, which remains a difficult technological challenge. This broadly
applicable platform will revolutionize the field of systems biology by providing
label-free chemical information for potentially thousands of individual cells
simultaneously. No such high-throughput electronic sensor technology is
currently available. The fundamental questions being investigated will give
insight to the behavior and interactions of bacterial cells that can be applied
to biotechnology, medicine, and environmental research. &lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impacts: The interdisciplinary nature of this research will foster
collaborations between engineers and biologists and train researchers for
emerging dynamic work environments. The proposed technology can be potentially
employed for a large variety applications ranging from microbial fuel cells to
drug screening to biomedical instrumentation to evolutionary biology. In
general, a better fundamental understanding of the electrochemical and
micro/nanoscale systems involved in this project will lead to the next
generation of tools for researchers in the biosciences. The importance of this
project and engineering in general will be disseminated to the public by
actively engaging teachers and students ranging from the middle school to
undergraduate levels. The PI will visit local inner city school to provide
information about engineering career opportunities. Live and virtual laboratory
tours will be offered. Hands on training in the laboratory will be provided for
high school students and teachers from Boston inner city schools, such as
Roxbury Preparatory Charter School. Middle and high school teachers
participating in the training program will be partner with the research group to
design kits and teaching modules to help educate students in junior high and
high school science classes about nanobiotechonolgy. The developed material will
initially be assessed at Pope John Paul II Catholic Grade School, a
predominantly minority school on Chicago?s southwest side. At the college level,
research experiences for undergraduates will be offered in the research group to
reinforce engineering concepts learned in the classroom.