* 1125332
* CDI-Type II: Mapping Complex Biomolecular Reactions with Large Scale Replica Exchange Simulations on National Production Cyberinfrastructure
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Ronald Levy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,625,000.00

Large scale, realistic simulations of complex biological and chemical phenomena
at the atomic level of resolution level present a grand challenge for molecular
simulation. Effective sampling of conformational space may require large numbers
of computationally intensive simulations which are coupled to one another.
Enhanced conformational sampling algorithms based on the application of biasing
forces and replica exchange generalized ensembles, whereby a large number of
replicas of the system are simulated in parallel, among the most powerful
methods to study a wide variety of physicochemical processes. Uncoupled methods
currently in use are very slowly convergent and often of dubious reliability as
the independent simulations are not in equilibrium with one another. The key
aspect of replica exchange (RE) algorithms is that replicas of the system
periodically exchange their state parameters allowing them to rapidly traverse
conformational space and to enhance equilibration. Current synchronous
formulations of the RE method in wide use, however, are highly limited in terms
of scalability and control when many exchanging replicas are involved. This
limitation precludes the use of RE simulations to new application areas that
require the calculation of high-dimensional free energy surfaces, and
necessitate the dynamic control of 103-104 replicas as the landscape evolves.
This project involves the development of a robust adaptive force biasing
procedure coupled with an asynchronous replica exchange method. The research
team is developing a novel infrastructure, the Replica Exchange Frame work
(REFW) to enable the execution of very large scale RE simulations on a broad
range of production computational resources, including but not limited to NSF
TeraGrid (and its successor XD), cloud and campus-level cluster environments, as
well as the forthcoming Blue Waters supercomputer. The REFW is being applied to
applications that present multiple levels of complexity, such as coupled ligand
binding, conformational change and catalysis in the glmS ribozyme/riboswitch
that were hitherto not possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cyberinfrastructure
created by this research team enables realistic simulations of important
biological processes that have relevance in many areas of biology, biophysics,
medicinal chemistry, and biophysics with the potential to impact human health.
Additionally, the REWF may be applied in many other scientific areas that
increasingly rely on realistic simulation including catalysis, earthquake
prediction and petroleum engineering. The project is also training the next
generation of computational scientists to apply these methods to solve high-
impact interdisciplinary research problems. The resulting technology and
training enables the study of a host of new reactive chemical problems of
unprecedented complexity, and greatly facilitates innovation and discovery
through advanced computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Cyber-Enabled
Discovery and Innovation Program award and is co-funded by the Division of
Chemistry and the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.