* 1125054
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Synthetic Organic Approaches to Carbon Nanotubes with Well-Defined Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Yves Rubin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2015
* USD 390,000.00

In this International Collaboration in Chemistry between US Investigators and
their Counterparts Abroad (ICC) project funded by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Yves Rubin
of the University of California at Los Angeles will develop methods for the
solution-phase self-assembly of carbon-rich macrocycles into columnar stacks and
study the controlled polymerization of these stacks into nanotubular carbon-rich
systems in solution and on surfaces by STM. This work includes an international
collaboration with Prof. Yoshito Tobe of Osaka University, Japan. Prof. Tobe's
work will be funded by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).
The ultimate thrust of this project is to achieve carbonization of these
nanotubular carbon-rich products into well-defined carbon nanotubes with precise
location of side-chains. The research has three complementary components. In the
first part, the research will focus on the use of molecular assembly of self-
complementary carbon-rich macrocyclic derivatives to achieve the correct
stacking parameters that lead to facile thermal topochemical polymerization of
columnar stacks of macrocycles. In the second part, controlled polymerization of
the carbon-rich macrocycles will be examined and optimized, both within single
crystals through heat, irradiation or high pressure, or with self-assembled
nanotubules on a surface by pulsed voltage from STM tips, UV irradiation, or
heat. Finally, a study of the structures and properties of the resulting carbon
nanotubes will determine if they have the desired well-defined widths as well as
carbon network and substituent topologies corresponding to their designed
molecular precursors. The broader impacts involve training graduate and
undergraduate students, enhancing research infrastructure by bringing together
an international collaborative group, and the potential societal benefits of a
long sought access to well-defined carbon nanotubes with unique electronic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of carbon nanotubes,
ultrasmall tubes comprised of a single layer of carbon atoms, with defined width
has been a grand challenge of carbon-based nanotechnology. Ready access to
carbon nanotubes with precise dimensions and electronic properties is not yet
possible, and this research seeks to solve part of this problem by achieving a
controlled formation of large sections of carbon nanotubes. The results of this
research could ultimately impact industries and commercial products that would
utilize nanoelectronics.