* 1125716
* Conference: University of Minnesota Minority Undergraduate Summer Research Program in Neuroendocrinology. The conference will be held at University of Minnesota-Twin Cities.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Robert Meisel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 05/31/2012
* USD 45,000.00

The 1990s were declared ?The Decade of the Brain? by then President George Bush
and Congress. This declaration affirmed what many had known for centuries; the
critical importance of the nervous system?s role in coordinating physiological
and behavioral processes across a diverse set of taxa. This
Presidential/Congressional mandate spurred on a new era of basic science
advances in our understanding of neural function. The challenge many years later
remains to excite a new generation of scientists committed to accelerating the
advances made in this fundamental biological discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
persisting gap in recruiting talented students to careers in science is among
historically underrepresented minority groups. The number of underrepresented
minorities in neuroscience is woefully small despite the ever growing numbers of
these populations in the US. A number of studies suggest that the solution to
the problem is to engage and nurture these students through early inclusion in
research projects coupled with academic and social support and professional
development. Exposure to effective role models, i.e. members of underrepresented
minorities who have achieved a measure of success, is warranted as it allows
students to see themselves in similar roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the University of Minnesota Minority Undergraduate Summer
Research Program is to establish a rigorous program to recruit, nurture, and
mentor promising undergraduate science majors from traditionally
underrepresented populations to professional careers in research in behavioral
neuroendocrinology. The plan for this 10-week course is to 1) recruit these
students to a career in science early in their undergraduate career by providing
them with a significant research experience, 2) expose these students to the
field of biological sciences at large through a capstone poster presentation
with students in other research areas, and 3) retain these students in the
field, through professional development and ongoing mentored support.