* 1125993
* MRI : Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Undergraduate Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Lynn Bradley, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 261,086.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Professor
Stephanie Sen from The College of New Jersey and colleagues Lynn Bradley, David
Hunt, Danielle Guarracino and Abby O'Connor will acquire a 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer. The award will enhance research training and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as (a) alkene hydrogenation by (allyl)Ni(II)
complexes containing stabilizing pendant coordinating arms, (b) probing hormone-
protein interactions implicated in disease, (c) development of small molecule
proteasome inhibitors, (d) studies of insect juvenile hormone metabolism, (e)
synthetic methods for ring construction, and (f) use of cocrystals as active
pharmaceutical ingredients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for
the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research not
only at The College of New Jersey but also will support nearby institutions such
as Rider University and also industrial collaborations.