* 1125592
* BRIGE: The Production of Biodiesel Using Liquid-Phase Electrical Discharge Plasmas
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Selma Mededovic, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2014
* USD 174,751.00

PI: Mededovic, Selma&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1125592&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Over the past ten
years, the PI has demonstrated that an electrical discharge in dimethyl
sulfoxide yields diamond-like carbon and that discharges in methanol and sucrose
solutions yield hydrogen gas and ethanol, respectively. More recently, she
discovered that within thirty minutes of plasma treatment, the viscosity of
vegetable oil is reduced by about sixty percent. Thus, the main goal of this
proposal is to investigate and assess electrical discharges as a novel
technology for the production of biodiesel and to study the fundamental
chemistry of plasmas in oils. The first objective will be achieved by conducting
electrical discharges in different vegetable oils (sunflower oil, palm oil and
coconut oil) with or without additives (methanol, glycerol and sucrose),
identifying reaction by-products and characterizing physical properties of the
liquids after the discharge. In order to elucidate and categorize chemical
processes inside the plasma and thus achieve the second objective, it is
critical to examine the nature of chemical reactions. There has always been a
suspicion that chemical reactions in plasmas are not driven purely by the
electron impact dissociation but also, because of the high plasma temperatures,
the pyrolysis. Thus, the development of a mathematical model to predict the
plasma temperature will assist in answering fundamental questions regarding the
types of chemical reactions in plasma and facilitate the understanding of the
reaction pathways for the conversion of vegetable oil into biodiesel. The PI has
two working hypotheses in the current proposal; 1) In the absence of additives
(i.e. methanol), during an electrical discharge in vegetable oil high-energy
electrons in plasma will dissociate triglyceride molecules and yield short- and
long-chained radicals which will recombine to form, among many other by-
products, alkyl esters; and 2) The presence of additives will increase the yield
of alkyl esters: In methanol/vegetable oil mixture, an electron-driven
transesterification will take place. Electrical discharge in glycerol will yield
methanol. To the contrary, the discharge in sucrose solution will yield ethanol.
Thus, by adding either glycerol or sucrose to the vegetable oil, we can
simultaneously produce methanol or ethanol and form alkyl esters.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The PI's primary efforts have always been
directed towards elucidating chemical reactions in plasma and at the plasma-
liquid boundary, thus advancing the fundamental knowledge of liquid-phase
electrical discharges. It is expected that the experimental results of the
proposed work will clarify the chemical degradation pathways in plasmas. The
specific focus placed on distinguishing the role of electron impact vs. thermal
dissociation reactions using mathematical modeling will assist in understanding
the nature of chemical reactions in plasmas. For more practical applications, we
expect for the results of this proposal to confirm electrical discharge as an
inexpensive and effective technology for dissociating molecules into useful by-
products, i.e. biodiesel. Additionally, the future experiments which will
include electrical discharges in algae oil and animal fat could be greatly
beneficial to the general public. On educational and diversity impact, the PI
has begun collaboration with the principal of a local high-school with the
purpose of encouraging young women to pursue a career in engineering. The PI has
offered her laboratory to the group of female high-school students to conduct
several simple experiments related to this project. The goal is to encourage
some of these students to join the engineering program at Clarkson University.
The PI is also collaborating with the Office of Institutional Diversity
Initiatives (IDI) at Clarkson University, which actively recruits under-
represented people to pursue careers in science and engineering. Through the
IDI, for this project, the PI will recruit two students during summer and thus
promote diversifying chemical engineering to the greatest extent possible. The
PI also encourages current female undergraduate from her laboratory to continue
her research as the graduate student. The afore-mentioned students from the
under-represented groups will be supported by BRIGE funding. In addition, the
results from this project will be integrated into the courses that the PI
teaches. One example includes studying the kinetics of complex chemical systems.