* 1125660
* BRIGE:  Nanoparticle-Based Photovoltaic Cells from Earth-Abundant Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Lorenzo Mangolini, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 175,000.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
provides funding for the development of a novel approach to the fabrication of
copper-zinc-tin-sulfide alloy (CZTS) photovoltaic cells. The project will
investigate critical aspects of the fabrication of solar cells, starting from
the selection of viable precursors and ending with device characterization. For
the first time, CZTS nanoparticles will be synthesized using a gas-phase,
continuous flow non-thermal plasma reactor starting from solutions of metal
salts. This process generates a highly reactive environment which is expected to
enable high-rate production of high-quality nanoparticles. Particle morphology
and composition will be carefully characterized with the goal of tight control
of particle stoichiometry which is expected to have a crucial influence on the
performance of the photovoltaic device. The particles will be functionalized
using in-flight plasma-initiated surface chemistry and the resulting ink is
expected to be compatible with roll-to-roll coating techniques. A densified
semiconducting layer will be realized by annealing using various techniques. The
prototype solar cell will be tested with the goal of improving the power
conversion efficiency (currently 10%) as compared to devices based on the same
material system. And the feasibility of the plasma-based fabrication approach
for the production of efficient CZTS solar cells will be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the application of a scalable
process for the CZTS system would provide a new, commercially viable approach to
renewable energy production. This material system is attractive because it is
based on cheap, earth-abundant, non-toxic elements. This project will also
advance the field of plasma processing of materials by investigating the gas-
phase chemistry and the dynamic of particle formation for a material system that
has not been widely investigated.