* 1125114
* BRIGE: Preventing Imminent Failures of Pipeline Networks via Real Time Damage Detection and Location System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Didem Ozevin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2014
* USD 173,559.00

Intellectual Merit: The buried and on-ground pipelines develop damage due to
temporal variables such as corrosion and creep or instantaneous threats such as
earthquake and impact. The detection of leaking oil, water or natural gas in the
pressurized pipelines before reaching structural instability is important to
prevent any catastrophic failure and, consequently, detrimental environmental
impact. The objective of this BRIGE proposal is to prevent such failures of
pipeline networks using a real time damage detection scheme for early
diagnostics. The research approach is based on understanding wave propagation
characteristics in steel and polymer based pipelines due to leak, damage and
impact, and develop novel shear sensor in order to detect and locate the source
based on propagating elastic waves. Novel piezoelectric based shear sensor will
allow large sensor spacing for monitoring pipelines with a limited number of
sensors. A new location algorithm will be implemented using the geometric
connectivity of pipeline structures, which allows locating the source in multi-
dimensions using one dimensional sensor array. The developed sensor and system
will be validated in field testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Successful implementation of the research will eliminate unexpected failures in
pipeline networks. The results of this research will be shared with pipeline
authorities and organizations in the field of pipeline inspection and safety in
order to demonstrate that the engineering methods can prevent impending
catastrophic failures as a way of increasing public safety and protecting
environment. The educational outreach and broadening participation approaches of
the research will be to educate and mentor selected students from
underrepresented groups who can be pioneers in the future challenges of critical
infrastructure design and analysis; add a special interdisciplinary technical
elective course to the curriculum to address how sensing systems are being
integrated into parts of civil structures to prevent catastrophic failures; and
support the participation of high school students into the research to attract
them to engineering.