* 1125674
* BRIGE:  Enhancing Nanoparticle Dispersion though Surface Modification using Biopolymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Achintya Bezbaruah, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 229,861.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
provides funding for the development of low-environmental impact polymer to coat
nanoscale particles for groundwater remediation. Plant-based polymers will be
modified and their structure-property relationships will be studied to
understand the impacts of various functional groups on dispersion, contaminant
treatability, aquifer injectability, and subsurface mobility of coated nanoscale
zero-valent iron particles. The results obtained from the experiments will be
used to fine-tune the final architecture of biopolymers to coat the particles.
The overall objective of this research is to study the impacts of manipulation
of the biopolymer functional groups on dispersion, contaminant degradation, and
transport behaviors of the coated iron particles as well as biodegradability of
the polymer coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
lead to the development of smarter and low-impact groundwater remediation tools
which will benefit practitioners in environmental remediation. The findings from
this research will elucidate the impacts of polymer architecture on aquifer
transport of polymer coated nanomaterials. The biodegradation studies are
expected to lead to the development of new polymer biodegradation test protocols
and help in better understanding the degradation behavior of complex engineered
nanomaterials in an aquatic environment. This research project will add to the
body of knowledge in environmental engineering, polymer science, and
nanotechnology as well in biomedical science. The biodegradable polymers
synthesized within this project may find uses in drug and nutrient delivery in
human and plants. The project will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups (Native Americans, first generation Americans, and women) in fundamental
research. The high school students recruited for research in this project are
expected to pursue higher education and careers in science and engineering.
Programs organized among Native American middle/high school students and
students with disabilities will help in inculcating the spirit of scientific
research among them.