* 1125325
* The causes and consequences of opinion formation in direct democracy elections
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Gary Segura, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 413,516.00

Elections offer voters many choices. While voter choice in candidate elections
has received a great deal of scholarly attention other choices, such as those
found in direct democracy elections, have not. This project helps address this
imbalance by conducting surveys exploring vote choice on ballot propositions. In
so doing, this project advances societal understanding of the nature of voter
decision-making, a valuable contribution to better understanding the strengths
and limitations of direct democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the project lies in its examination of two connected sets of puzzles
concerning the causes and consequences of opinion formation on ballot
propositions. In the first set of puzzles the project examines how voters form
opinions on ballot propositions. Existing literature emphasizes endorsements
made by political actors such as interest groups or political parties. But
previous research raises more questions than it answers since endorsements imply
that voters are uninformed enough not to know how to vote on a problem, yet
informed enough to understand certain kinds of cues. Similarly, an endorsement-
driven approach may explain why opinions form but cannot explain whether
opinions - once formed - remain stable or change. This last point in particular
has not been explored to date. It also connects the second set of puzzles
relating to the consequences of direct democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
second set of puzzles, the proposal examines whether, and how, direct democracy
sets the agenda in elections and affects candidate vote choice and turnout in
federal and state elections. Although these issues have been considered in the
literature to date, the conditions under which these effects are seen, and who
turns out as a consequence of ballot propositions, do not have established
answers. The answer to both sets of puzzles is that effects vary not just over
individuals but also over the kinds of issues themselves and, importantly, over
differences in state political context. In order to understand both sets of
puzzles, it is necessary to understand the conditional nature of these
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to conduct web surveys before
and after the 2012 presidential election in conjunction with the ANES. The study
is augmented with instrumentation that addresses questions with more appropriate
data and, further, will allow a better examination of the effects of state
political environments. In coordinating with ANES, the project can apply the
intellectual richness of the leading survey of electoral behavior to an
understanding of voting on direct democracy issues. In return, direct democracy
content may inform models of candidate vote choice and turnout, the central aims
of the ANES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project lies in
three areas. First, it will establish the degree to which voters can and do have
opinions informed by cues and, further, the extent to which those opinions
remain stable. Second, it will establish the degree to which choices on national
level candidates are shaped by local political context. Third, the project
offers several empirical contributions. One assumption of the ANES is that
issues relevant to vote choice are national in scope but there are often
important state issues that shape these decisions, especially ballot measures.
If that is true, then ANES' focus on national level politics is only part of the
story. If it is the case that initiatives can inform vote choice even in federal
elections - either by shaping the criteria voters use to evaluate candidates or
affecting turnout - then this may help shape future ANES instrumentation.
Lastly, the proposed study will markedly improve the quality of data available
to study questions about direct democracy elections.