* 1125539
* Mobility Strategies Among Latin American Immigrants in the South
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Irene Browne, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 143,890.00

SES-1125539&lt;br/&gt;Irene A. Browne&lt;br/&gt;Emory
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobility
Strategies among Latin American Immigrants in the
South&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates how race and ethnic
inequality influences mobility strategies of middle class Dominican and Mexican
immigrant parents in Atlanta. In particular, we ask, "what role does
discrimination play in immigrant parents" decisions about where to live, where
to send children to school, what organizations to join, what social networks to
cultivate and what activities to pursue? Moving beyond the Black/White paradigm
of discrimination, we identify the ways that the current national climate of
anti-Latino hostility creates a context in which middle class Latinos leverage
resources to secure opportunities for their children. We capture key differences
in experiences and perceptions of discrimination, racial/ethnic identity and
mobility strategies among Latino groups by conducting in-depth interviews with
70 middle class Mexican parents and 70 middle class Dominican parents. Our
project addresses the urgent questions of race relations and immigrant
incorporation amidst a rapidly shifting demographic landscape, uncovering the
ways that ethnic and class boundary construction link discrimination and
mobility strategies in reciprocal, ongoing processes. By focusing on two
specific Latino groups in Atlanta, we gain insight into how the national climate
plays out through the local race, ethnic and class dynamics of a new immigrant
destination, where historically black/white race relations are encountered,
challenged and potentially transformed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:
Our study highlights a segment of the Latino immigrant population "the middle
class" that remains virtually invisible in national discourse on immigration.
Our comparative study of two groups can educate the public about the class and
ethnic diversity of the Latino population in the U.S. Our project also speaks to
policy debates over whether the harsh anti-immigrant legislation recently
implemented at the state and local levels disadvantage Latino immigrants who are
documented as well, creating barriers for members of the Latino middle class and
their children. By identifying the mechanisms through which race and ethnic
inequality influences pivotal mobility decisions, and identifying important
class and national cleavages among groups of Latinos, we also hope to discover
opportunities for cooperation and coalition-building among historically
disenfranchised groups.