* 1125307
* The Role of Urban Centers in Mobilization and Democratization
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Edward Crenshaw, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 07/31/2014
* USD 64,192.00

The Role of Urban Centers in Mobilization and Democratization

SES - 1125307 Edward Crenshaw Ohio State University

Description

Past research suggests that many autocratic regimes concentrate their countries'
populations and economic activities in single, very large cities (usually
national capitals). This pattern is known as "urban primacy" in the scientific
literature. In the short term, this allows highly centralized, autocratic
regimes to maximize economic efficiency and easily monitor and control the rise
of political opposition. This project instead examines the long-term, unintended
consequences this urban primacy strategy has for autocratic regimes. Over time,
primate cities can concentrate grievances because rapid rural-to-urban migration
causes increasing inequalities. Moreover, these densely populated urban centers
increasingly offer a unique blend of resources that encourage political
mobilization (e.g., local and international media, non-governmental and civic
organizations). Thus, the PIs hypothesize that primate cities may indeed become
an Achilles heel for authoritarian regimes, serving as key sites of political
contention. In short, the project examines whether -- contrary to common
perceptions -- urban primacy plays a crucial role in explaining under which
conditions authoritarianism has yielded to democracy over time at a global
scale.

The project employs pooled times-series and zero-inflated negative binomial
regressions to investigate the relationship between authoritarianism and urban
primacy, different forms of violent and non-violent contention (e.g., riots,
protests, terrorism), and democratization during the period 1960-2010.

Broader Impact

This project seeks to inform our understanding of democratic and authoritarian
regimes, social movements, and urban development. Moreover, democratization has
long played a central role in U.S. foreign policy. Findings may inform the
policy community regarding the conditions under which to expect (1) contention
to lead to democratic reform; 2) certain types of cities to become key to regime
opposition; and 3) that the complex relationship between e.g., repression, urban
primacy and political contention creates political consequences. In light of
recent political turmoil in the Middle East and elsewhere, a better
understanding of how these forces shape political development may be valuable to
a broad set of stakeholders.