* 1125588
* BRIGE: Understanding Multiphase Architecture in Li-ion Batteries through Multiscale Modeling
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Fuqiang Liu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 174,999.00

ECCS-1125588&lt;br/&gt;PI: FuqiangLiu&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas
at Arlington&lt;br/&gt;Title: BRIGE: Understanding Multiphase Architecture in
Li-ion Batteries through Multiscale
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The research objective of this BRIGE project is to explore the multiphase
architecture of Li-ion battery electrodes through an integrated multiscale
modeling approach. Such studies will reveal limitation of the electrode
transport processes in greater details and thus provide strategies on how to
improve the sluggish species transport and therefore battery capacity. In pursue
of the goals, the planned research activities include: (1) developing a 3D
multiscale model of transport, electrochemical reaction, and phase
transformation in Li-ion electrode materials. The single-cell continuum
convection-diffusion model, stochastic microstructure reconstruction, structure-
level statistical analysis, single particle phase transformation, and
experimental validation will be coupled together; and (2) predicting
electrochemical behavior of numerically reconstructed electrodes and validating
the model with ex situ and in situ experiments. The validated multiscale model
will be applied to in-depth exploration and quantification of the battery
electrode architectures reconstructed from SEM/TEM images. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The planed research will provide a heretofore
inaccessible, microscopic insight to the multiphase architectures of Li-ion
battery electrodes. Results of this work will result in a significant leap in
further development of novel structures and processes for efficient energy
storage. The proposed research efforts are integrated with education activities,
which target both graduate and undergraduate students, but also high school
students as well as minority and underrepresented groups (female, African
American, Hispanic and disabled). Hispanic students, which are the fastest
growing student segment at the University of Texas at Arlington, will be
recruited to attend summer programs, and the PI will mentor them for academic
careers in the field of engineering and energy. A suite of interactive numerical
models for use in a variety of courses will be created. A combined effort of an
interactive virtual nano-energy simulation database and experimental
demonstration library will be set up to showcase the research and fully immerse
students in the discovery process that defines science and engineering. An
interactive summer camp on Electrochemical Energy for K-12 students, in
conjunction with the Web-based virtual laboratory, will be developed to raise
students awareness in the area of energy storage and to keep them motivated in
engineering.