* 1125801
* BRIGE: An Interdisciplinary Research and Education Program for Engineering Biodegradable Metallic Implants and Biomimetic Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Huinan Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

PI: Liu&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1125801&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millions of
medical implants and devices (e.g., screws, plates, pins, wires, suture anchors)
are used each year worldwide in surgery, and traditionally the components have
been limited to permanent metals (e.g., stainless steel, titanium alloys) and
polyester-based absorbable polymers. Because of clinical problems associated
with these traditional materials, a novel class of biodegradable metallic
materials, i.e., magnesium based alloys, has been actively pursued. Magnesium
(Mg) is particularly attractive for orthopedic applications because it has
comparable modulus and strength to cortical bone. Controlling the interface of
magnesium with the biological environment is the key challenge that currently
limits this biodegradable metal for broad applications in medical devices and
implants. Therefore, the long-term research objective is to determine the
fundamentals of Mg degradation in a variety of bodily fluid environments and
engineer its interface with tissues. This knowledge will enable researchers to
design biodegradable metallic implants/devices with tunable degradation
properties compatible with new tissue growth. This two-year BRIGE project will
particularly focus on how to create a biomimetic interface between the
biodegradable metallic implant and surrounding tissue for the dual purposes of
(1) enhancing tissue integration and regeneration and (2) simultaneously
mediating the degradation of the metallic implant in a deterministic
programmable fashion.&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The idea of biodegradable Mg
implants was discarded a century ago because of their rapid degradation. Recent
advances in the design and processing of metal alloys has revived interest in
Mg-based materials and devices. Most recent research has focused on decreasing
Mg degradation through the addition of alloying elements (e.g., rare earth
elements), but their long-term toxicity is a concern. The novelty of this
project is to make Mg degradation tunable and biocompatible without adding
alloying elements. Specifically, this project will develop a library of
biomimetic nanocomposite coatings on Mg to control the material-structure
degradation-healing relationships that manage tissue regeneration, and to use
this nanocomposite library to build a predictive model that will guide the
design of medical implant/devices with tunable degradation. It is hypothesized
that the biodegradation rate of Mg could be moderated when coated with
nanostructured bone-like composites, and this would also promote
osseointegration to accelerate healing at the interface of Mg and bone tissue.
This project will produce fundamental knowledge that will advance the design of
biodegradable implants/devices and transform the concept of biodegradation from
traditional polymer domain to a new era of smart metals. The success of this
project will lead to a revolution in biomaterials - specifically unlock the full
potential of biodegradable metals through developing novel engineering
strategies to control the degradation.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This research
will build the foundation for practical design guidelines for biodegradable
metallic implants/devices. These, in turn, will increase the competitiveness of
U.S. companies in the medical implant industry. The PI will use the knowledge
developed in this project to develop graduate and undergraduate courses and
modules in UCR's interdisciplinary Materials Science and Engineering program;
her first priority is to establish an interdisciplinary Biomaterials Design
course. She also will team up with UCR?s ALPHA Center (Academy of Learning
through Partnerships for Higher Achievement) to integrate her research into a
new outreach initiative, NanoDays. NanoDays is a national program designed to
increase public awareness of nanotechnology, and the ALPHA Center will use it as
a tool to inspire more young people from inland Southern California - a highly
diverse region that lags behind much of California in economic opportunity and
educational achievement - to pursue studies in science and engineering fields.
The PI and her students will work actively in the community to inspire more
young people to pursue engineering careers through outreach, mentoring, and
serving as role models to young women