* 1125670
* BRIGE: Characterizing the Time-Dependent and Anisotropic Mechanical Properties of the Uterine Cervix with Micro and Nano Indentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Kristin Myers, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 07/31/2013
* USD 175,000.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
award provides funding for the investigation of the mechanical properties of
human cervical tissue and provides opportunities to raise the visibility of
engineering science to female students. The research goal is to quantify
cervical structure and material property relationships to determine how cervical
tissue remodeling and mechanical properties influence each other during
pregnancy. The cervical extracellular matrix (ECM) is responsible for
maintaining tissue mechanical integrity and for regulating cell activity. The
architecture of the collagen network and the interaction of the collagen fibers
with its surroundings dictate the non-linear, time-dependent, and anisotropic
material behavior of the tissue. This research aims to develop a micro and
nanoindentation technique to account for the anisotropic and time-dependent
mechanical behavior of cervical tissue and to develop finite element analysis
tools to explore stress and strain behavior during indentation. This testing
framework will guide the development of an appropriate constitutive model to
generate descriptive material properties and will benefit future investigations
of cervical tissue altered through disease, genetic manipulation, and
biochemical alteration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cervix is a mechanical barrier,
retaining the fetus inside the uterus during pregnancy. The mechanical integrity
of the cervix and the precise timing of tissue remodeling events during
pregnancy are critical for a healthy gestation of the fetus. The research funded
by this grant aims to characterize the mechanical behavior of human cervical
tissue and to quantify how connective tissue alterations may influence cervical
material properties. The goal is to develop appropriate experimental and
analytical methodologies to account for the complex nature of the tissue. The
research conducted in the PI's lab is dedicated to the advancement of women's
health through scientific research, and through these efforts the PI further
aims to attract and recruit female students to the engineering field through
efforts at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate level.