* 1125285
* CDI-Type II: Unravelling the Complexity of Extreme Waves: A Computational Quest
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Balakumar Balachandran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,750,000.00

Extreme waves occur as an emergent phenomenon in many natural systems. These
unusually large concentrations of energy coalesce from smaller adjacent
perturbations. This energy focusing effect, which has been observed in ocean
waves, fiber optic systems, and microwave systems, is not well understood and
has not been investigated through massively parallel computations. With this in
mind, the overall goal of this multi-disciplinary team of researchers is to
pioneer an integrated approach to computationally model extreme waves through
Eulerian and Lagrangian formulations, use CUDA based large-scale computations as
a means to obtain an enhanced understanding of energy focusing associated with
the natural and complex phenomenon of extreme waves, and exploit the insights
and knowledge gained for forecasting such conditions for the first time. The
proposed four-year effort is to be carried out by a team comprised of
researchers from mechanical engineering, applied mathematics and scientific
computation, atmospheric and ocean sciences, and astrophysics. This team will
pursue a novel integrated approach to create a computational platform, advance
GPU-based simulations, and use computational thinking to derive fundamental
insights into the complexity of extreme wave conditions. This understanding can
help in facilitating energy focusing and taking advantage of it for energy
harnessing. Specific outcomes are expected to include different computational
models tailored for studies of full field extreme waves, including Lagrangian
based N-particle computational models and grid based Navier-Stokes formulations.
Instability tests based on the breeding method, which have been developed for
atmospheric and ocean modeling studies, will be used for the first time to
identify characteristics of instability growth in ocean wave interactions and
forecast them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has multiple global
economic, security, and scientific applications and shares many of the values of
the Cyber-Enabled Discovery and Innovation program. A large number of broader
impacts are conceivable given the wide ranging and multi-disciplinary influences
of wave energy concentration. The potential to create sub-specialties and
entirely new fields of energy transport optimization demonstrate the important
science these emergent phenomena can reveal. The identification of precursors
and modeling of extreme wave events can afford wide ranging benefits to many
fronts including commercial shipping, naval missions, offshore energy
harnessing, fiber optic communications, and galaxy formation and other
astrophysical phenomena. Apart from integration of research findings into the
undergraduate and graduate course offerings across departments, a new cross-
disciplinary undergraduate elective on computational dynamics will be created
and offered to enable discovery based learning. Along with a post-doctoral
scholar, three graduate students will directly get a unique opportunity to work
on convergence research and develop computational thinking through a robust
cross-disciplinary education. Local high-school students are also expected to
benefit through simulation based research practicum to be pursued at the
University of Maryland. Art-in-science displays on solitons and other wave
phenomena will be used to stimulate and nurture the interests of K-12 students
who visit campus for different events including the annually held Maryland Day
on campus.