* 1125578
* U.S. Participation and Organization of the 2011 Canadian-American-Mexican Graduate Student Conference (CAM2011) to be held September 29 - October 1, 2011 in Washington, DC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Abhishek Kumar, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2013
* USD 39,671.00

This award provides support to the American Physical Society (APS) for
organization and student travel to participate in the joint Canadian, US, and
Mexican physical societies' graduate student conference (CAM 2011), to be hosted
by the American Physical Society in Washington D.C., from September 29th to
October 1st, 2011. The scientific program will include plenary talks by well-
known invited professors in physics sub-disciplines such as Astronomy &amp;
Astrophysics; Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics; Biophysics; Condensed
Matter Physics; and Nuclear/Particle Physics, and followed by contributed talks
from students to complement the plenary session topics. A student poster session
will round out the scientific portion of the program. All student participants
will present, either through an oral or a poster contribution, the research they
have performed in graduate school. By bringing together working scientists and
students in an informal setting, the conference will also enable students to
explore and discuss career options available to young physicists. Through
special topical and technical sessions, students will have the opportunity to
gain a broader view of physics beyond their own classrooms and research
laboratories. The meeting will generate scientific exchange among them student
participants, promote international collaborations among young scientists within
the North American continent, expose graduate students to sub-disciplines in
physics beyond their individual research areas, and promote interdisciplinary
research within the sub-disciplines. The meeting's organization is carried out
by the students. Overall, it will provide excellent training for next generation
researchers in the U.S.