* 1125798
* G8 Initiative:  ExArch:  Climate Analytics on Distributed Exascale Data Archives
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2017
* Duane Waliser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 02/28/2017
* USD 295,627.00

This NSF award to UCLA funds U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by the G8 Research Councils Initiative on Multilateral
Research through the Interdisciplinary Program on Application Software towards
Exascale Computing for Global Scale Issues. This is a pilot collaboration among
the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Canadian National Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian Foundation for Basic
Research (RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils (RC-UK), supporting
collaborative research projects selected on a competitive basis that are
comprised of researchers from at least three of the partner countries.

This international project targets the rapidly growing demands of climate
science data management as models increase the precision with which they depict
spatial structure and the completeness with which they describe a vast range of
physical processes. The ExArch project is principally a framework for the
scientific interpretation of multi-model ensembles at the peta-and exa-scale. It
applies a strategy, a prototype infrastructure and demonstration usage examples
in the context of the imminent CMIP5 archive, which will be the largest of its
kind ever assembled in this domain. It will attach the ExArch framework to the
CORDEX experiment, pushing beyond CMIP5 in resolution, albeit at regional scale.

This international project involving collaborating researchers in six countries
will explore the challenges of developing a software management infrastructure
which will scale to the multi-exabyte archives of climate data which are likely
to be crucial to major policy decisions by the end of the decade. In the short
term, strategies will be evaluated by applying them to existing data archives.
The NSF funding to UCLA primarily supports the extension of the information
model to earth observational data and the validation of regional climate models
with observational data.