* 1125519
* African American Racial Identity and Coping with Racial Stressors
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2016
* Robert Sellers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 01/31/2016
* USD 449,163.00

Racial discrimination is a frequent and often pervasive phenomenon in the lives
of many African Americans. Research reveals that more than 60 percent African
American adults report encountering racial discrimination in their lives.
Frequent experiences with racial discrimination appear to come with some cost to
the psychological and physical well-being of African Americans. Indeed, racial
discrimination has been consistently implicated in mental health and physical
health outcomes for African Americans. Although most of the previous studies
linking racial discrimination to measures of mental health have utilized cross-
sectional data, recent longitudinal research suggests a causal link between the
frequency of perceived racial discrimination and psychological distress such
that experiences of racial discrimination leads to subsequent distress. There is
also evidence linking racial discrimination to Cardiovascular (CV) activity and
physical health outcomes among African Americans. Importantly, not all African
Americans are impacted equally by discrimination. One potential source for this
differential vulnerability is racial identity. Racial identity is defined as
that part of the person's self-concept that is related to her/his membership
within a race. The goal of this project is to determine how racial identity
attitudes influence appraisal and coping with racial hassles in African American
students' everyday lives, whether these students appraise and cope differently
with racial and nonracial stressors, and whether racial stressors have a more
negative effects on students' mood and cardiovascular activity compared to
nonracial stressors. This research project uses mixed-methodologies and consists
of five interrelated studies that will explicate the processes by which college
students' racial identity attitudes and situational factors interact to
influence how they appraise and cope with racial hassles in their everyday
lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are evident in
that it will shed light on the physiological implications of racial
discrimination that have been linked to broader racial disparities in
educational achievement and attainment as well as well being and health for
African Americans. The research conducted within this project will also provide
an opportunity for students from underrepresented groups to gain greater
exposure to psychological research as research assistants and study
participants, and will provide a valuable training experience for a number of
undergraduate and graduate students.