* 1125821
* Acquisition of a Mass Spectrometer for a Capillary High Performance Liquid Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer (LC/MS)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Richard Laursen, Museum of Fine Arts
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 133,527.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Dr.
Richard Newman from the Museum of Fine Arts and colleague Richard Laursen
(Boston University) will acquire a capillary liquid chromatograph (LC)
interfaced with an ion trap-mass spectrometer. The award will enhance research
training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as analyses of
natural and synthetic dyestuffs used in cultural artifacts (including textiles,
easel and wall paintings, and polychromed sculpture). The objectives of this
project are to gain insights into the compounds that are found in the raw
(plant) source material; to enable comparisons between these compounds and those
actually present on test samples that have been dyed or colored with the natural
materials using a variety of extraction and dyeing procedures; as well as to
provide information to identify the dyestuffs on deteriorated artifacts in which
original dye components may have been significantly altered.

Mass spectrometers (MS) are used to identify the chemical composition of a
sample by measuring the mass of the molecular constituents in the sample after
they are ionized and detected. This instrument couples a capillary liquid
chromatography system with the mass analysis ability. The liquid chromatograph
separates minute volumes of mixtures of compounds extracted from the art pieces
into its molecular components. These components then flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized and their masses determined. The
instrumentation will be used not only for research that will help preserve art
but also in laboratory courses at nearby Simmons College.