* 1125457
* STEP Center: EHR-ENG STEP Innovation Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2016
* Thomas Byers, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 12/31/2016
* USD 10,000,000.00

Project Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STEP Center project is
establishing a national resource that is focused on innovation and
entrepreneurship (I&amp;E) for engineers. The objective of the center is to
catalyze a wave of change in undergraduate engineering education in the United
States through initiatives that inspire students to envision possibilities and
create viable, innovative products, services, and processes for lasting economic
and societal impact. It is influencing educators and students at a national
level by: 1) building upon a foundation of principles from three distinct, yet
complementary fields: learning sciences, engineering education, and I&amp;E
education, 2) drawing on the content and expertise of the Stanford Technology
Ventures Program (STVP) and other institutions and partners to create a coherent
set of learning materials and methods that are collected and curated, 3)
providing a "Pathway to Proficiency" platform for teaching and learning about
engineering innovation and entrepreneurship, 4) conducting scholarly research on
how people learn to be innovative and entrepreneurial, and develop instruments
and processes others can use to assess students' innovation skills, and 5)
performing an on-going assessment and garnering feedback to improve/enhance its
impact and reach. The center also offers a research and outreach web portal/hub
for the creation, collection, and sharing of resources on how to educate the
next generation of engineering innovators and entrepreneurs. This STEP Center is
jointly funded by EHR's Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE) and ENG's
Division of Engineering Education and Centers
(EEC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Significance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the STEP Center is to reshape
undergraduate engineering education and enhance U.S. competitiveness. The STEP
Center is providing a diverse set of offerings and, through a partnership with
the National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance (NCIIA), is
implementing multi-faceted dissemination approaches that reach a large number of
faculty and students across the U.S. It is developing tools and processes to
help others measure I&amp;E skills; while investigating and pursuing additional
ways to enhance STEM enrollment among underrepresented groups. Through research,
the STEP Center aims to discover novel insights into how engineers become more
innovative and entrepreneurial and what inhibits or blocks the development of
these skills.