* 1125755
* BRIGE: Formation, Characterization, and Modeling of Photosynthetic Biofilms for Biotechnological Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Halil Berberoglu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2014
* USD 174,934.00

PI: Berberoglu, Halil&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1125755&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall career goals of the PI are (i)
developing innovative technologies to provide the society with sustainable and
environmentally friendly energy supplies and (ii) providing world class
education and research experience to students in renewable energy technologies.
As a step towards this goal, the objectives of this BRIGE proposal are (i)
characterizing the formation and structure of photosynthetic biofilms and
modeling the transport of light, mass, and thermal energy in these systems that
affect their productivity and (ii) integrating these interdisciplinary research
efforts to educate and inspire students, in particular of underrepresented
groups, to pursue careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Cultivation of algae has
been considered as a promising method for producing carbon neutral hydrocarbon
feedstock for biofuel production. However, conventional technologies, such as
open ponds and closed photobioreactors, prove to be energetically, economically
and environmentally unfeasible owing to cultivation of dilute concentration of
biomass. This necessitates use of (i) large volumes of water during cultivation,
(ii) large energy requirements for pumping the dilute algae suspension, and
(iii) energy intensive dewatering and concentration processes for downstream
processing of the algae. In our recent work, we have demonstrated the reduction
of the water intensity of the process by a factor of 60 by cultivating the algae
as a biofilm. Development of a novel algae cultivation method based on
photosynthetic biofilms can transform the algae based biofuel production
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, we aim to take the initial
steps towards understanding photosynthetic biofilms for developing these systems
as the next generation method for economically and sustainably producing
biofuels. We specifically propose to (a) characterize the cell-surface
properties and interactions, (b) the formation and structure of photosynthetic
biofilms, (c) measure the profiles of light, mass and thermal energy across
these biofilms, and (d) modeling these transport phenomena for better
understanding and overcoming the productivity and performance limitations of
these systems in biotechnological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The proposed activity will advance the understanding and technological
applications of photosynthetic biofilms while providing interdisciplinary
education and research opportunities for students. Moreover, the methods
developed and the results obtained in this study will serve as necessary input
for future proposals on (i) measuring and modeling the nutrient consumption,
growth and product formation kinetics of photosynthetic cells in biofilms for
biofuel production and wastewater treatment applications, (ii) developing
sorption models for heavy metal ion removal from waste streams by photosynthetic
biofilms, and (iii) modeling the transport phenomena and productivity of
biofilms in bioelectrode systems for energy and environmental applications. The
educational and outreach components of this BRIGE will target the participation
of females and minorities in engineering and will focus on renewable energy
technologies and biofuels. These activities will include (i) My Introduction to
Engineering (MITE) summer camp reaching over 100 minority high school seniors
per year, (ii) Girls Exploring Science summer camp reaching 70 girls per year
between the ages of 7 and 10, (iii) the Crockett High School Science Research
Program providing research opportunities for 2 minority high schools seniors
encouraging their enrollment in college, and (iv) Texas Research Experience
(TREX) program recruiting 4 minority undergraduate researchers for encouraging
their retention, enrolment in graduate school and ultimately for seeking Ph.D.
degrees in engineering. Finally, this award will enable the PI establish active
collaborations with NASA Ames research center.