* 1125234
* CDI-TYPE II--COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Using Algebraic Topology to Connect Models with Measurements in Complex Nonequilibrium Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Mark Paul, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2016
* USD 380,395.00

Numerous complex systems in nature and in technology defy concise
characterization because they exhibit strongly nonlinear behaviors that lack all
symmetries and are highly non-periodic on a wide range of spatial and temporal
scales. Characterization by detailed measurement (in lab experiments or direct
numerical simulations) is now possible in many cases using modern measurement
technologies or computational techniques. However, the resulting deluge of data
often leads to little insight; in particular, there is frequently no good way to
connect quantitatively experimental measurements of a particular complex system
with the output from simulations/models of the same system. New,
computationally-based, mathematical tools from algebraic topology have the
potential to bridge the gap between measurements and models; the proposed
research will explore the use of algebraic topology to link numerical
simulations and laboratory experiments in situations where complexity arises
because the system under study is driven out of thermodynamic equilibrium. The
research focuses on an outstanding paradigm for nonequilibrium complexity: fluid
flow driven by temperature gradients (thermal convection). The planned work
brings three unique capabilities together in a single effort: &lt;br/&gt;(1) the
experimental ability both to measure and to manipulate precisely complex,
convective flows; &lt;br/&gt;(2) efficient methods for state-of-the-art, large
scale, high-resolution numerical simulations of convective flow; &lt;br/&gt;(3)
open source, general purpose, and efficient computational algorithms and
software for computing algebraic topological invariants on large data sets.
&lt;br/&gt;Topological tools will be developed both to characterize and to
minimize model error as well as to compare and to quantify dynamical properties
including Lyapunov exponents, dimensionality and bifurcations between complex
spatiotemporal flow states. This effort should ultimately identify ways in which
homology-based metrics can be used for building reduced order models that permit
prediction and, perhaps, control of convective flow. More generally, we expect
the metrics developed for convection should find broad application to PDE-
modeled problems ranging from the control of cardiac arrythmias to the
prediction of weather and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behaviors
of complex systems in the world around us can now both be measured with high
fidelity using advanced sensing technologies and simulated with great realism
using modern computer techniques. However, the enormous data sets typically
produced in these cases are often difficult to interpret because there exist few
good mathematical tools to connect quantitatively the experimental measurements
of a given complex system with the output of computer simulations of that same
system. The proposed research explores the use of the mathematics of topology to
relate lab measurements to computer outputs in a particular complex system,
thermal convection. The results of this work should lead to new ways to
understand, to predict, and, perhaps, to control convective flow, which plays a
direct role in natural processes (e.g., volcanism, earthquake dynamics,
continential drift) and industrial applications (e.g., thermal regulation of
many devices, the growth of semiconductor materials). Moreover, the topological
tools developed for thermal convection should apply more generally to a wide
variety of other problems involving complex systems including the forecasting of
weather and climate; the dynamics of the biomass in the oceans; the onset of
turbulence; the evolution of reagent patterns on a catalytic metal surface; and
ventricular fibrillation in a human heart.