* 1125906
* Early Career and Student Support for the XVIII Householder Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2012
* Michael Overton, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 01/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports the participation of U.S.-based early career scientists
and Ph.D. students at the Householder Symposium XVIII on Numerical Linear
Algebra, June 12-17, 2011, at the Granlibakken Conference Center in Tahoe City,
California. The Symposium is very informal, with the intermingling of early
career and established researchers a high priority. Participants are expected to
attend the entire meeting. The Householder Prize for the best thesis in
numerical linear algebra since January 1, 2008 is awarded at the meeting.
Numerical linear algebra plays a central role in scientific computing. For the
2011 Symposium the Householder Program Committee aims for a healthy balance of
theoretical, computational and applied presentations. There is an emphasis on
broad relevance, in contrast to results that are of interest only in a narrow
subfield. Since abstract submission is only 6 months in advance of the meeting
date, the Symposium always features hot research topics and emerging areas. The
organizers anticipate a large number of submissions on the following topics:
Nonlinear eigenvalue problems, tensor algorithms and analysis, domain
decomposition and multilevel methods, Krylov space methods for linear systems
and eigenvalue problems, algorithms for structured matrices, computation of
matrix functions, randomized algorithms, as well as application to optimization,
differential equations, signal and image processing, control, electronic
structure calculations, data analysis, information retrieval, bioinformatics,
and structural, mechanical and aerospace engineering.

The support of this project ensures the attendance at the meeting of well
qualified applied mathematics U.S. Ph.D. students from U.S. institutions, as
well as early U.S. career scientists who received their Ph.D.'s after January 1,
2008. Support of this group will have a positive impact on the continued strong
competitiveness of the U.S. in this crucial discipline, with its connections to
a large number of scientific computing topics. Individual benefits for early
career researchers who have attended a Householder Symposium include: career
advice from established researchers, enhanced visibility in the community, ideas
for REU programs, and several NSF funded research projects that arose directly
from collaborations established or advice received at the Householder Symposium.
Funding for participants takes into consideration the participant diversity at
the meeting.