* 1125909
* SOLAR: New Materials Search for Solar Energy Conversion to Fuels
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Krishna Rajan, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,100,000.00

The search for suitable, durable inorganic semiconductors that can convert solar
energy to fuels is a grand challenge in the fields of chemistry, renewable
energy, and materials science. There is no material available currently that
meets all the criteria required for spontaneous water splitting with solar light
at appreciable efficiency and durability. Despite rapid advances with computing,
the first principles-based techniques for predicting properties of materials are
time consuming. In many cases, the search process itself requires some
direction. One approach has been to utilize a combinatorial, high throughput
sample creation from different elements as a means of screening materials;
however, the search space that has been explored is relatively small. This
research project seeks to develop a fundamentally transformative strategy by
using an informatics-guided computational and experimental approach for
proposing and testing new materials. The team extracts design rules to
systematically identify critical structure-property relationships in a
quantitative fashion to determine the exact role of specific combinations of
materials descriptors that govern a given property of interest. Statistical
inference methods are used to identify and experimentally validate new materials
with new properties. This information is then linked to a targeted first
principles modeling step to provide a physical interpretation of mechanisms
controlling opto-electronic properties. The predictions will be validated using
electronic and photoelectrochemical properties of synthesized semiconductor
alloys. This project brings together investigators from chemical engineering
(Sunkara), mathematical sciences and informatics methods (Datta and Rajan),
physics (Menon, Sheetz), and materials science & engineering (Rajan, Jasinski)
from the University of Louisville, University of Kentucky, and Iowa State
University. This SOLAR project will: (a) develop materials informatics-guided
modeling for predicting band gaps and work functions for creating a new
materials database that links structure with properties as a guide for both
experimentalists and computational materials scientist/physicists; (b) advance
new non-linear manifold learning methods in promoting informatics as a
predictive tool for materials discovery; (c) utilize accurate first principles
modeling techniques as a second step for refined prediction of physical and
electronic properties of the new alloys; and (d) perform materials synthesis
toward experimental validation of properties of promising materials systems and
for validation of theoretical predictions and associated errors.

Solar energy can meet global energy demands for electricity and fuel if cost-
effective and durable technologies are developed. Hydrogen production via photo-
electrochemical water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction to hydrocarbon
fuels using solar energy are highly promising for providing both clean abundant
fuels and storage of large-scale quantities of solar energy. However, there are
no suitable semiconductor materials for enabling solar energy conversion to
fuels. This project will develop the tools necessary to accelerate the search
process for suitable semiconductor materials that can absorb solar energy
radiation efficiently and are durable for efficient solar energy conversion to
fuels. This project brings together researchers from such diverse fields as
physics, chemical engineering, material science, and mathematical sciences and
will result in a variety of educational and research tools, including: (a) an
educational module on materials informatics to be integrated into courses in
various disciplines; (b) a set of new mathematical and informatics-based tools
and datasets for use by students and other researchers; and (c) new
undergraduate/graduate level courses on solar cells and photoelectrochemistry.
This SOLAR team's PIs leverage this effort through existing collaborations on
energy materials and informatics with scientists from several countries such as
Slovenia, Greece, Poland, Germany, UK, etc. The PIs' groups host a number of
visiting scientists and students from these countries. PIs will also involve a
large number of high school and undergraduate students and will expose them to
solar energy and materials research.