* 1125957
* Workshop: The Seventh US-Japan Joint Workshop on Nanoscale Transport Phenomena, Izu, Japan, June 26-29, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Li Shi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2012
* USD 25,000.00

1125957&lt;br/&gt;Shi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide a critical
review of the current state of the art in nanoscale transport and provide
directions for future activities. A broad range of application areas are
targeted including thermoelectric, optoelectronic, photovoltaic and nano/micro
fluidic systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed workshop
will examine the fundamentals of nanoscale transport including phonon, electron
and photon interactions and examine how this understanding can be used to
improve a wide array of nanoscale devices. The workshop will attract a number of
key researchers in this field, including some who have not been active
participants in this series of workshops. The PIs will provide a summative
assessemnt of the state of the art, progress and challenges and future research
directions that will be submitted for consideration for a journal publication
and NSF report. The PIs are encouraged to look beyond simplistic modeling at the
MD level in idealized geometries and consider how the advances made in the
nanoscience field in the last two decades can now begin to be applied to
nanodevices with increasing complexity and functionality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop will bring together a
diverse group of people in an international setting and will therefore foster
broad dissemination of the ongoing work and active interchange of ideas. The
requested support is significantly biased toward supporting junior faculty.