* 1125543
* Fluvial Dynamics of Cutoffs and Abandoned Channel Development on Meandering Rivers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2017
* James Best, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2017
* USD 250,100.00

This project will advance the understanding of the mechanics of meandering river
cutoffs, a ubiquitous, yet poorly understood feature of rivers. Meandering
rivers are among the most recognizable landforms on the earth's surface, and
their complex spatial patterns have been of interest to geographers and other
earth scientists for a long time. A characteristic feature of meandering rivers
is the development of cutoffs, where curved channels migrate close enough to one
another for a new channel to developt across the interior portion, or neck, of a
tight bend. The development of cutoffs typically produces oxbow lakes as
sedimentation occurs at the bend entrance and exit, the river follows the path
of the new cutoff channel, and flow through the abandoned bend ceases. Despite
an abundance of past work on meandering rivers, knowledge of the mechanisms by
which bend cutoffs develop is incomplete. As a consequence, the capacity to
accurately model and predict the spatial and temporal dynamics of meandering
rivers is limited. In response to this research need, this project will address
questions concerning cutoff channel evolution after they have been initiated,
the patterns of the flow structures and how these impact sedimentation and
erosion patterns, and how flow structures in the main channel as well as
sedimentation and erosion patterns change after the cutoff has been initiated.
To address these questions, the investigators will use state-of-the-art field
measurement techniques to capture, at a high resolution, how three-dimensional
flow structure and patterns of erosion and deposition interact at an evolving
cutoff of the Wabash River along the Illinois-Indiana border just upstream from
the confluence of the Wabash and Ohio rivers. They also will conduct a series of
laboratory experiments in a physical model of a bend cutoff to examine three-
dimensional flow structure, bed morphology, and channel change for a variety of
cutoff configurations. Finally, they will develop numerical models to simulate
cutoff dynamics, using field and laboratory data to condition and validate the
computational models. The validated and fully tested models will then provide an
advanced theoretical tool for predicting cutoff dynamics along meandering rivers
over an extended range of boundary conditions.

This project will enhance knowledge about meandering rivers by contributing to
basic theoretical understanding of the processes involved in the development of
bend cutoffs and by providing the basis for improved predictive capabilities for
modeling the dynamic behavior of meandering rivers. The project also will yield
practical knowledge relevant to river management, including sedimentation
problems associated with cutoffs that can impede commercial navigation, the
conservation of riparian habitat at the sites of cutoffs and oxbow lakes, and
river restoration activities that include maintaining or establishing
connectivity between oxbow lakes and the main river channel, especially where
rivers have been channelized. The project will contribute to interdisciplinary
training for graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign (by incorporating findings into courses. It will also expose
high school students, including students from underrepresented groups, to
cutting-edge scientific research that advances theory and serves society at the
annual Illinois Science Olympiad and at the National Science Olympiad, which
will hosted by the state of Illinois in 2014.