* 1125164
* Phonetic Characteristics of Epenthetic Vowels in Palestinian Arabic
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Nancy Hall, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 202,802.00

This project explores the phonetics of several sub-dialects of Arabic spoken in
Israel. The main focus is on the acoustic properties of vowels and the ways that
native speakers perceive them. A distinctive feature of Arabic is that in casual
speech, a great many words can optionally be pronounced with extra vowels: for
example, the Arabic word for "girl" can be pronounced as either "bint" or
"binit". There is evidence that the optional vowels are different from regular
vowels, but the details of these differences have not been investigated in
depth. The project consists of data collection, elicitation, and experiments
designed to identify the nature of these vowels, their acoustic properties, and
how speakers perceive them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phonetics experiments will be
carried out at several Israeli universities, with Arabic-speaking university
students as participants. The project will train U.S. graduate students in
acoustic speech analysis, experiment design and phonetic
fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have both practical and
scientific implications. A better understanding of the phonetics of Arabic may
help advance the state of the art in automatic speech recognition, speech to
speech translation, speaker identification, as well as the teaching of
colloquial Arabic. Scientifically, the optional vowels have posed difficulty for
theories of language due to certain puzzling properties, for instance that they
never appear in stressed syllables. A better understanding of the acoustics of
these vowels can help resolve such puzzles. More generally, the project will
contribute to our understanding of the mental and physical processes underlying
human speech production and perception.