* 1125624
* BRIGE: Continuous Structural Health Monitoring Framework for Bridge Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Babak Moaveni, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 174,538.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
provides funding for the development of a probabilistic continuous structural
health monitoring framework. The novel framework will allow structural damage to
be estimated as a loss of stiffness in probabilistic terms. The framework
permits estimation of confidence in damage identification results as a function
of uncertainty in the identified modal parameters which are directly calculated
from continuous measurements. This new framework will be applied to a prototype
footbridge (Dowling Hall Footbridge) located at the Tufts University campus. The
footbridge is exposed to a wide range of environmental conditions and is large
enough to exhibit complex structural behavior, providing an opportunity for a
realistic assessment of structural integrity in the presence of varying
environmental effects. As part of this framework, modal parameters of the
Dowling Hall Footbridge are extracted based on the low-amplitude ambient
vibration response measured using accelerometers and strain gages. Separation
methods are then used to remove the effects of changing environmental conditions
(temperature and relative humidity) from the identified natural frequencies. The
continuous stream of identified natural frequencies, mode shapes, and their
statistical characteristics are fed into a recursive Bayesian finite element
model updating algorithm for probabilistic damage identification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will improve
the accuracy and confidence of damage detection algorithms, thus permitting
enhanced monitoring and maintenance of infrastructure by providing a more
effective engineering basis for better allocation of limited financial
resources. In addition, the prototype continuous monitoring system provides a
live, cross-disciplinary laboratory for integrated research and teaching in
health monitoring of civil infrastructure systems. During this project,
participation of students from underrepresented groups will be promoted through
K-12 outreach and undergraduate research.