* 1125087
* CDI Type II: Bridging the Computational Semantic Gap: A Demand-Driven Framework for Portal-Based Chemistry, Astronomy and Neurobiology
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Hanspeter Pfister, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,100,000.00

We propose a new framework to enhance the quality of scientific computational
research in the fields of chemistry, astronomy, and neurobiology. We make an
analogy with demand-driven, portal-based online knowledge systems, such as
Google Search, Wolfram|Alpha, Expedia and Orbitz. For example, travelers in the
recent past relied heavily on travel agents who manipulated complicated flight
databases and booking protocols. Nowadays customers can perform searches and
make reservations on their own via the web using a simple online interface
without any specialized knowledge such as hotel logistics or airport codes. One
of the greatest advantages is the freedom to explore the information space
autonomously, potentially finding many more travel options, increasing overall
competition and quality of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our analogy, the
application scientist is the traveler and the computer expert is the travel
agent. Scientific computation is an accepted third pillar of scientific
discovery, alongside traditional experiment and pen-and-paper theory. However,
it is very often restricted to a cadre of specialists who have mastered the
knowledge of utilizing complicated software tools and hardware, despite massive
investment in world-class high-performance computing (HPC) facilities.
Successful scientists who lack these computer skills face a semantic gap
impeding their potential. Our ultimate vision is to democratize the exploitation
of these valuable HPC resources to a broader range of application scientists,
inspired by the success of portal-based online services which abstract-away the
technical details of a computer platform without sacrificing functionality. Our
system will provide access to simulation and data-processing packages on HPC
hardware, and facilitate the imaging and visualization of complex data sets.
Moreover, a natural-language interface and expert system, based around the
Wolfram|Alpha approach, will help to guide productive inquiry and interpretation
of results. The selected drivers are: (1) quantum chemistry simulation of
thousands of molecules, including the search for advanced materials; (2) imaging
massive cosmological datasets from radio telescopes; (3) analysis of high-
resolution electron microscope brain images in computational
neurobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We envisage a broad impact of the work not
only in many areas of fundamental research, but also in education. The program
will be integrated into courses offered at Harvard and its Extension School, and
outreach to minorities and the underprivileged will be accomplished through
established mechanisms at the University. The portal format, coupled with an
online database of historical results, naturally enables dissemination of
research products and offers an ideal platform for training events and
workshops.