* 1125520
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Enterprise Level System for Research and Research Training
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ron Coleman, Marist College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2014
* USD 678,883.00

Proposal #: 11-25520 PI(s): Norton, Roger; Coleman, Ron G.; Lauria, Eitel
Institution: Marist College Poughkeepsie, NY 12601-1387 Title: MRI/Acq.: An
Enterprise System for Research and Research Training Project Proposed: This
project from a mainly undergraduate-serving institution, acquiring an enterprise
computing processor and associated storage and network peripherals, aims to
introduce research training in enterprise computing to faculty, undergraduates,
and K-12 teachers and students and to bring existing and new research
applications onto the new system. Enterprise computing (EC) research and
research training has steadily declined at universities for over three decades.
Although enterprise systems and data are vital to national security and economic
growth, many CS and ITS faculty are ill equipped to train the next generation of
instrumentalists. This new equipment will be used to fill a major gap in
computer science research and research training. Also, since many technological
advances in systems hardware and software appear first on enterprise systems and
are later adopted by smaller systems, access to an enterprise system will allow
faculty researchers and students to explore technologies only encountered on
large systems and to explore them earlier. This proposal focuses on research
training of faculty and students on the system itself and its use by individual
researchers to consolidate and upscale their projects from smaller systems to
this larger system. Research projects in computer science, information
technology, and mathematics will be moved to the new equipment where a wide
scope of applications in different disciplines can be run simultaneously. The
work consists of three primary activities: - Business analytics as a solution to
the problems associated with manual medical coding. The new equipment will allow
analysis of much larger datasets than are currently feasible. As medical records
expand and become more complex, the equipment will be able to accommodate the
growth. - Location aware mobile devices for historical sites will be dependent
on the ability to rapidly deploy virtual Linux environments for new historical
sites as well as high-speed access to large data stores that house the archives
and artifacts associated with his system. - Research training for faculty and
students will prepare the next generation of instrumentalists and improve the
computer science, information technology, and mathematics curriculum and
introduce researchers in other disciplines to a technology that can benefit
their research. Business analytics and data mining have broad applications in
correcting errors in medical diagnoses. The instrument would contribute to a
model for data cleansing in large complex data sets. In location-aware mobile
devices, the instrumentation would contribute in modeling other research
projects to explore ways to give users in-depth information and navigation in
large geographical areas. Broader Impacts: The institution seeks to revitalize
research and research training within a predominantly undergraduate setting.
Faculty engaged in applied research and the 800 plus members of the NSF-funded
Enterprise Computing (EC) Community have expanded training opportunities and
provided resources to support their research. Although some of the research
proposed has broad application in the medical field, the methodology under
development can be applied wherever there is a need to detect errors and ensure
greater accuracy in large complex data sets. Other research, digital information
from an enterprise system to common handheld GPS devices, aims to prepare the
next generation of researchers and industry professionals who will be
responsible for the design and operation of the technology infrastructure that
provides the rapid, reliable and secure backbone required by the national
economy, the US, state and local governments, and academic researchers. This
proposal aims to counter the decline trend in researchers by retraining current
faculty and introducing a new generation of undergraduates and, through the
Greystone Consortium, K-12 teachers and students to EC research and research
training. Research conducted on the requested equipment will be made available
to the broader community through a new website and online collaboration site
that Marist will host.