* 1125030
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute: Air Quality at the Interface: Mega Cities and Adjacent Agroecosystems; Mar del Plata, Argentina; July 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Michael Mozur, Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

1125030&lt;br/&gt;Mozur &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE), will take place in Mar del Plata, Argentina in July 2012.
Organized by Michael Mozur of the Society of Environmental Toxicology and
Chemistry (SETAC) in Pensacola, Florida, the institute will define and address
the scope of air quality issues near mega-cities and chemical exchange between
them and adjacent agro-ecosystems. Specifically, scientists and trainees from
North and South America will evaluate the joint effects of mega-cities?
?metabolisms? and agriculture practices on air quality, with particular
attention to be given to potential interactions among the two pollution
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI addresses a global concern that presents
significant public policy dilemmas for local leaders and environmental managers
in affected areas. The international scope of the participants and the plan to
encourage collaborative research to address the above issues will represent
significant multidisciplinary contributions to tackling this important
challenge, even beyond the Americas region. This PASI will integrate research
communities that in the past had emphasized agricultural or urban air quality
separately, thereby fostering the development of successful hypothesis-driven
research.