* 1126380
* MRI: Development of a Chirped-Pulse, Fourier-Transform mm-Wave Pulsed Uniform Supersonic Flow Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Robert Field, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 695,275.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
Arthur Suits from Wayne State University and colleague Robert Field from the
Massachussetts Institute of Technology will develop a spectrometer that will
join two powerful technologies: ultrabroad band chirped-pulse, Fourier-transform
microwave spectroscopy and pulsed uniform supersonic flows obtained from a Laval
(convergent-divergent) nozzle. This combination has the potential to offer a
nearly universal detection method for near-nascent species thermalized at 30-50
K, that can deliver quantitative measurements of reaction intermediates, excited
states, and vibrational distributions. The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
detection of isomer and conformers, (b) quantitative detection and spectroscopic
charaterization of unstable reaction intermediates, product vibration
distributions, and molecular excited states, as well as (c) reaction dynamic,
kinetics, combustion and atmospheric chemistry, physics and
astrochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This unique spectrometer combines two
powerful new techniques using sophisticated electronics developed for the
communications industry. The combination results in something new: an instrument
that can detect absolute numbers of trace amounts of unstable reaction products
or excited states of molecules, and at the same time determine their structure:
combining spectroscopy (giving structural information) and dynamics (revealing
details of the reactive events). These unique attributes indicate that the new
instrument will have broad applicability across many fields. During development,
construction, testing and commissioning of the instrument many students will
participate.