* 1126549
* MRI: Acquisition of Neuroimaging Equipment For Acquiring 4-Dimensional Brain Data From Real-World Stimuli
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jeremy Skipper, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 217,282.00

Cognitive science is a cross-disciplinary effort to understand the mind and
brain. Neuroimaging is a central tool in this effort but has been limited to
equipment capable of achieving either high spatial or temporal resolution of
brain activity. Recent electroencephalography (EEG) equipment and associated
software advances, however, allow for both high spatial and temporal (i.e., 4-D)
resolution through source localization of the electrical EEG signal as measured
noninvasively (and inexpensively) through the scalp. The resulting data could
put scientists and clinicians in the position to understand brain function as it
occurs in the real-world if there were established methodological approaches to
analyze such data. The Principal Investigators are developing a procedure that
is capable of analyzing brain data resulting from naturalistic stimuli that
could be applied to 4-D EEG data. This award provides an upgrade of existing EEG
equipment, additional equipment, and software that, when combined, will achieve
high source localization accuracy and allow them to test their approach on
source localized 4-D EEG data. It will permit the purchase of a 256 EEG system.

A goal of cognitive science is to understand the brain under conditions in which
it is thought to have evolved, typically develop, and normally function. That
is, under ecological, natural, or real-world conditions. This has not yet been
possible with existing equipment and methodological techniques. This is in part
because of spatial or temporal limitations of neuroimaging equipment have
necessitated the use of tightly controlled and usually reductionist stimuli that
do not always resemble anything one might encounter in the world. By applying
the aforementioned analysis method to 4-D data resulting from naturalistic
stimuli, the investigators will be able to understand how the brain
realistically yields behavior for the first time. Thus, cognitive science will
have a new and transformative tool to understand mind and brain.

The requested instrumentation will be used in a cross-disciplinary effort at
Hamilton College. Specifically, the equipment will advance research in
laboratories in the Departments of Psychology and Neuroscience pertaining to the
organization of language and the brain and in Computer Science pertaining to
human computer interaction. Both labs make use of real-world stimuli or
situations to understand mind and brain in more realistic terms. The advocated
approach will also serve to create other collaborations that will be facilitated
by the students at Hamilton who have the an exceptional opportunity to
participate in lab-based curricula. It will be easier for these students to
conduct experiments using naturalistic stimuli and will make research more
accessible to them and, therefore, enhance their educational experience.
Validations of the described methods using the acquired equipment will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and all software will be made publicly
available. This will ultimately have a broad impact outside of Hamilton college:
Allowing physicians to use naturalistic stimuli will ultimately improve
retention in therapeutic programs if patients can do something they enjoy while
brain data is collected (e.g., watching television). Furthermore, the high
spatial and temporal resolution data acquired under these natural conditions
could lead to better predictors, diagnosis, and treatment of disease.