* 1126669
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS) for Earth and Marine Science Research
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Justin Ries, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 410,116.00

The PI's request funding to acquire a LA-ICP-MS system to be used for the high
resolution analysis of elemental and isotopic ratios of various substrates and
materials in earth science, oceanographic, and climate change research.
Acquisition of LA-ICP-MS would serve researchers working within various
disciplines at UNC - CH and at other regional institutions. The requested LA-
ICP-MS system is required for the broad range of research projects of multiple
early career, mid-level, and senior researchers at UNC - CH. These projects
include investigating temporal trends in carbonate mineralogy, developing a
multielemental coral paleothermometer to reconstruct recent climate change,
isotopic labeling of carbonate shells and skeletons in ocean acidification
experiments, investigating trace element partitioning in synthetic and biogenic
carbonates, investigating the origin and evolution of rhyolite magmas,
investigating the relationship between plutons and volcanic rocks,
reconnaissance U-Pb dating of zircons, evaluating the flux of U and Th isotopes
from rivers and coastal environments to the ocean, diagenetic screening of
paleoceanographic proxies, and elemental fingerprinting of fish otoliths to
investigate patterns of fish migration, larval dispersal, and population
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activity will contribute to the advancement of science in a range of
disciplines in geoscience, and to the training of a range of researchers and
their associates. It will especially benefit the establishment of 5 junior
researchers at UNC-CH whom are in the process of developing new research
programs. One minority post-doc and two minority students from Belize have
already been identified to receive training in the new facility.