* 1126896
* MRI: RUI: Acquisition of Eye Tracking Equipment to Support Research at UAA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kenrick Mock, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2014
* USD 126,183.00

Proposal #: 11-26896 PI(s): Hoanca, Bogdan; Mock, Kenrick Institution:
University of Alaska at Anchorage Title: MRI: RUI: Acquisition of Eye Tracking
Equipment to Support Research at UAA Project Proposed: This project, acquiring
two eye tracking systems, (along with wireless sensors for creating a biometric
profile for a computer user), enables new and innovative research directions in
user authentication, assistive software for teaching mathematics, context aware
document retrieval, and student attentiveness. These new, state-of-the-art eye
trackers will replace two lower quality eye trackers, freeing one up for student
use. The eye trackers will be located in a controlled-access, public use
laboratory available to several researchers at the University of Alaska at
Anchorage. The enhanced capabilities of the new eye trackers will permit greater
range of motion for more natural user interaction and higher accuracy for better
biometrics. Consequently, the work will permit transformational research into
more natural and transparent user authentication and computer security based on
a comprehensive set of biomarkers, assistive research into mathematical learning
techniques for persons with disabilities, enhanced, biomarker-based intelligent
search and document categorization through online user profiling, and enhanced
assessment of learning efficacy. Aside from brain activity, eye patterns are one
of the most direct windows into a person?s understanding and mental activity.
Broader Impacts: The broader impacts include the involvement of 4-6
undergraduate students per year in eye tracking research by the co-PIs, with
possibly another 4-6 undergraduates per year from other faculty. Four broader
impacts are apparent. First, if widely deployed, the proposed authentication
scheme has the potential to thwart phishing attacks, and even man in the middle
attacks, for e-commerce users. Second, advanced assistive technology for
mathematics will allow physically disabled people to perform math manipulations
on par with able-bodied people. Third, by tracking what a user actually reads,
user profiling will result in better, faster searches for relevant information
automatically. Finally, high quality eye tracking should provide the UAA faculty
with insight into the direct connections between learning and eye patterns