* 1126175
* Neighborhood Social Control & Disorder in Contemporary Urban China
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Lening Zhang, Saint Francis University
* Standard Grant
* Helena Silverstein
* 08/31/2015
* USD 274,823.00

This study examines the distinctive organizational mechanisms intended to
control disorder in contemporary urban China. The research focuses on the
interplay between the operations of the traditional, grass-roots social control
organizations in urban China -- the "neighborhood committees" and neighborhood
police stations -- and the newly developed market-based services for public
safety and security. The analytic model guiding the research integrates key
concepts from the Western literature on neighborhood social control with
concepts tailored to the unique Chinese context. The researchers will collect
original quantitative and qualitative data for a sample of neighborhoods in
Tianjin, a city of more than 12 million people situated about 60 miles southeast
of Beijing. A survey based on a sample of 2,500 households distributed across 50
neighborhoods will provide the primary quantitative data. The qualitative data
will be gathered through focus groups with members of neighborhood committees
and face-to-face interviews with the local police officers assigned to the
sampled neighborhoods. With these data, the researchers will address the
following overarching questions. To what extent do the traditional grass-roots
organizations continue to play a key role in securing order and public safety in
a changing China? How has the increased availability of market-based services
for public safety and personal security altered the operations of these
traditional organizations? In what ways do traditional, grass-roots and market-
based mechanisms of neighborhood social control vary along with socio-
demographic characteristics of neighborhoods?

The results of the research will shed light on important social developments
pertaining to disorder in contemporary urban China and will enhance, more
generally, knowledge about how different forms of neighborhood social
organization and associated social control processes evolve and are adapted to
fundamental changes in the larger social landscape.