* 1126471
* MRI:  Acquisition of Apparatus to Study the "Expression" of the Parental Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Craig Kinsley, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 646,168.00

The parental brain represents a significant opportunity to understand the manner
in which inherent neuroplasticity, the brain's reserve for change and
adaptation, can be expressed at many different levels. The PI, Craig H. Kinsley,
is interested in acquiring a related suite of neuroscience equipment that can
focus on detailed and precise genetic expression questions, to provide his
students, and those of seven colleagues, with outstanding research experiences.
This request will enhance their research, connecting previously NSF-supported
detailed behavioral observations, and precise neuronal protein and histological
techniques, with single-cell proteomic analyses using the Zeiss Axiovert PALM-
Bioquant system and a suite of Qiagen qRT-PCR equipment. The current set of
microscopes in the PIs' labs are all upright platforms, whereas the requested
microscope is an inverted microscope, thereby increasing and enhancing their
technical abilities significantly (including cell culture and live, small animal
[e.g., C. elegans; roundworms] capabilities). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teams of
investigators plan to perform laser micro-dissection and micro-capture from
animal nervous tissues, precisely removing minute pieces of individual
neurons/cells for pure, uncontaminated genetic analyses, thereby allowing
observation of neuronal and cell gene-expression patterns in a heretofore
unparalleled manner, expanding their already detailed behavioral and regional
brain analyses and providing their students with multi-disciplinary
opportunities for study and collaboration, both here and abroad. This broad
approach will bridge basic research with the latest technologies, and allow them
to: conduct more sophisticated studies on neural regulation of the parental
brain; obtain more reliable data from other cellular realms; increase the number
of studies performed; and increase the number of undergraduates involved,
including those reluctant to use rats or their tissues. The equipment will be
used by faculty and students from: Randolph Macon College (Dr. Lambert);
Virginia Union University (TBA); Marshall University (Dr. Bardi); Rhodes College
(Dr. Gerecke); Longwood University (Dr. Franssen); the University of Sao Paulo,
Brazil (Dr. Felicio); and for teaching and research by other UR investigators
(Drs. Radice, Telang, and Warrick). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment
represents a significant advance in understanding the development of the
parental brain, across multiple species. Presently, their talented
undergraduates can embark on sophisticated questions related to brain and
behavior. Currently, their equipment allows them to conduct complementary
multiple antigen-labeling studies of maternal and paternal brains and other
tissues faster, more efficiently, and more reliably (an especially important
advantage for students seeking to complete an experiment in one+ semester). The
current MRI request will add a significant capability to the scientists' work
with students, one that substantially increases the students' understanding of
neural events, and one in which more students are interested: proteomics. Last,
the expanded research opportunities will support their continued efforts to do
excellent research, expand general interest in and understanding of science, and
educate and train many students, including more diverse students, which in the
past (and currently) have included significant numbers of women and under-
represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his colleagues are
passionate advocates for the neurosciences and complementary hands-on
experiences to enhance the academic experience. Scores of their undergraduates
have gone on to become assistant and associate professors of neuroscience and
related fields, postdoctoral fellows, predoctoral fellows, graduate and medical
students, and co-authors.