* 1126615
* EAGER: Wildfire Modeling and Prevention Initiative: Developing a Technical Framework for Integrating Research with Public Policy Decision Support
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Larry Smarr, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 262,439.00

Wildfires are increasing in both absolute number and severity in the American
southwest and this trend is predicted to continue over decades to come.
Therefore, the need for descriptive and predictive simulation tools to support
wildfire prevention, or suppression during future wildfire events, is becoming
critical. As a first step, this project aims to develop a technical framework
for integrating three dimensional landscape models, real-time environmental
data, and suite of simulation codes, and wildfire management protocols. This
research will involve determining how best to merge elevation and ground
classification datasets, couple fire propagation, atmospheric, and hydrologic
simulation codes, and verify the accuracy of the coupled computations against
historical wildfire data. Key components in the development of the technical
framework include: 1) Identifying and obtaining access permissions to the wide
variety of datasets needed to create the high-resolution digital model of the
topography and landscape of San Diego County. 2) Investigating how these
datasets can be seamlessly "sewn together" using GIS software systems. The
integration methodology being developed will be investigated using an unburned
area of the San Diego County?s Santa Margarita Ecological Reserve, which is an
ideal rapid prototyping and validation site for this project. It is prone to the
strong Santa Ana wind events we wish to study and is already equipped with
intensive real-time wireless ground sensors connected through the NSF's High
Performance Wireless Research and Education Network (HPWREN).