* 1126235
* Standard Research Grant: The Marcellus Shale Gas Rush: A Study of Public, Private, and Academic Water Quality Monitoring Policies
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Abby Kinchy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 398,337.00

Hydraulic fracturing, popularly known as water fracking, is an issue of national
importance. It is of particular interest in states such as Texas, Pennsylvania,
and New York where new regulations and projects are proposed. This project
examines the social and economic forces that structure what is known and not
known about the environmental consequences of energy production, focusing on the
impacts of natural gas drilling on surface water in New York and Pennsylvania.
The research investigates the following questions: 1) Where are public agencies
investing in watershed monitoring, and why are these public efforts unevenly
distributed? 2) To what extent does civil society research (volunteer or
activist water quality monitoring) fill knowledge gaps about the impacts of gas
drilling on water quality, and why are these civil society efforts unevenly
distributed? 3) How and to what extent do academic scientists aid in filling
knowledge gaps about the impacts of gas drilling on water quality? To answer
these questions, the project uses mixed methods, including A) qualitative
interviews with key informants in government, academic science, environmental
advocacy groups, and volunteer water monitoring groups, B) a survey of volunteer
watershed groups and county conservation districts, C) socio-spatial and
statistical analysis of the distribution of research efforts, using Geographic
Information System (GIS) software, and D) comparative case studies of six
communities.

The project's broader impact includes contributing to a better understanding of
how regulatory science works in the US. In particular, research findings will
identify communities and watersheds that have received the most and least public
investment in watershed monitoring. This information will be useful to
regulatory agencies, funding bodies, academic research institutions, and
community groups as they assess the effectiveness of current monitoring
practices and prioritize areas for future knowledge investments. Furthermore, by
documenting the extent of civil society research and analyzing its outcomes,
this study will generate knowledge that will be essential to efforts to
strengthen the capacity of volunteer scientific organizations.