* 1126162
* Probation/Parole Officer Interactions with Women Offenders:  Do Relationship Style and Communication Pattern Predict Outcomes?
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Deborah Kashy, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 340,909.00

This research will identify the types of relationships and communications that
probation and parole officers use to promote desired outcomes for women
offenders. It focuses on the two-thirds of women offenders who are drug-
involved. This group is under-researched, even though their outcomes have spill-
over effects on children and other individuals under their care. Theories about
the effect of different relationship styles of people who both control and help
clients (dual role relationship theory) and about the effects of authoritarian
vs. a conversational communication pattern provide a framework for anticipating
the predictors of positive outcomes including following rules, engaging in drug
treatment, avoiding arrest. The researchers will gather data from 50 supervising
officers and 400 of their clients as well as official records. Two months into
supervision, they will assess the types of women's needs known to lead to
recidivism. After three additional months, they will measure the nature of the
relationship and communication between officers and clients. After another three
months, they will obtain a final measure of needs. Official records will reveal
whether women violate supervision rules or are rearrested within the 18 months
after supervision begins. A statistical technique called multi-level modeling
will show how communication and relationship, as well as other influences,
explain outcomes. An additional and important part of the research is the
collection of qualitative data on memorable messages, including those from the
supervising officer, that affected the women and on other ways that officers
promoted both negative and positive results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identified
positive qualities of officer-client interaction and actions taken by
supervising officers will inform development of training curriculum to increase
the effectiveness of probation and parole officers, and to set the stage for
research that evaluates the effects of such training.