* 1126361
* MRI: Development of a Real-Time Instrument for Measurement of Aerosol Hygroscopicity Growth Factors from Aircraft Platforms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Suresh Dhaniyala, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 523,400.00

Limits in our understanding of concerning cloud-aerosol interactions, and
particularly the role of atmospheric aerosols serving as cloud condensation
nuclei and their ultimate influence on solar and infrared radiation passing
through earth's atmosphere, remain a significant source of uncertainty in the
prediction of long-term global climate trends. This research will serve to
design and develop an instrument to enable real-time measurement of aerosol
hygroscopic growth factors suitable for operation aboard research aircraft. This
instrument, called the Real-time Hygroscopic Differential Mobility Spectrometer
(RH-DMS), will permit accurate sizing and characterization of aerosols both
within and outside cloud systems over a diameter range of observed particle
diameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort centers on
efforts to minimize uncertainties in cloud interactions with both short-
(visible) and long-wave (infrared) radiation, and will employ innovative
components including an interstitial inlet for artifact-free sampling of aerosol
within clouds, a high-resolution differential mobility analyzer to distinctly
quantify particle sizes, and coupling with a high-resolution optical particle
sizer and electrical mobility spectrometer to assess the hygroscopic growth
potential over a wide range of aerosol sizes (10-500 nm). Broader impacts will
come through enhanced measurement capabilities aboard a research aircraft, and
improved understanding of both the local behavior and global impacts of clouds
in the context of both naturally-occurring and anthropogenic aerosols relevant
to earth's changing climate. Related educational benefits will include graduate
student education and be integrated with the lead investigator's existing K-12
outreach activities.