* 1126343
* MRI:Development of a femtosecond high brightness electron beam source for time-resolved electron diffraction and imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Martin Berz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2016
* USD 968,183.00

Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel high flux rf enabled femtosecond
electron diffraction microscope will be developed to allow unprecedented
resolution and sensitivity for studying underlying physical and chemical
processes associated with nanoscale complex materials and macromolecules. These
efforts rest upon innovative solutions to the space-charge broadening issues
associated with high-brightness beams that lead to degradation of the temporal
resolution and beam quality, and overcoming the limitation in the photo-gun
design to provide a high-brightness coherent electron source. Our proposed new
technologies include incorporating an rf cavity to recompress electron pulses
that are degraded by space-charge broadening; optimization of the coherent
electron source through design and implementation of a laser pulse shaper to
control photoemission; and a real-time electron bunch imager to provide feedback
control. Scientific and technological progress will be enabled by a unique team
of experts in accelerator and beam physics, rf cavity design and implementation,
femtosecond laser and ultrafast electron diffraction technologies, and
theoretical modeling for the development of this unique fs electron beam system.
Our ultimate goal is to be able to videograph single-particle and single-site
events by ultrafast diffraction with 2-3 orders of magnitude enhancement in the
beam brightness compared with the current state-of-the art ultrafast electron
diffraction systems. Reaching a nano-probe limit will open up new research areas
including those identified by a recent Academy of Sciences report, such as:
"single-site" heterogeneous catalysis, charge dynamics in nanocrystal quantum
dots relevant for photovoltaics, energy transfer through nanostructures relevant
for information processing and sensing, the emergence of electron correlation in
strongly correlated materials and heterostructures, and energy transduction at
the nanoscale. The realization of this table-top scale fs electron beam system
will enable unprecedented material research capabilities at a wide variety of
University laboratories both at Michigan State University and in the broader
community. A nanoscience movie will be produced that provides K-12 students with
an engaging view of nanoscience and the way in which graduate students drive the
process of constructing a forefront user facility to understand nanoscience and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An innovative ultrafast electron beam system will
be developed to allow unprecedented resolution and sensitivity for imaging
atoms, molecules and nanoparticles "in the act" at the femtosecond (fs)
timescale (1 fs=1/1000,000,000,000,000 second). The breakthrough in the advanced
capabilities is made possible by solving the space-charge effects associated
with high-density electron pulses causing degradation of the beam quality for
high-resolution imaging. Our proposed new technologies include accelerator
technology to compress high-density electron beam to the fs timescale with a
radio-frequency compressor, innovative photoelectron source design incorporating
fs laser pulse shaping, and advanced high-speed electron beam characterization
to provide instant feedback control. Scientific and technological progress will
be enabled by a unique team of experts in accelerator and beam physics, radio-
frequency compressor design and implementation, fs laser technologies, and
theoretical modeling for the development of this unique fs electron imaging
system. Our ultimate goal is to be able to videograph the molecular events with
high fidelity and fs speed with a nanometer scale probe. Realization of this
goal will bring a completely new dimension to unveil material properties and
chemical reactions underlying the forefront of nanotechnology and nanoscience
including those identified by a recent Academy of Sciences report, such as
biochemical reactions and catalysis, solar energy harvesting, complex material
functions, and information processing on the nanometer scale. The realization of
this table-top scale fs electron beam system will enable unprecedented material
research capabilities at a wide variety of University laboratories both at
Michigan State University and in the broader community. A nanoscience movie will
be produced that provides K-12 students with an engaging view of nanoscience and
the way in which graduate students drive the process of constructing a forefront
user facility to understand nanoscience and nanotechnology.