* 1126790
* The Biomechanics of Arboreal Stability: An Integrated Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Jesse Young, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2016
* USD 299,528.00

Biological anthropologists have long maintained a keen interest in the
adaptations that allowed primates to successfully invade the arboreal habitat,
where stability is paramount. Decades of research have identified anatomical
features, such as grasping hands and feet, and behavioral mechanisms, such as
the use of distinctive walking styles, which arguably facilitate stability on
branches. Nevertheless, we still have an incomplete understanding of the
mechanisms by which primates actually keep balance when moving about in the
trees. The proposed research will remedy this gap by carrying out a series of
experiments to understand balance performance in both New and Old World monkeys.
In so doing, we will gain deeper insight into several fundamental issues of
primate, and human, evolution -- such as the functional importance of grasping
hands and feet and the possible consequences of tail loss among the apes. Basic
data on the balance capabilities of common laboratory primates may also be of
use to researchers studying primate stability in more clinical settings, perhaps
shedding light on human balance disorders. Moreover, the collaborations
engendered by this research will broaden educational experiences of STEM
students at the host institution and neighboring colleges and universities,
helping to build a collaborative network of research and training throughout the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will address three specific research
aims. First, to determine the relationship between morphological variation and
the capacity for grasping force production, functionally-informed hand and foot
musculoskeletal anatomy will be combined with experimental data on maximum grip
strength. Second, to generate quantitative measures of stability, researchers
will collect detailed biomechanical data from monkeys moving over simulated
arboreal substrates. Finally, a series of force sensors mounted on compression
springs will be used to gauge balance performance on mobile branches, providing
a measure of arboreal balance control in a more naturalistic setting. This
fundamental biomechanical research will 1) allow testing of long-held
assumptions about the nature of primate locomotor adaptation, 2) inform
reconstructions of grasping ability and locomotor performance in the primate
fossil record, and 3) introduce a novel set of research methodologies to the
discipline of biological anthropology.