* 1126393
* MRI Consortium: Development of Instrumentation for Measuring the Dependability and Quality of Cloud Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Farokh Bastani, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2016
* USD 503,668.00

Proposal #: 11-26393 (Consortium) 11-26747&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Bastani, Farokh
&amp; Tian, Jeff&lt;br/&gt; Gupta, Gopal; Huynh, Dung T.; Yen, I-Ling &amp;
Huang, LiGuo; Nair, Sukumaran&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas-Dallas;
&amp; Southern Methodist University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI Consortium/Dev.:
Instrumentation for Measuring the Dependability and Quality of Cloud Computing
Systems&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, aiming to develop
instrumentation that enables rigorous experimental quality and dependability
assessment of cloud computing systems, including cloud service-oriented
architecture&lt;br/&gt;(SOA) systems, dramatically enhances the validation
capability of cloud platform services and cyberinfrastructure. Cloud platforms
must meet specified service level agreements (SLA) and provide mechanisms to
support the minimization of the power used in cloud data centers without
adversely affecting the quality of service (QoS). Also, some safety-critical
emerging cloud applications, such as health-care and transportation
applications, must meet stringent dependability requirements, that include high
availability, reliability, performance, resilience, safety, and security. The
proposed work establishes a high performance, metrics-driven instrument enabling
rigorous evaluation for the following research projects on cloud performance:
&lt;br/&gt;- Assurance of QoS in Service Clouds,&lt;br/&gt;- Optimization of
Dependability in Evolving Clouds,&lt;br/&gt;- Mobile Device Power Management in
Service Clouds,&lt;br/&gt;- Achievement of Highly Secure Compositions in Service
Clouds, and&lt;br/&gt;- Testing and Validation of Secure Hardware-Software
Architectures.&lt;br/&gt;The work aims to develop a flexible instrument for
validation and verification of cloud performance, seen to be a key element in
the future of computing services. In recent years, computer services have been
moving to remote virtual machines ?in the cloud.? The commercial success of this
new business model is based on service quality guarantees, which are becoming
increasingly hard to verify as the complexity and volume of cloud services
increase. Testbeds of this type are critical to the economic and research
vitality of the academic and industrial communities.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation substantially raises the quality, scale, and
scope of experimental research in dependability enhancement methods for cloud
computing systems. It helps foster a strong scientifically based experimental
paradigm for computing and provides capabilities that will greatly enhance the
quality of undergraduate and graduate courses in computer science and
engineering, as well as senior design projects by enabling students to work on
realistic platforms. The instrumentation enhances the facilities of an NSF
I/UCRC and will be available to researchers at the participating institutions
and industrial partners.