* 1126118
* Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Enhancing Undergraduate Research and Training across the Sciences at Washington &amp; Lee University and Virginia Military I
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* James Turner, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 365,736.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Drs.
Watson, LaRiviere, Stewart, Erickson, Turner and ten colleagues from the
Departments of Biology, Psychology, Physics and Engineering, and Computer
Science, along with the Programs in Neuroscience, Biochemistry, and
Environmental Sciences at Washington and Lee University (W&amp;L), Virginia
Military Institute (VMI) and Mary Baldwin College (MBC) will acquire an Olympus
Fluoview 1000 (FV1000) Spectral Confocal Live Cell System for research and
training across the sciences. This confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM)
will form the foundation of the newly created communal microscopy, imaging, and
computational core of a projected Interdisciplinary Quantitative Science Center
that is part of a long-range, grant-funded initiative at W&amp;L which promotes
mathematical modeling, bioinformatics, and data analysis. The confocal
microscope will enable fifteen researchers from three schools to expand their
ability to detect, quantify, and localize gene products and to study biological
structures, thereby expanding the scope of existing research agendas and
developing new as well as collaborative research opportunities. Specifically,
the confocal microscope will facilitate and impact the following areas: 1) the
study of different aspects of synaptic connectivity and influences on neuronal
wiring in the brain and central nervous system, 2) eukaryotic nonfunctional
ribosomal RNA decay pathways, 3) effects of hormone regulation in the developing
cardiovascular system and sexual differentiation, 4) mechanism of Ca++
regulation, 5) reconstruction of glandular morphology of terrestrial
invertebrates, 6) ultrastructural analysis of single-celled eukaryotes, 7) rapid
assessment of otolith structure in new fish species, 8) comparison of the
formation of dense core secretory granules cells, 9) localization of nitrogen-
cycling microorganisms on freshly harvested fine roots and organic matter and
10) image segmentation and analysis studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confocal
microscopy is a technique that allows a three dimensional high resolution image
acquisition of live or fixed specimens. By attaching fluorescent dyes
(fluorophores) to biological specimens, cells and sub-cellular components can be
identified with a high degree of specificity amid non-fluorescing material.
Moreover, several target molecules can be visualized simultaneously with
multiple fluorophores emitting light at differing wavelengths. Using image
analysis software, the acquired serial optical sections are then rendered to
generate a clean high resolution three-dimensional reconstruction of the
specimen in which all out-of-focus light has been rejected. The result is an
exceptionally clean high resolution image of a biological specimen that can
reveal the presence of a single molecule. This instrument is critical for the
study of biological structures and will have a transformative effect on how
emergent young scientists are trained at W&amp;L, VMI, and MBC. The CLSM will
provide cutting edge tools for faculty to carry out their research projects and
provide microscopy training and research opportunities to undergraduate students
from three rural primarily undergraduate institutions. Using the teacher-scholar
model, which seamlessly integrates research with discovery-based laboratory
course work, W&amp;L and VMI, will take full advantage of this instrumentation
to promote further research integration into courses, to expand undergraduate
programmatic research opportunities, and to promote student and faculty
collaborations within and between departments and institutions.