* 1126950
* Mineral Nutrient Gene Discovery and Gene X Environment Interactions Using the Nested Association Mapping Population in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Margaret Smith, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,357,133.00

PI: Ivan Baxter (USDA-ARS &amp; Donald Danforth Plant Science
Center)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Paul Anderson (Donald Danforth Plant Science
Center), Owen Hoekenga (USDA-ARS &amp; Boyce Thompson Institute), Chad Myers
(University of Minnesota), Mourad Ouzzani (Purdue University), Margaret Smith
(Cornell University) and Terry Woodford-Thomas (Donald Danforth Plant Science
Center)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maize is the most widely adapted and adopted crop
on the planet. This is largely due to the high degree of genetic and phenotypic
diversity that can be harnessed into adaptation for local conditions. While
progress has been made in understanding some aspects of adaptation such as
flowering time, little progress has been made with respect to adaptation to soil
conditions. This is ironic given the importance of plant-soil interactions as
they relate to agricultural efficiency, sustainability and productivity. This
project will leverage germplasm resources and discoveries generated by other NSF
supported programs to examine the genetic and environmental factors that
determine the elemental composition (many elements exist as ions, hence, the
IONome) of maize grain. These previous efforts, together with recent innovations
in the study of the ionome, will allow the rapid dissection of the genes and
environmental conditions that determine the macronutrient, micronutrient and
metal contaminant composition. This will create hypotheses that can be tested
using experimental varieties evaluated across the United States and in Africa.
This information will lead to the development of new maize varieties that are
better adapted to low fertility soils, contain higher levels of essential macro-
or micronutrients ("biofortification"), or decrease levels of metal
contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support training
opportunities for young scientists, aspiring scientists, teachers and
international scientists. Student and teacher internships will be sponsored in
St. Louis, St. Paul and Ithaca, while educational resources will be developed to
assist high school teachers in incorporating bioinformatics and plant molecular
biology into their curricula. Participants will also mentor high school students
in science through eScience, a program utilizing technology to link students and
scientists. Information will be shared with international sciences through
direct connections with breeders at CIMMYT involved in biofortification and
participants in maize breeding workshops offered at the University of Ghana.
Data generated through this project will be available through
http://www.ionomicshub.org/, http://www.panzea.org, and http://www.maizegdb.org.