* 1126871
* SBIR Phase II:  NanoIR:  Infrared Chemical Spectroscopy at the sub-20 nm Scale
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,11/30/2014
* Craig Prater, Anasys Instruments Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2014
* USD 784,885.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will involve
research and development of infrared nanospectroscopy, leading to the first
commercial instrument capable of infrared spectroscopy and chemical imaging at
the sub-20 nm scale on a broad range of samples. We will develop and demonstrate
key technologies to dramatically improve the resolution and sensitivity of
atomic force microscope-based infrared spectroscopy (AFM-IR). Conventional
infrared spectroscopy is the most widely used technique for chemical
characterization, but fundamental limits prevent it from being applied at the
nanoscale. The AFM has excellent spatial resolution, but until recently had no
ability to perform chemical spectroscopy. AFM-IR has demonstrated infrared
spectroscopy at well below conventional diffraction limits, but the current
spatial resolution and sensitivity are on the order of 100-200 nm, and the
method requires specialized sample preparation. This effort will expand on
successful Phase I research to develop a robust instrument for obtaining high-
resolution chemical spectra on a wide variety of samples with minimal sample
preparation. This project will combine simulations with development of
experimental techniques and prototype instrumentation to enable
commercialization of infrared spectroscopy and chemical imaging down to the
scale of single monolayers and individual molecules.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to give
researchers a robust capability to leverage the power of infrared spectroscopy
over broad wavelength ranges and at resolution scales well below current limits.
Infrared spectroscopy is arguably the most widely used technique for chemical
characterization, but spatial resolution limits have prevented it from being
widely applied at the nanoscale. With billions of dollars of global investments
in nanoscience and nanotechnology, the lack of IR nanospectroscopy technology
leaves an enormous gap in needed characterization capabilities. The novel AFM-IR
platform will enable a wide range of high-resolution characterization
methodologies in materials science and life sciences including correlation of
morphological, chemical, mechanical and optical properties. Based on specific
early customer measurement requests, we anticipate significant downstream
benefits in areas including the development of block co-polymers, advanced
polymer nanocomposites, functional nanostructures, catalysts, materials for
energy generation and storage, and many other areas.