* 1126894
* MRI: Development of a Free-Electron Laser for Ultrafast Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 992,270.00

Development of a Free-Electron Laser for Ultrafast Electron Magnetic
Resonance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: Like nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), EPR becomes much more powerful at high magnetic fields and
frequencies, and in a pulsed rather than continuous wave (cw) modality. The
major bottleneck for high-field, high-frequency pulsed EPR has been the absence
of electromagnetic sources capable of high frequency (&gt;100 GHz), high power
(&gt;1 kW), high long-term frequency-stability, and pulse-programmability.
Supported by a previous MRI grant and an award from the W. M. Keck Foundation,
the world's first FEL-powered pulsed EPR spectrometer has been demonstrated at
UC Santa Barbara. The most dramatic achievement is extremely rapid spin
manipulation-spin ½ electrons have been rotated by 90 degrees in 6 ns at 240
GHz, two orders of magnitude faster than the next fastest 240 GHz spectrometer
in the world, which is based on a solid-state source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major research instrumentation to be developed is a free-electron laser (FEL)
that is optimized for electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) at frequencies
between 240 and 500 GHz (corresponding to magnetic fields between 8.5 and 18 T).
This development heavily leverages 25 years of infrastructure, investment,
institutional commitment, and expertise at UC Santa Barbara. The existing 6 MV
electrostatic accelerator will be upgraded and a new free-electron laser
(undulator + cavity) will be built. Together, these improvements will increase
the peak power available at 240 GHz from 300 W to &gt;10 kW, the repetition rate
from 1 Hz to &gt;10 Hz, and also greatly improve the long-term stability and
reliability of the system. The new FEL will bring times for 90-degree rotations
of spin ½ electrons below 1 ns, enabling resolution of extremely rapid spin
relaxation processes. Data acquisition times for pulsed EPR will be reduced by
at least a factor of 1000. The new FEL and associated EPR spectrometer will be
made available to a national and international user community, and enable
transformative studies in materials science, physics, chemistry and molecular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract: The world's brightest
source of tunable terahertz radiation will be developed to manipulate electron
spins faster than has ever been possible. This ultrafast spin manipulation will
enable pathbreaking studies with applications ranging from development of
inexpensive solar cells to understanding how protein molecules fit together and
move to regulate the flow of energy, information and matter in living
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrons and atomic nuclei both have a property
called spin, which makes them behave like (very tiny) magnets. In nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR), which is the basis for magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), a strong external magnetic field aligns nuclear spins, while powerful
pulses of radio-frequency electromagnetic radiation manipulate nuclei to
discover otherwise invisible information about neighboring atoms. Electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR), in a fashion similar to NMR, uses an external
magnetic field to align electron spins (rather than nuclear spins). Typically,
pulses of microwave-frequency electromagnetic radiation manipulate these
electrons to learn about local environments over larger neighborhoods. EPR
becomes even more powerful when extremely high-frequency terahertz radiation is
used.&lt;br/&gt;The free-electron lasers (FELs) at the University of California
at Santa Barbara (UCSB) are famous as the world's brightest sources of tunable
terahertz radiation. Recently, researchers at UCSB demonstrated that one of the
UCSB FELs could be used to rotate electron spins 50 times faster than ever
before at .25 terahertz. This project will fund the construction of an even more
powerful FEL. The new FEL, which will be used by scientists from all over the
nation and world, will be 100 times more powerful than the existing one, and
will pulse ten times faster, enabling at least 1000 times more rapid acquisition
of experimental data. The EPR spectrometer powered by this new FEL will create
an unprecedented capability to observe the structure and ultrafast dynamics of
molecules, materials and devices at nanometer length scales.