* 1126688
* MRI: Development of a Highly Scalable and Reconfigurable Testbed in Support of Future Many-Core and System-on-Chip Research and Design Exploration
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Minghao Qi, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,999.00

Proposal #: 11-26688&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Yang, Mei&lt;br/&gt; Jiang, Yingtao; Qi,
Minghao&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Nevada, Las Vegas&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Dev.: Highly Scalable and Reconfigurable Testbed in Support of Future Many-
Core and System-on-Chip Research and Design Exploration&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project from an EPSCoR state, aiming to develop a
highly scalable and reconfigurable multi-board-based testbed which can emulate
and validate future large-scale many-core and system-on-chip systems, enhances
the future for design of multi-core systems. Specifically, this testbed
efficiently and effectively emulates all the functionalities that are perceived
at both the network-on-chip (NoC) and the full-system levels. The proposed work
establishes a high performance, multi-core testbed in Nevada, enabling the
following research projects in system-on-chip design:&lt;br/&gt;- Emulation of
new computer architecture designs,&lt;br/&gt;- Design space exploration for NoC-
based many-core designs,&lt;br/&gt;- Emulation of hybrid photonic-electronic NoC
architectures, and&lt;br/&gt;- Traffic modeling and benchmark
development.&lt;br/&gt;The work aims to develop a flexible testbed for NoC
architectures seen to be key to the future of multiprocessor design. In recent
years, computer architecture speed-ups have begun to rely exclusively on multi-
core paradigms instead of faster cores. There is a general consensus that these
many cores have to be linked together through a functionally correct, power-
efficient, and reliable on-chip communication architecture, now widely known as
network-on-chip. Testbeds of this type are critical to economic vitality in the
computer industry.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation
should provide a unique research facility for faculty and graduate students to
conduct research on NoC architecture technology and education. The testbed will
be made available to researchers around the country through a
cyberinfrastructure remote access mechanism. The proposed testbed enhances Ph.D.
production in an EPSCoR state and solidifies UNLV?s position in NoC architecture
research.