* 1126441
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High-Resolution Electron Tomography System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Paul Ahlquist, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,146,576.00

The intermediate voltage (300kV) electron microscope equipped with a tilting
sample holder for tomography and a cryostage is serving a longstanding need to
provide key imaging technologies to a wide variety of biological and
bioengineering research programs on the University of Wisconsin - Madison. Users
of this microscope are heavily dependent on high resolution imaging for their
work on a wide range of important topics, including membrane and protein
trafficking, biomineral and biopolymers, viral replication and virus-host
interaction, cytoskeletal organization and cell division, nerve terminal
organization and exocytosis, bacterial architecture, imaging of molecular
complexes, and neuroengineering. This imaging system enables researchers to
collect multiple images of relatively thick samples over a series of tilt
angles. All these images are mathematically processed to generate a 3D
reconstruction (tomogram) of the original section. The increased acceleration
voltage is essential for allowing the electron beam to penetrate the sample
without plural or inelastic scattering, especially at high tilt angles where the
section thickness doubles or nearly triples Electron tomograms of either plastic
sections of biological samples or cryofixed biological specimens or biopolymers
results in an axial resolution of 2-10 nm. The new equipment is housed in an
existing, highly effective campus microscopy and characterization center,
managed by a permanent, full-time PhD expert entirely funded by the center
budget, and supervised by a dedicated advisory committee of faculty
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new tomographic system fosters many
collaborations on campus and allows researchers and students from almost every
single college/school to apply state-of-the-art high resolution imaging
techniques. Hands-on demonstrations on the use and applications of the proposed
EM are included in the imaging courses taught by the PI and co-PIs. In addition,
annual summer workshops are held to train researchers and students on campus on
tomographic approaches. The new microscope has also a very important role in
outreach. Three-dimensional tomographic models are visually stunning
representations. They convey 3D information of cellular structures in a very
effective way to everyone, from highly trained biologists to the general public.
The new Wisconsin Institute of Discovery (WID) has a microscope and imaging
discovery niche in the Town Center that includes a high resolution display
consisting of an array of monitors. Tomographic reconstructions derived from the
use of the new microscope, including images of replicating viruses, cytoskeletal
arrays during cell division, plant organelles, signal transmission in neurons,
are displayed in these monitors. In addition, some tomographic models are
printed in a 3D printer for display in the WID and other participating
Departments.