* 1126312
* MRI: Development of Polarization Control for  Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Sanford Simon, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 463,749.00

1126312&lt;br/&gt;Simon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Total internal reflection (TIR)
fluorescence microscopy allows high resolution imaging of membrane processes
with very low background. Unique properties of TIR can lend themselves to
interesting and unique quantifications. However there are obstacles in the way
of robust quantification of TIR data. First, the excitation field created with
TIR is non-homogenous due to interference fringes. These fringes, which are
often of larger magnitude than the biological signals, result from interferences
in the light source, the delivery optics, the objectives and the sample. This
makes quantification of fluorescence intensities difficult. It is also difficult
to control the excitation field polarization, particularly while correcting for
interference fringes discussed above. Polarization based TIR allows for
quantitative measurements of the levels, orientation and dynamics of proteins as
well as membrane orientations. This group has shown that polarization can be a
powerful tool for exploring the dynamics of molecules. The goal of this proposal
is to advance quantitative TIR imaging by redesigning the illumination of the
evanescent field and building a new microscope to allow: Improved uniformity of
the TIR excitation field, control of the excitation beam, and through the image
acquisition software control of the polarization of the excitation beam.