* 1126860
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nano-Indenter to Improve the Nanoscale Materials Testing and Characterization Capabilities at the University of Wyoming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Carl Frick, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 233,333.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funding for the
acquisition of a Nano-Indenter to improve the nanoscale materials testing and
characterization capabilities at the University of Wyoming. The nano-indenter
remains one of the few mechanical testing systems that can characterize small-
scale materials and components. There are many fundamental research areas of
transformative character that a nano-indenter enables to explore. At the
University of Wyoming (UW) the specific research activities that will be enabled
with the acquisition of the nano-indenter system are quite diverse which also
reflects the different backgrounds of the principal investigators in chemical
and mechanical engineering. The research activities include (a) size dependent
deformation of polymers, (b) synthesis and mechanical characterization of CO2
sorbent materials and (c) encapsulated nanoparticles for drug delivery, as well
as (d) collaborative research on small-scale material systems and components
which is conducted in a combined experimental and theoretical/simulation based
investigation. These research activities represent original research that is or
has great potential to be of transformative character. The proposal activities
that are enabled with the nano-indenter investigate both fundamental as well as
practical aspects that are of direct societal relevance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This nano-indenter complements the research infrastructure
and significantly enhances ongoing and future research and will fill a missing
gap between mechanical testing/characterization and chemical and
optical/dimensional analysis equipment already available at UW. Nanotechnology
is one of the core strategic research areas at UW and involves multiple academic
disciplines working towards a wide range of applications. Many faculty members
will be using the instrument from various academic departments at UW including
chemistry, physics and chemical, civil, mechanical engineering. The nano-
indenter will further promote and develop collaborations across these
disciplines. Besides improving the research infrastructure the nano-indenter
will also enhance the training infrastructure for nanotechnology and materials
at UW. The associated investigators are involved in projects with (i)
engineering undergraduate/graduate students of which many are female students,
(ii) dissemination of nanotechnologies for energy production and environmental
protection in rural areas of Wyoming, and (iii) mentorships of prospective
students with disabilities. In all these activities the equipment has an
integrated part in providing hands-on experiences to nanotechnology and will
enhance the ability of the involved faculty to promote the interest in
engineering and science programs and science in general to the students of
Wyoming.