* 1126991
* Early Career: Acquisition of a He system for (U-Th)/He thermochronology at the University of Colorado, Boulder
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Rebecca Flowers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 320,000.00

This early career award will fund the acquisition of a He system for automated
degassing, isotope dilution and measurementof He for use in a new (U-Th)/He
thermochronology facility in the Department of Geological Sciences at the
University of Colorado (CU), Boulder. This award will also fund three-years of
technician support, and a plan is in place for future alternative sources of
support for this new technician dedicated to this facility. With the exception
of the capacity to degas minerals and analyze He, all other equipment and
procedures necessary for (U-Th)/He analytical work are now established at CU,
including protocols for mineral separation and selection, U-Th spiking and
mineral dissolution, and U-Th analysis by ICPMS. This&lt;br/&gt;award will allow
CU to come online efficiently as a complete (U-Th)/He facility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(U-Th)/He thermochronology is a field that continues to
expand its application to a broadening array of earth science problems. The
potential for innovative studies using this tool is growing and the demand for
these data by the earth science community is only increasing. The goals of a
(U-Th)/He facility at CU-Boulder would be to provide the analytical capacity to
support existing and planned research initiatives, support the research
initiatives of CU faculty members and universities in the Rocky Mountain region,
and provide hands-on training for students, postdoctoral fellows and professors
in thermochronology techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A (U-Th)/He facility at CU
will have a significant impact in training scientists at the undergraduate,
graduate, and professional level in the application and interpretation of
geochronology and thermochronology data. A particular effort will be made to
provide students with hands-on experience in thermochronology procedures as part
of thesis research projects. No (U-Th)/He lab exists currently in the Rocky
Mountain region, and this facility would expand the analytical capabilities in
the region. A thermochronology facility at CU would further enhance the PI's
ongoing efforts to incorporate effective approaches to teaching about deep time
in her undergraduate and graduate teaching. The PI has a solid record of
mentoring women in her lab, and has plans to facilitate the training of
minorities through an existing NSF-funded project in Africa.