* 1126438
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High Performance Cluster for Multidisciplinary Computational Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Karlis Kaugars, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 289,574.00

Proposal #: 11-26438&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): deDoncker, Elise H.; Guftafson, Peter A.;
Kaugars, Karlis; Liou, William W.; Mo, Yirong&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Western
Michigan University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: High Performance Cluster for
Multidisciplinary Research &lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring a high performance computer cluster, supports interdisciplinary
projects focused on computational engineering. This hybrid performance computing
cluster enables simulations of computational fluid dynamics, nanotube models,
flexible body aerodynamics, and paper engineering models of ink transfer and
engraving properties. The initial uses of the computational cluster will include
basic research in Computer Science, with parallel algorithm development and
implementation for projects in high energy physics and medical physics, and
furthermore in computational fluid dynamics (CFD), carbon nanotube (CNT)
modeling, and composite materials research in Mechanical and Aeronautical
Engineering, flexible body aerodynamics in Paper, Chemical Engineering, and
Imaging, and novel computational approaches in Chemistry. With a hybrid
computing environment supporting distributed memory computations between nodes
and shared memory computation within nodes and massive parallel computation on
graphics processor cores, this cluster would provide a unique
resource.&lt;br/&gt;Significant computational capability is required for the
process of inter-scale information transfer in multi-scale modeling to yield new
fundamental understanding of composite mechanics. For high-resolution CFD, the
proposed acquisition of the HPC computer cluster is suited for high-speed,
parallel DNS (Direct Numerical Simulations) and LES (Large Eddy Simulations)
simulations (which play a key role in the advancement of the understanding of
fluid turbulence in a wide range of characteristic scales). The computer cluster
is expected to reduce the wall-clock time for computing the mechanical behavior
of complex structures containing CNTs at a scale comparable to their production
in a laboratory environment. While conventional CFD methods fail to accurately
model flexible structures highly interacting with 3D flow, the proposed Lattice
Boltzman method provides a powerful computational tool for complicated flexible
body aerodynamics. High performance computational chemistry is expected to
contribute new understanding of the reaction mechanisms catalyzed by DXR
(reductoisomerase) and develop new methods for modeling the nature of chemical
bonding by combining valence bond and molecular orbital theories. In computer
science, a new model of parallel integration will be developed to support the
automatic computation of iterated integrals, enabling new computations of
Feynman loop integrals to support the validation of theoretical physics models
for the collision of elementary particles observed at colliders. Iterated
integration will also be applied in medical physics computations for regulating
the dosage of proton beam radiation at varied angles. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation provides the opportunity for training
on cutting-edge computing facilities across four departments and two colleges.
It allows student participation in the operation and maintenance of the system.
The new cluster should enable projects that foster inter-disciplinary research
and collaborations. The Feynman integration project is supported by the High
Energy Accelerator Research Organization in Tsukuba, Japan. Collaboration for
the radiation therapy project is established with staff of the Henry Ford
hospital in Detroit. Furthermore, some projects have applications in biomedical
engineering (composite &lt;br/&gt;materials modeling, orthopedic implants and
other medical devices, drug delivery with nanotubes, flow in IV tubes), medical
physics (radiation oncology) and biochemistry (development of antibiotics,
antimalarial drugs and herbicides), which can underlie cooperation in the
framework of bio-engineering and the planned medical school of the university.
The research in multiscale modeling for composite materials might have impact on
global energy usage through improved fuel economy associated with weight
reduction in structural components. It should also contribute to improve the
environment through advances in wind turbine models and other renewable energy
generating technologies. The results in flexible body aerodynamics should
update, advance, and positively impact our understanding of the fundamental
mechanisms of migration, rotation, flocculation, and dispersion of flexible and
deformable fibers and bio-particles. Hence, the instrumentation can set the
stage for educational developments at this mainly undergraduate serving
institution. Software, data, and supporting materials of the projects will also
be disseminated.