* 1126366
* MRI:   Acquisition of FACSARIA-II, a next-generation high-speed cell sorter for a Flow Cytometry Core supporting interdisciplinary research and training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Susan Roberts, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 384,586.00

Flow cytometry is a powerful analytic technique that facilitates the
characterization, quantification and/or isolation of cell populations based on
innate or manipulated cellular attributes. Labeling cells externally or
internally with fluorescently-conjugated antibodies or fluorescent vital dyes,
or by genetically expressing fluorescent reporter molecules, all represent
strategies for defining cell populations that may be differentiated using a flow
cytometer.In recent years, BectonDickinson has made significant technological
improvements, leading the field in creating the next-generation of cell sorters
with its FACSAria (4) platform. A newer, user-friendly, bench-top high-speed
cell sorter, the FACSAriaII, has digital electronics that allows high-speed
analyses (70,000 events/second) based on up to 14 parameters, including cell
size and internal complexity, with concomitant high-speed, simultaneous sorting
of two or four populations, saving time and resources for users. Sample nozzles
are easily interchanged to accommodate sorting large cells. Its fixed-laser
alignment increases sensitivity, minimizes start-up time, improves
reproducibility between experiments and enables automated daily quality control.
It is capable of sorting cells aseptically for subsequent cell culture. The
FACSAriaII platform is upgradeable, permitting economic configuration at the
outset and retaining the flexibility to meet evolving user needs in the future.
High-speed sorting, large cell size accommodation, increased sensitivity and
upgradability make the FACSAriaII the best possible choice now and an excellent
long-term investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes the research
of nine PIs as major users of a FACSAriaII, and an additional 10 minor users.
Their projects, are broadly grouped by their requirements for one or more of the
unique capabilities intrinsic to the FACSAriaII: i) high-speed sorting of unique
target cell populations; ii) simultaneous, high-speed enrichment of multiple
cell populations for further in vivo or ex vivo utilization; iii) high-speed
sorting requiring multi-parameter stratification. Many of these PIs have
optimized protocols in place, ensuring data will be obtained almost immediately
upon acquiring a FACSAriaII. Reagent development is another important goal of
many of the PIs, and acquiring a FACSAriaII will provide them with the capacity
to advance and accelerate discovery for entire fields of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical engineers will modify and analyze plant
cells, on a per cell basis, to improve their production of cancer-treating
compounds, or engineer bacterial quorum sensing for synthetic biology and
industrial biotechnology. Biologists will be able to better understand the genes
that regulate the structural dynamics of plant growth and chemists will use
bacterial expression systems to generate and screen for synthetic allosteric
?switches? that can regulate cell death. Polymer scientists will track the
efficiency and consequences of synthetic payload uptake into viable cells, while
immunologists will recover and manipulate rare cell populations, transferring
them from one host to another to better define mechanisms of disease, identify
novel therapeutic targets, or advance vaccine development. Ongoing, diverse and,
in many cases, interdisciplinary research will be strengthened and accelerated
by the capabilities of a FACSAriaII high-speed cell sorter.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Many of the proposed research projects have applied objectives
including potential translational benefits, such as identifying novel
therapeutic targets and providing proof-of-principle data for novel delivery of
payload. Additionally, some of these projects may have industrial or commercial
applications. On-site access to a FACSAriaII will hasten progress toward these
objectives. The group of major and minor users collectively trains many
undergraduate and graduate students, and many of these through grant-funded
interdisciplinary education and training, such as the University of
Massachusetts/ Amherst Institute for Cellular Engineering and the
Chemistry/Biology Interface. Looking forward, through outreach to sister
colleges in the Five College Consortium, the Flow Core Facility will provide
expanded opportunities for training undergraduate students in flow cytometric
techniques, including students from Mt. Holyoke and Smith College, two all-women
colleges that prepare a significant percentage of their undergraduate enrollment
for advanced training in the STEM fields. Specifically, in conjunction with
Smith College's Summer Science and Engineering Program, offered each year to
high school-aged young women from across the country, a flow cytometry and cell
sorting research module will be developed to introduce the next generation of
women scientists to the power of single-cell analysis. Looking back, the
University of Massachusetts/Amherst has a long-standing reputation for
recruiting and retaining under-represented groups, in part through its lead role
in the Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate. This
five-institution organization is committed to expanding opportunities for
scientific graduate education and career advancement for under-represented
groups. In 2008, the Cargnegie Foundation recognized the outreach efforts of the
University of Massachusetts/Amherst when it designated UMass a Community Engaged
University. The FACSAriaII, an instrument that combines powerful single-cell
sorting and analysis with an accessible, user-friendly design will play an
invaluable role in continuing these efforts.