* 1126379
* MRI:   Acquisition of an Imaging Flow Cytometer for Multidisciplinary Organic and Inorganic Particle Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Richard Buchholz, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 102,415.00

The main purpose of this project is to facilitate acquisition and use of a
state-of-the-art flow cytometer with imaging and fluorescence triggering
capabilities, which will be located at the University of Mississippi (UM),
Department of Biology. The Flow Cytometer and Microscope, or FlowCAM, utilizes a
high resolution CCD camera, multiple objectives, and image analysis software to
allow enumeration, measurement, and image capture of individual suspended
organic and inorganic particles ranging from 0.002 to 2 millimeters in size.
This instrument was designed for plankton assessment, but it can be used for any
fluid-suspended particle in this size range. Therefore, in addition to studies
in plankton ecology, planned uses of the instrument include research in
symbiosis, mycology, biogeochemistry, hydrology, and wildlife biology. The key
features of the FlowCAM are an unprecedented speed of sample processing (up to
10,000 particles per minute) and production of a digital reference image for
each particle. The processing speed improves statistical robustness of community
data, and the automation leads to a significant reduction in human bias in
plankton identification and enumeration. As microscope-based community analysis
is often the limiting factor in plankton research, this instrument will allow
the investigators to address ecologically relevant questions at a spatial and
temporal scale not before possible, including real-time monitoring of plankton
dynamics such as aquatic pollution events and harmful algal blooms. A web-based
data access portal will enable remote users to quickly receive data from samples
sent to UM.

Many scientific questions in biology could be more rapidly and efficiently
answered if scientists could easily identify, count, and document microscopic
objects such as unicellular algae, fungal spores, and protozoan parasites; the
FlowCAM will do just that. The multi-disciplinary nature of this instrument will
encourage use by a diverse group of scientists, greatly expand UM existing
research and training capabilities, and encourage collaborations among
researchers across the region. Projects supported by the instrument will include
assessing algal roles in ecosystem services such as nutrient retention in
agriculturally influenced streams; measuring the impact of the invasive,
planktivorous Asian carp on the food resources of native fish species in the
Mississippi River Basin; relating parasite load to mate choice in wild turkeys;
understanding symbiotic relationships and co-evolution in mycorrhizal and coral-
algal symbioses; and understanding survival and distribution patterns of native
and invasive mussel larvae. Image databases will be made accessible for public
use through Morphbank, an open web database of biological images, and detailed
community databases shared through the Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity. The
PIs will provide educational demonstrations and research opportunities for a
high school-to-college summer bridge program designed to attract minority
students to the fields of math, science, and engineering. At the university
level, the instrument will be integrated into several laboratory-based courses
(Aquatic Biology, Principles of Microbiology, Limnological Methods) and will be
used in faculty-supervised independent research projects (e.g., Directed Study
in Biological Sciences, summer REU programs). Research data will be disseminated
in the primary scientific literature.