* 1126717
* MRI: Acquisition of an SEM-EDS-CL for interdisciplinary research and training in materials imaging and chemical analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Marc Hendrix, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2013
* USD 295,424.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the acquisition of
equipment to develop a new electron microscopy facility at The University of
Montana that focuses on materials imaging and chemical analysis. This funding
provides support for a variable pressure scanning electron microscope (SEM),
energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) for micro-chemical analysis, a live
color cathodoluminescence (CL) detector for imaging of luminescent materials,
and a sputter coater for sample preparation. The user group includes scientists
from the Departments of Geosciences, Anthropology, Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry,
Physics, Geological Engineering, and Forestry. Research applications include the
petrologic examination of geologic materials, materials-based archaeology
studies of lithic tools and resource transport strategies, imaging and analysis
of nano-scale magnetic devices, studies involving the effect of fire ash on the
hydrologic system, and documenting the nature and compositions of metal
contamination in river sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty involved in
this project are committed to recruiting a diverse group of researchers and have
a track record of working with Native American undergraduate and graduate
students. Undergraduate students will use this state-of-the-art technology in
courses at all levels of the curriculum and for senior research projects,
forming the foundation for a hands-on, active learning environment. Exposure to
these techniques will better prepare students for careers in industry that rely
on high resolution microscopy for materials characterization. Outreach will be
accomplished through established collaborations involving the PI, co-PIs, and
the K-12 community. The scanning electron microscopy facility is unique within
the state of Montana and will thus operate as a regional facility for research
collaboration with scientists from other universities, and regional state and
federal agencies, such as the Montana Bureau of Mines and Geology.