* 1126923
* Scholar's Award: Plague's Third Pandemic: A History of Disease Ecology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2016
* Susan Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 74,766.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes the historical development of the
field of Disease Ecology, which is a distinctive approach to understanding and
controlling disease outbreaks. The view to be explored in this project is the
extent which disease ecology had its roots in quantitative population biology
and animal ecology. The analysis is it developed in the context of the Third
Pandemic of Bubonic Plague (so named in 1894), which killed far fewer people
than previous pandemics, even though human activities spread the disease quickly
over a much greater area of the globe. Between the 1890s and 1980s, the plague
invaded and infected wild animal populations, and it was widely feared that
these animal "reservoirs" of disease could be a permanent source of infection
for humans. Veterinarians, tropical medicine specialists, ecologists and local
workers formed a global network of researchers and public health officials who
tested and honed ecological models and methods. Along with its public health
role, disease ecology played an important part in shaping the science of ecology
and in assessing microbes' fitness and use as biological weapons at mid-century
(1940s-60s). After a period of quiescence during which plague outbreaks receded
(1960s-1980s), disease ecology has become important again with the re-emergence
of diseases such as influenza, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and
BSE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project analyzes an
important interdisciplinary network of scientists involved in global
circulations of scientific knowledge about ecology and disease. It addresses
several important questions. How did this network overcome geographical,
disciplinary, and cultural boundaries? What role did vernacular knowledge play
in the development and applications of disease ecology? Aiming to be a
foundational history of disease ecology, this project serves as a fresh approach
to the history of ecology and informs our understanding of how ecological
knowledge has circulated among various disciplines over the past century. The
project bridges a needless divide between historians of science (who have
written about ecology) and historians of medicine (who have written about
disease). The project revises historical analysis by bridging these sub-
disciplines and their constituent subjects (human and animal). Its trans-
disciplinary approach follows that of the disease ecologists
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project also
addresses a broader audience of public health officials, scientists and
laypeople concerned about the global spread of infectious disease. International
health and wildlife conservation organizations use the models of disease ecology
to assess the dynamic interactions at the human-animal-ecosystems interface.
This project demonstrates how and why practicing disease ecologists have come to
rely upon a priori mathematical models and what has been lost in the process
(including local social and spatial conditions; and climate change and other
variables important to future outbreaks). The PI is disseminating results
through public lectures, a book, articles, and a website (educational materials
for public dissemination); a new university course (integrating research
activities into teaching); graduate student training (including underrepresented
groups); and participation in a National Institute for Mathematical and
Biological Synthesis Working Group, which integrates research into state,
federal and private-sector partnerships.