* 1126273
* MRI:   Acquisition of a laser scanning confocal system to advance research and training in biology, chemistry, and physics at Willamette University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Tallman, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 526,788.00

Six research-productive faculty members from the biology, chemistry, and physics
departments at Willamette University will purchase, install, maintain, and
manage a shared Zeiss LSM-710 confocal microscope to add essential functionality
to Willamette?s Core Imaging Facility and advance multidisciplinary research in
the cellular, molecular, and biophysical sciences. Confocal microscopy is the
method of choice when sensitive, high resolution, three-dimensional, time-
resolved imaging is required to unambiguously localize and monitor simultaneous
dynamic changes in cellular molecules, structures, and processes. Research by
the PI and co-PIs requires submicron axial resolution, elimination of background
out-of-focus light, and 3-D reconstruction for precise localization and accurate
quantification of sub-cellular molecules. Spectral un-mixing of the signals is
required for several investigators who work with dyes that emit at wavelengths
close to that of specimen background (PI Coddington and co-PIs Fisher, Tallman).
Further, the work of co-PIs Altman, Duncan, and Tallman requires imaging of sub-
cellular protein movements in live cells and/or tissues. This necessitates
outfitting the LSCM system with Definite Focus, allowing imaging of single
proteins over extended time-scales without stage drift in the z-axis. Drs.
Tallman and Altman?s research further requires cells and tissues to be
maintained at precise temperatures and pH, which necessitates the environmental
module extra to the stage. Thus, the specific capabilities that are required are
rapid speed of acquisition; live cell and tissue imaging through time series
analysis; laser power for photo bleaching purposes; and spectral separation
capabilities. In summary, the Zeiss LSM 710 mounted on an inverted Axio Observer
Z1 microscope optimally meets our research and training
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF award is used to purchase a confocal
microscope for six faculty members in the Biology, Chemistry and Physics
departments at Willamette University, a primarily undergraduate institution.
Three of the six co-PI?s are women, and four are pre-tenure junior faculty; all
of whom serve a strongly female undergraduate student body in biological and
STEM fields. Acquisition of this equipment allows Willamette researchers to
answer a variety of highly relevant research questions including: how stress
hormones regulate animal behavior; how genes and proteins control nervous system
development and function; how pesticides interfere with animal development; and
how heat stress and hormones control plant growth and reproduction. The
microscope accelerates our faculty research programs to the level of
disciplinary recognition required to sustain and/or compete for other external
research grants. We also realize broader gains as the microscope becomes part of
a larger imaging facility available for research use by faculty members at other
small colleges in the area and a fulcrum for interdisciplinary and collaborative
research. This state-of-the-art instrument attracts highly motivated
undergraduates to science careers and provides opportunities for high-impact
research training of undergraduates bound for graduate school and for immediate
employment in the technical workforce.