* 1126314
* MRI:  Acquisition of Self-Referenced Frequency Comb for Atomic-Molecular-Optical Physics and Optical Signal Processing Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Daniel Elliott, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 273,347.00

Research Objectives and Approach

The objective of this research is to investigate applications of optical
frequency combs in photonic signal processing and atomic-molecular-optical (AMO)
physics. The approach is to acquire a state of the art, commercial frequency
comb laser to enable new experimental studies.

Intellectual Merit

In ultrafast photonics the frequency comb will enable generation of optical and
radio-frequency signals with instantaneous bandwidth and long-term jitter
properties significantly better than available by conventional technologies. In
AMO physics research, the frequency comb will enable driving coherent optical
transitions involving very different transition frequencies, and will be an
invaluable tool, for example, to create ground state molecules via
photoassociation for current research aiming to use such molecules for quantum
computing. Furthermore, the proposed equipment is expected to catalyze new
interdisciplinary collaborations involving both disciplines.

Broader Impacts The proposed equipment will provide rich opportunities for broad
student training in areas of cutting-edge technology and enable new research
impacting optical and wireless communications, both areas with direct societal
impact, and quantum computing, an emerging area with potential for revolutionary
impact in the long term. Broader impact is also anticipated through a variety of
activities in which the proposing faculty are engaged. For example, Weiner is
currently Chair of the National Academy of Engineering?s Frontiers of
Engineering conference, considered to be an important career development
opportunity for future engineering leaders, while Elliott is active in diversity
issues, as evidenced by his term as Director of Graduate Recruitment and
Retention Programs at Purdue?s College of Engineering.