* 1126099
* SBIR Phase II:  Atom Chips for Cold and Ultracold Matter Applications
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Evan Salim, ColdQuanta, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2015
* USD 640,099.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to develop
the next generation of atom chips for producing and manipulating ultracold
atomic gases (temperatures &lt; 1 ÂµK). While atom chips developed in Phase I
provided only magnetic control, these new hybrid atom chips will be able to
manipulate ultracold matter both magnetically and optically. These chips will be
incorporated into atom-chip vacuum cells, allowing optical techniques to be
implemented in compact ultracold matter products. In Phase I, we developed
silicon/glass wafers for both creating ultrahigh vacuum electrical feedthroughs
with near perfect yield as well as in-trap imaging of ultracold matter. In Phase
II, we will further develop this technology by incorporating miniature on-chip
optical elements as a vehicle for bringing optical potentials (e.g. produced by
laser beams) into the vacuum system. Our research plan includes redesigning
existing chip layouts to accommodate small-sized optics that will be anodically
bonded to silicon regions of the chip. To further enhance functionality, we will
pursue both anti-reflection coating of atom chips and redesigns of the
connectorization scheme used to bring electrical currents to the
chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to greatly expand the number and variety of experimental techniques
that can be implemented with atom-chip vacuum cells. Of key interest here are
optical techniques, such as optical lattices, used to trap and coherently
control quantum mechanical systems (e.g. Bose-Einstein condensates). An
important application of ultracold lattice-trapped atoms is interferometry,
which can be used to realize gyroscopes, accelerometers, and gravimeters that
are expected to be orders of magnitude more sensitive than current state-of-the-
art technologies. Such devices are crucial for navigational positioning systems
and satellite communications, and therefore are of great interest to both
commercial and defense-oriented markets. Optical trapping is also vital for the
next generation of neutral atomic clocks, whose accuracy is now exceeding a
phenomenal 1 part in 10^17 (i.e. a loss of 1 second every 3 billion years).
Optically trapped atoms are also ideal for implementing quantum information
algorithms, and therefore have many applications in the emerging fields of
quantum computation and information processing. For basic science, optical
lattices have been used for precision measurements of fundamental constants,
some of the most stringent tests of the Standard Model of Physics, and
groundbreaking studies of many-body physics.