* 1126739
* MRI: Development of Melete: an interaction-oriented, software-rich compute cluster with tangible interface support for collaborative research and the classroom
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Susanne Brenner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 900,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-26739&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Ullmer, Brygg&lt;br/&gt; Batzer, Mark
A.; Brenner, Sussanne C.; Butler, Leslie G.; Parker, Rod&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Louisiana State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Melete: An Interaction-
oriented, Software-rich Compute Cluster with &lt;br/&gt; Tangible Interface
Support for Collaborative Research and the Classroom&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing Melete, a new genre of interaction-
oriented compute cluster instrument integrated with advanced interaction
technologies, servicing research collaboration and training in computational
science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics (STEAM), aims to advance
the capabilities of batch processing systems. In decades past, batch processing
meant turning over computation to a remote dispatcher, retrieving only the
results of the isolated and distant computational process. As users have evolved
to expect greater interactivity with their copious mobile devices and other
forms of mobile computation, the evolution of the ?cloud? as a computational
paradigm ha become much more interactive. Melete promises to extend this
interactive paradigm to cluster computing in new and innovative ways.
&lt;br/&gt;The developed instrument will enable research in biology,
visualization of computational materials, displaying configuration space for
computational mathematics, mapping and displaying data from robot mapped
locations (e.g. archeology sites, urban environments, etc), and architecture
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This proposal promises
benefits to society by balancing activities between research and research
training contexts. This approach is aligned with NSF priorities in
cyberlearning, cyberinfrastructure, and beyond. The proposal's partnership with
Southern University (an HBCU) in&lt;br/&gt;both research and classroom impacts,
building upon five years of successful collaboration in "Cybertools," provides
further potential and promise for broader impact.