* 1126433
* MRI:  Development of an ALMA Beamformer for Ultra High Resolution VLBI and High Frequency Phased Array Science
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Alan Whitney, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,072,370.00

The ability of astronomers to detect fine structure details in distant objects
depends upon the angular resolution obtainable from their telescopes and
instruments. Angular resolution is related to the wavelength at which the
observations are made (the smaller the wavelength, the higher the resolution
that can be achieved) and also to the diameter of the observing objective (the
larger the objective, the higher the resolution). In most cases the observing
objective is the size of the telescope's primary mirror. But when multiple
telescopes are used simultaneously and their beams are combined the objective
size becomes the baseline distance between the telescopes used. For several
decades, radio astronomers have taken advantage of large baselines by
coordinating observations between radio telescopes on different continents in a
technique termed Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). This technique has
enabled radio astronomers (who work at quite long wavelengths compared to that
of visual light) to achieve angular resolutions that rival, and in some cases
surpass, the kinds of resolutions available to optical astronomers. Dr. Sheperd
Doeleman of the MIT Haystack Observatory has been successfully increasing VLBI
resolution by using shorter wavelengths and he now wants to add VLBI capability
to the new Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) that is now becoming
operational in northern Chile. By adding ALMA to the VLBI network the angular
resolution will be improved by a factor of two and the sensitivity of the
ensemble of telescopes will increase by a factor of ten. Technically, this will
involve combining the beams from up to 66 telescopes in ALMA into one phased and
coherent signal that can then be used as one VLBI station. This new capability
will enable scientists to use VLBI to study the environment around and very
close to Black Holes like the one at the center of our own Milky Way Galaxy and
another in a nearby very massive galaxy. The results of these investigations are
likely to lead to new understanding of the physics in strong gravitational
fields and will provide new tests for the theory of General Relativity. This
work will be made possible through an award from the National Science
Foundation's Major Research Instrumentation program.