* 1126120
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Instrument for Heterogeneous and Biologically Inspired Architectures Research at CUA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Ozlem Kilic, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 08/31/2013
* USD 140,000.00

Proposal #: 11-26120 PI(s): El-Araby, Esam; Chang, Lin-Ching; Kilic, Ozlem
Institution: Catholic University of America (CUA) Title: MRI/Acq.: High
Performance Instrument for Heterogeneous and Biologically Inspired Architectures
Research Project Proposed: This project, acquiring and integrating an SRC-7
system and a GPU cluster into one High Performance Heterogeneous Computing
instrument, aims to investigate, model, design, and potentially prototype new
heterogeneous architectures that are inspired from biology. The instrument will
contribute to expand some of the available hardware accelerators such as
reconfigurable Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) and graphical (GPGPU)
processors currently utilized for research in the fields of high-performance
computing, computational neuroscience and medical informatics, and
electromagnetic and remote sensing. It will facilitate research towards
designing/discovering new heterogeneous architectures that are easy-to-use and
highly productive. Moreover, the instrument will also allow investigating the
use of new processor technologies through interdisciplinary collaborations with
other research groups inside and outside the institution. In computational
neuroscience and medical informatics, the high-performance cluster (HPC) will
help in designing and developing new computational methods to process and
analyze medical imaging data such as diffusion tensor magnetic imaging (DT-MRI).
Although DT-MRI is used increasingly in clinical research for its unique ability
to depict white matter tracts and for its sensitivity to microstructural and
architectural features of brain tissue, it suffers a number of image artifacts
that can corrupt diffusion weighted images (DWIs) which in turn affect DTI
derived quantities. Although ideal for parallel computation, the post-processing
DT-MRI data is very difficult and time consuming. The new instrument will help
test new post-processing algorithms, explore the limitations of the existing
technology, and develop solutions. In electromagnetic and remote sensing
applications, the new instrument will help enhance the computation times of the
numerically intensive problems faced by the research community for commercial
and military applications. Design and optimization of metamaterials, performance
analysis and optimization of antennas on platforms, and target detection behind
clutter (e.g., soil, foliage, fog) represent some examples of the latter.
Broader Impacts: This instrumentation enables realistic computational problems
that can integrate research and teaching as well as promote learning through
discovery. Hence, it is expected to contribute in producing a new generation of
students and postdocs with the ability to face the current changes in computing
technology. Moreover, the instrument enables the creation of a new
interdisciplinary HEterogenous and Biologically Inspired Architectures research
lab (HEBA). The project includes an outreach program, open house events that
include community colleges, high school, and middle school students, and K-12
teachers. Increasing women and minorities is also targeted. Results will be
shared and disseminated.