* 1126004
* Transforming Cross-National Theory and Research through International Research Collaboratives
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2013
* Masayuki Murayama, Law and Society Association
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 175,750.00

This grant funds networks of researchers, or International Research
Collaboratives (IRCs), who organize themselves to accomplish specific
internationally-focused law and social science projects. Participants in IRCs
are distributed across the world's regions, and commit to work together on a
collaborative research project to advance theory, methodology, and policy and to
generate a defined scholarly product. During the grant period, members of thirty
IRCs will address the theoretical and methodological problems of transnational
law and social science research on a variety of topics, including the
globalization of law, climate change, debt and credit regulations throughout the
world, the use of global indicators, comparative judicial settlement procedures,
human rights, citizen participation in legal decision making, and changes in
legal education. NSF grant funding will enable scholars from low and middle
income countries to travel to an international meeting to collaborate with other
IRC members and present their work. This initiative is significant for theory
and for methodology in law and social science. The cross-disciplinary and cross-
national teams will bring wider theoretical perspectives to the problems they
address. The IRCs will also generate new knowledge about the most effective
research methods for analyzing global law and social science phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initiative also holds promise for public policy
advances. Public policy formulated on the basis of broader and deeper
transnational expertise has significantly greater probability of making a
constructive impact. At a time when the US and other leading European and Asian
countries face enormous new challenges - including rapid legal changes,
international financial crises, and the need for increased national and
international security - it is essential to produce a more comprehensive
theoretical framework about law that is built on robust research. The
collaborative model described here offers an innovative and promising way of
moving forward.