* 1126657
* MRI Consortium: Acquisition of LC-MS/MS Instrumentation for Undergraduate Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Danielle Dube, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 379,944.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor
Elizabeth Stemmler from Bowdoin College and colleagues Patsy Dickinson, Dharni
Vasudevan, Danielle Dube and Benjamin Gorske will acquire a liquid
chromatograph-quadrupole, mass spectrometer with tandem capabilities and various
accessories. The proposal will enhance research training and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as (a) use of transcriptomics and peptidomics
strategies to neuropeptide identification and to explore the role of hormonal
cycles on differential neuromodulatory responses in crustaceans, (b)
characterization of bacterial glycosylation, (c) studies of protein methylation,
(d) characterization of transformations of molecules of importance to the
environmental degradation of contaminants, and (e) development of methods to
synthesize and characterize oligothioamides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass
spectrometers (MS) are used to identify the chemical composition of a sample by
measuring the mass of the molecular constituents in the sample after they are
ionized and detected by the mass spectrometer. This instrument couples a high-
resolution liquid chromatography system with the mass analysis ability of mass
spectrometry. The liquid chromatograph separates mixtures into their molecular
components. These components then flow into a mass spectrometer where their
masses, and those of their fragments, are measured. This mass spectrometer has a
special design that provides relatively high mass accuracy, sensitivity and
resolution that allows detection and determination of the structure of molecules
in a complex mixture. The instrumentation will be used not only for research but
also in laboratory courses to train significant numbers of students in the use
of this important analytical technique and for research and outreach activities
with regional institutions such as Bates College, Colby College and Mount Desert
Island Biological Laboratory.