* 1126587
* MRI:  Acquisition of Probes and an Upgrade to the Console for a 500 MHz wide Bore Solids NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* William Cooper, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program and the
Chemistry Division, Professor Geoffrey Strouse from Florida State University and
colleague William Cooper will acquire a new console and probes for a 500 MHz
wide bore nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer for solids. The award
will enhance research in areas such as (a) studies of microenvironments in
quantum dots (QD), (b) biogeochemistry of natural organic compounds in surface
waters, ground waters and soil pore waters, (c) nanofibers composed of designer
peptides, (d) intermetallics and Zintl phases, (e) metal supported catalysts,
(f) ferroelectric phase transitions, (g) live-cell metabolite analysis, (h)
structural analysis of biomimetic nanotechnologies (i) identification of natural
products, and (j) soil organic carbon dynamics in tropical forests. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;NMR spectroscopy is one of the most widely used analytical tools used
by chemists to investigate the content and structure of materials and solids. It
is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and probe the microenvironments in solid state
materials. The results from these NMR studies will have a positive impact on
studies of bio-inspired materials, polymers, and environmentally relevant
materials. The instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research. It will be shared with faculty and students at Florida A&amp;M
University and Valdosta State University, and researchers at Tyndall AFB and the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama.