* 1126470
* Resolving Pliocene and Pleistocene Hominin Ontogeny With Synchrotron Virtual Histology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tanya Smith, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 221,912.00

Exploring the evolution of human growth and development is of particular
significance for understanding unique attributes of modern humans, such as long
childhoods and extended post-reproductive periods. The integration of cutting-
edge X-ray imaging, developmental biology, and analyses of the fossil record
will reveal the intimate record of birth and subsequent growth recorded in
ancestral human remains. More broadly, this project will significantly improve
research and education infrastructure through the creation of an open-access
virtual hominin database. This will directly benefit students and scholars who
are unable to access original specimens and costly equipment, as well as African
repositories with limited infrastructure for hosting and disseminating large
virtual datasets. The project also will also strengthen and establish novel
multidisciplinary international collaborations, protect invaluable fossil
material by potentially reducing the demand for access to original specimens,
and provides research and training opportunities for students and a postdoctoral
fellow in the emerging field of virtual histology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to
their highly mineralized nature, teeth are the most common elements in human
fossil assemblages. Tooth crowns and roots preserve precise records of daily
growth, formation time, and age at death in young individuals, remaining
unchanged for millions of years. Importantly, the timing of tooth formation is
the most accurate proxy for reconstructing growth and development in fossil
species. This project will assess the evolution of human development through the
study of early hominin dentitions. Cutting-edge synchrotron imaging will be
employed to reveal microscopic tooth structure non-destructively and in three-
dimensions (3D). In contrast to most preceding studies, which necessarily
employed living ape and/or human developmental variables, this project will
yield the most comprehensive and independent assessment of development in
hominins predating Neanderthals.