* 1126629
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Multidisciplinary Imaging Core Facilities
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 355,088.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award funds the acquisition of a laser
scanning confocal microscope at the Rochester Institute of Technology. The
microscope has sufficiently high resolution and fast data acquisition rate to be
used in biological and materials research, and its acquisition will transform
research at RIT by significantly enhancing imaging capabilities. The four main
projects that will be impacted are (1) examination of the evolution of
development in echinoderms through fate mapping and examination of gene
expression, (2) subcellular localization of plant proteins, (3) characterization
of the viscoelasticity of eye lens protein solutions as a function of
composition and temperature and mapping their glass transition boundaries, and
(4) examination of the colloidal glass transition. At least fifteen faculty
members in the departments of biological sciences, medical sciences, physics,
chemistry, mechanical engineering, and biomedical engineering will be impacted
by this new imaging system. The faculty users actively involve undergraduate
students in all phases of their projects, including publishing and presenting at
national meetings. Several faculty members also support Master's students. The
acquisition of the microscope will directly address the NSF goal of improving
the access to and increasing the use of state-of-the-art equipment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confocal microscope will be integral in creating a
multidisciplinary research training environment as it will be housed in a
central location to facilitate collaborations between faculty and students
across science and engineering. Undergraduate research students will work on
research projects with their faculty mentors, workshops will be given on
confocal microscopy to train new users (undergraduate students, graduate
students, faculty, and external users), the confocal microscope will be used in
current research-based courses, and a new multidisciplinary course will be
developed and delivered by the PIs. This course will provide students with
hands-on experience with microscopy in student/faculty designed research
projects, and the confocal microscope will have an integral role. The
acquisition of the confocal microscope will have broader impacts beyond
enhancing RIT's infrastructure for research and facilitating the integration of
research and education. These include broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups, especially the deaf and hard-of-hearing students at
RIT, women in science and engineering, and faculty and students who are AALANA
(African American, Latino/a American, Native American). Results of the research
projects will be presented at undergraduate research seminars and symposia,
local, regional and national meetings, and will be published in peer-reviewed
journals.