* 1126599
* MRI: Development of an Ultracold Potassium Rydberg Source for Experiments in Quantum Optics and Many-Body Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Charles Conover, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2016
* USD 157,616.00

This grant supports the development of an instrument to produce dense, cold,
gases of potassium atoms in highly excited quantum mechanical orbits (Rydberg
states). The atomic gases will have temperatures less than a thousandth of a
degree above absolute zero. In highly excited states the electrons are very far
from the nucleus, and are highly susceptible to interactions with external
electric fields and other atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of their
remarkable properties, highly-excited atoms have the potential to provide
insights into the dynamics of an array of quantum mechanical systems. The simple
properties of highly excited potassium atoms will allow experiments that
elucidate fundamental quantum processes of interest in chemical quantum control
and in quantum information science. The strong, long-range, and non-isotropic
nature of the interactions between atoms and measurements of the dynamics of
many-atom systems is connected to ongoing experiments in condensed matter
physics that employ ultracold samples of atoms and
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments that will be enabled by the
instrument will address two overriding questions. The first question is how
simple quantum systems behave when driven by strong fields. The second question
is how energy transfer between atoms and molecules can be assisted or frustrated
by light while in the presence of complex many-body interactions. The unique
instrument will allow transformative research at a small college through
experiments that complement research done in other atomic and molecular species
at other institutions worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing the instrument
involves design and construction of three distinct components to be added to a
working system that produces cold ground-state atoms. The main goals of the
development project are the following: (1) stabilizing lasers for excitation of
the potassium electrons; (2) developing and constructing a structure to apply
controlled electric fields to the atoms; and (3) developing and constructing a
detector that can determine the energy levels of the individual atoms in the
apparatus. Specifically, the following components will be added to the PI's
existing potassium magneto optical trap (MOT): (1) stabilized ultraviolet and
infrared lasers for stepwise excitation of ultracold potassium atoms from the
ground-state to Rydberg states via the intermediate 5p level; (2) a
radiofrequency transmission line to apply fields to the atoms that are
compatible with the ultra-high-vacuum MOT; and (3) a state-selective field-
ionization detector that does not perturb the Rydberg
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves extensive student training.
The project will impact the education of many undergraduate students at Colby
College both through their direct participation in instrument development and in
classes affected by the project. The PI has been effective at integrating
undergraduate students of all levels into his research program. Undergraduates
working on the development of the instrument will receive training in state-of-
the-art atomic physics and expertise in lasers, electronics, optical
instrumentation, vacuum and radiofrequency technology, and computerized data
acquisition and control systems.