* 1126812
* MRI:  Acquisition of  A Hyrid High Performance Computer Cluster for Gravitational-Wave Source Simulation and Data Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 475,000.00

This award supports the acquisition of high-performance computing (HPC)
equipment that will enable research in the area of gravitational-wave physics
relevant to ground-based GW detectors, such as the NSF-funded Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO). The research enabled by
this equipment focuses on both modeling the astrophysical sources of
gravitational waves, as well as the development of computational tools for the
analysis of gravitational-wave signals obtained by LIGO, bringing together a
collaboration of physicists with computer scientists and applied mathematicians.
The hybrid character of the equipment originates from the incorporation of
cutting-edge Graphics Programming Units (GPUs appropriate for scientific
computing) used as accelerators for massively parallel computations in
additional to regular computing units. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of
gravitational wave sources is important in many other areas of physics and the
enabled research work has a strong interdisciplinary character. The equipment
will further enable the multi-faceted training of students in HPC technology and
computational research, including algorithmic development for GPUs most
desirable for a technically sophisticated workforce, competitive in the 21st
century. A small fraction of the computing time resources will also be coupled
to another NSF-funded project at Northwestern, a GK-12 program; these resources
will bring computational thinking and simulation tools to K-12 classroom through
activities and modules tied to the science curriculum thus engaging teachers and
students in inquiry-based learning, understanding of the research process, and
advancing communication and outreach skills of the graduate students.