* 1126870
* MRI: Development of an instrument for quantitative characterization of size distribution of aquatic colloids
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Rick Reynolds, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2016
* USD 472,463.00

Colloids are the most abundant particles in the ocean and other aquatic
environments, and play a crucial role in the structure and functioning of these
ecosystems. The PI's request funding to design and fabricate a new instrument,
an Aquatic Colloidal Analyzer (ACAN), for quantitative determinations of
concentration and size distribution of heterogeneous colloidal assemblages
(including nanoparticles) present in aqueous suspensions. No instrumentation is
presently available which provides accurate information about size distribution
of polydisperse systems of aquatic colloids over a broad size range from about
10 nm to 1 Âµm. The ACAN will utilize a Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA)
method, which is based on physical principles of Brownian motion and light
scattering by colloids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACAN measurements on
unperturbed samples will provide a capability for acquiring an unprecedented
wealth of scientifically new and valuable information on polydisperse
assemblages of naturally occurring aquatic colloids, which cannot be obtained
using present techniques. The data from these measurements will be fundamental
in extending the understanding of the biogeochemistry of the ocean, the carbon
cycle, satellite remote sensing of the oceans for biogeochemical and climate
studies, the roles of microbes in ocean ecosystems, and atmospheric colloidal
particles and their deposition into the ocean (via rainwater
analysis).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed instrument has the potential to impact a broad range of environmental
studies related to particle dynamics, such as biology, chemistry, optics,
physics and climate science. These measurement are critical for many fields in
the aquatic sciences The project would interface with the education and outreach
projects with the UCSD Preuss School and the Scripps Birch Aquarium designed for
K-12 students, college students, and general public.