* 1126662
* MRI: Acquisition of a BlueView Technologies Multibeam Sonar System for High-resolution Vehicle-based Sea Floor Mapping
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Robert Ballard, Sea Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2012
* USD 121,292.00

The PI's request funding to obtain a high resolution bathymetric mapping
capability through the acquisition of a multibeam sonar and a pan and tilt
actuator. Together these items will create a versatile mapping capability for
complex underwater scenes distinct from other vehicles used by the scientific
community. These instruments will provide a means for multiscalar visual and
acoustic mapping over scales from a square kilometer with 10's of cm accuracies
down to hundreds of square meters with millimeter accuracy.

High resolution bathymetric maps have become essential tools for the study of
marine archaeology and oceanography, particularly marine geology. The ability to
efficiently make bathymetric maps will enable the PI's to better understand the
geological landscape of dive sites and provide a context for collected samples.
These tools will also complete the suite of mapping sensors and greatly
facilitate complementary engineering effort of developing techniques for robotic
mapping. The requested items will give the PI's the capability to mapping fully
vertical and complex underwater scenes appropriately using the freedom provided
by the pan and tilt actuator and develop methodologies for creating 3D texture
mapped representations of the seafloor.

Broader Impacts:

The acquisition will further an extensive outreach program which focuses on the
link between science and technology. Techniques and data will be incorporated
into the Educator-At-Sea program and the public outreach arm of the Nautilus
Program. This provides the ability to engage the general public and provide
experiences to K-12 teachers. The Nautilus program incorporates a large
education and training effort for science and engineering students. Partnerships
will be developed between students at URI and collaborative institutions.
Bathymetric data will also be made available to the oceanographic community
through the Nautilus' Doctors-on-call program. The PIs have a history of
participation opportunities for underrepresented groups and through the Nautilus
program will continue to provide such opportunities. The real-time interactive
broadcast of seafloor exploration provides excellent opportunities for broad
participation even if everyone is not able to be on the ship in remote locations
with the PIs. Benefits to society will likely be realized both in technological
advances towards exploring and understanding our environment and through the
anthropological/archaeological nature of much of the PIs work.