* 1126743
* MRI: Acquisition of a multi-user, analytical transmission electron microscope (TEM) for multi-disciplinary research and training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Judy Schneider, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 659,981.00

Research at Mississippi State University broadly covers both life and materials
science &amp; engineering and relies on major research instrumentation located
primarily at the Institute for Imaging &amp; Analytical Technologies (I2AT), a
university supported, centralized facility to advance synthesis methods and
probe the physics of behavior and response to various stimuli. The analytical
transmission electron microscope (TEM) is configured to serve the multi-
disciplinary research needs of diverse faculty representing 9 departments, 5
institutes, and 4 colleges, in addition to local industries. Significant
benefits are obtained through access to shared major research instrumentation
including both cost savings and facilitation of cross cutting
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this project is
the enhanced imaging and analysis capabilities the equipment provides at MSU to
ensure and support the growth of multi-disciplinary research programs.
Researcher teams, including members from diverse departments (Biology,
Entomology, Forest Products, Geosciences and Veterinary Science; Aerospace, Bio,
Chemical, Electrical, and Mechanical Engineering) are actively engaged in
collaborative efforts requiring analytical TEM: An overview of representative
research in critical need of the TEM is provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life
Science Research relies on understanding molecular mechanisms of disease;
visualizing the architecture of tissues and cells; and observing individual
viruses and macromolecular complexes in their natural biological context. TEM
techniques are vital to an in-depth exploration of normal and diseased cell
structure/function and have significant application in the design of prevention
and intervention protocols. Expanding traditional TEM imaging with digital
capabilities, increased resolution, and elemental analysis techniques ensures
the continuation and enhancement of diverse life science research at MSU.
Materials Science and Engineering Research relies on understanding crystal
structure, defect characteristics, and elemental distribution/segregation, which
is vital to understand rate controlling mechanisms in plasticity across length
scales, support development of semiconductor devices, and protect our natural
resources. As this research area continues to expand at MSU, a TEM with
analytical capabilities is necessary to observe and quantify defects in
crystalline materials, map elemental distributions and support modeling
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology Research relies on the synthesis
and use of nanoparticles (NPs) used in nanobiotechnology and nanomechanics
applications. Because NPs can enhance material properties, their incorporation
is being investigated experimentally and used to expand modeling efforts. A
recently awarded NSF-Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education Award highlights the
emerging nanotechnology research at MSU. Correlating synthesis techniques with
mechanical properties requires the ability to identify elemental composition of
the core NPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is the
training of the next generation of scientists for multi-disciplinary teamwork,
by a diverse group of researchers at MSU who collaborate across discipline,
department, and college lines. Student access to specialized major research
equipment provides a "hands on" environment for learning the "tools of the
trade". The open access structure of the I2AT includes an interactive setting
for viewing of equipment and data from anywhere on campus and throughout the
K-12 educational system. These activities benefit the state, region, and nation
by attracting, training and retaining academic and industry investigators in
integrated research, education and professional development
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analytical TEM provides benefits to MSU as
well as local industries through complimentary research activities and workforce
development. Successful research and educational efforts are broadly
disseminated via scholarly works, presentations at national and international
conferences, web content, regional/national media and outreach activities.