* 1126080
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for a Primarily Undergraduate Consortium
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Hal Van Ryswyk, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2014
* USD 546,273.00

Technical Abstract

We request the purchase of a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-
SEM) for use in the Claremont Colleges consortuim, a major academic community of
5,500 students. The instrument will be used daily by undergraduate research
students across a broad range of disciplines with time allocated by an online
reservation system and without user fees. We have chosen to focus on the three
main areas in the description below: (1) Materials for Energy and the
Environment. In this area, the proposed instrument would support important
imaging in several projects: Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells with Porphyrin
Sensitizers on Zinc Oxide Nanotubes, Low-cost, High-Stability Polymer Solar
Cells, Inorganic/Organic Composite Gas Separation Membranes for Low-Energy
Separations, and Environmental Monitoring (combinatorial materials research for
chemical microsensor and microanalytical system development). (2)
Bioengineering. Amongst other projects in this area, the instrument would
support projects on Tissue Engineering a Cornea, and Chitosan Nanoparticle
Synthesis. (3) Geology. Two major projects in this area include Igneous and
Metamorphic Petrology and Geomicrobiology and Sedimentary Geology.

The primary purpose of the requested instrument is for undergraduate research
and research training. Our management plan is based on our success over the past
7 years with the current facility built around a used FE-SEM, which is now over
13 years old. In the past four years, more than 150 users, almost all
undergraduates, have used the current FE-SEM for a total of 1070 sessions.
Providing undergraduate students with the opportunity to work with sophisticated
instrumentation provides motivation to discuss a variety of specialized topics
and can be a key factor in encouraging students to pursue further scientific
research, graduate studies or industrial research positions. The facility will
be featured in outreach programs across the consortium.

Non-technical Abstract

The Claremont Colleges consortuim, a major academic community of 5,500 students
has submitted a proposal to the National Science Foundation for the purchase of
a field-emission scanning electron microscope. This type of microscope is able
to routinely image analyze fibers, cells, particles, minerals, new materials,
and devices at size scales ranging from inches to nanometers, corresponding to
magnifications from ten times to one million times, and significantly better
than any tradition optical microscope. The microscope will be used daily by
undergraduate research students across a broad range of projects including novel
materials for new energy sources such as new types of solar cells, sensors for
environmental monitoring, bioengineering of artificial corneas, and for analysis
of geologic samples that help scientists understand mechanisms through which the
most basic forms of life interact with the Earth. While most field-emission
scanning electron microscopes are located in large research universities and
high tech industrial settings, the primary purpose of the requested instrument
is for undergraduate research and research training. The proposal is based on
the success over the past 7 years with the current microscope facility built
around a used microscope, which is now over 13 years old. In the past four
years, more than 150 users, almost all undergraduates, have used the current
microscope for over a thousand research sessions. Providing undergraduate
students with the opportunity to work with sophisticated instrumentation
provides motivation to discuss a variety of specialized topics and can be a key
factor in encouraging students to pursue further scientific research, graduate
studies or industrial research positions. The facility will be featured in
outreach programs for the public, especially with school children and teachers
in grades 1-12. The proposal was written by a team of professors from Pomona
College and Harvey Mudd College, both amongst the most selective colleges in the
country with strong records of undergraduate research.