* 1126455
* MRI: Acquisition of an oxide molecular beam epitaxy system
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Umesh Mishra, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2014
* USD 563,096.00

Technical Abstract

Research programs in oxides at the University of California, Santa Barbara
(UCSB) span a wide range of applications, including as dielectrics,
semiconductors, thermoelectrics and memristive devices. Many of these research
activities are central to interdisciplinary programs and centers and all support
graduate student education and training. These programs require oxide thin films
with low defect densities, high purity, compatibility with active electronic
device structures, low interface trap states and near-monolayer control over
layer thicknesses. To address these needs, we propose to acquire a versatile,
state-of-the-art oxide molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system that will
significantly expand capabilities for the synthesis of highly-perfect oxide thin
films and structures, as needed to solve key problems in the development of new
devices with oxides and in the materials physics of oxide structures. The
project will contribute to advancing oxide MBE through the development of
approaches to address issues such as stoichiometry control and poor volatility
of constituents. In keeping with the tradition of UCSB's MBE Laboratory, the
proposed oxide MBE system is designed to facilitate compatibility and
accessibility and will be operated as a shared facility, impacting the training
of a large number of students in interdisciplinary research programs at UCSB and
at collaborating institutions. Graduate students and postdoctoral scholars are
the primary users and oxide MBE will be the central focus of many Ph.D.
dissertations. Two development engineers provide hands-on training in MBE while
formal training is provided by a graduate course and weekly MBE seminars. The
oxide MBE system will significantly expand research internship opportunities
offered through education programs that target undergraduate and high-school
students from underrepresented minority groups.

Non-Technical Abstract

Research programs in oxide materials at the University of California, Santa
Barbara (UCSB) span a wide range of applications, such as new electronic devices
and energy conversion. Many of these research activities are central to
interdisciplinary programs and centers and all support graduate student
education and training. These programs require the deposition of thin film
oxides with exceptionally low defect densities and high purity, comparable to
what is now standard for conventional semiconductor materials. To address these
needs, we propose to acquire a versatile, state-of-the-art molecular beam
epitaxy (MBE) system for the deposition of thin film oxides. In keeping with the
tradition of UCSB's MBE Laboratory, the proposed oxide MBE system will be
operated as a shared facility, impacting the education and training of a large
number of students in a wide range of interdisciplinary research programs at
UCSB and at collaborating institutions. Graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars are the primary users. Two development engineers provide hands-on
training in MBE while formal training is provided by a graduate course and
weekly MBE seminars. The oxide MBE system will significantly expand research
internship opportunities offered through education programs that target
undergraduate and high-school students from underrepresented minority groups.