* 1126067
* MRI:  Development of a Magnetized Dusty Plasma Device
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Marlene Rosenberg, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,488,346.00

This project will develop a new multi-user multi-institutional research
instrument -- a magnetized dusty plasma device. The device would be housed at
Auburn University (Auburn, Alabama). The PI (Edward Thomas, African American)
from Auburn University, heads a strong team of co-PIs including Marlene
Rosenberg (female) from University of California, San Diego, and Robert Merlino
from the University of Iowa (EPSCoR state). This project combines the integrated
development of a superconducting, high magnetic field (|B| = 4 Tesla) system, a
flexible, multiconfiguration plasma chamber and plasma source, a novel
nanoparticle imaging system, and an advanced, network-based control system to
create a unique, research device that will be the premier instrument of its type
in the dusty plasma research community. This project is the culmination of over
two years of international development activity. This effort has leveraged the
expertise of the entire dusty plasma research community as well as involving
researchers with interests in fusion, astrophysics, and fluid mechanics, and
thus provides strong evidence that this community will embrace this project and
make use of this new resource. Moreover, this proposed project is
transformational in that, once operational, this device will allow access to
regimes of dusty plasma behavior that have previously been inaccessible, which
provides additional motivation for broad community support for this project.
Investigations of grain charging (e.g., ion/electron gyro-orbits less than
inter-grain distances), wave phenomena (e.g., electrostatic dust cyclotron
wave), magnetic field effects on dust transport (e.g., g[vector] ×B[vector]
drift), and the behavior of plasma with embedded paramagnetic particles are new
scientific topics that will be enabled by this device.