* 1126330
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Compute Cluster for Multidisciplinary Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ranga Komanduri, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 908,812.00

Under this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project, Oklahoma State
University High Performance Computing Center (OSUHPCC) will acquire, deploy and
maintain an HPC cluster supercomputer, to be named Cowboy, that will support
computing-intensive research and research training across a broad variety of
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. As a
campus-wide shared resource, Cowboy will be available not only to all of OSU's
faculty, staff, postdocs, graduate students and undergraduates, but to
researchers across Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many areas of Computational
and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDESE) research will be facilitated by
the proposed system by collaborating research teams with an expected doubling of
the number of users every 12 months based on experience to date. Projects
include: mechanics of granular materials and fracture simulations in nuclear
clad materials; discovery genes for canine hip dysplasia; improvements to
performance per Watt of many-core systems; transcriptional profiling of
determination events in adult and embryonic murine stem cell lines; genomic,
metagenomic and proteomic approaches to decipher host- pathogen interactions,
complex carbohydrate metabolism and cellulosic bioenergy; modeling geophysical
fluids; computational chemistry; simulations of nanostructured materials;
simulation of the growth of carbon nanotubes; simulating gas-phase and
condensed-phase materials; seismic characterization of surface geology;
computational optimization; optimal error-control coding and compressive sensing
techniques; charge, spin and heat transport; molecular phylogeny of the
Asteraceae; evolutionary genetics of morphological diversification and
domestication in grasses (Poaceae) and mustards (Brassicaceae); robust
electromagnetic field testing; phylogenomic analyses of the extremophile red
alga Galdieria sulphuraria; integrating data in evolving social networks;
computational and combinatorial methods in commutative algebra; microbes
associated with non-cultivated and cultivated plants; intensity-modulated
radiation therapy planning software; and phylogenomics of milkweeds (Asclepias,
Apocynaceae). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma users are at 24 institutions,
including 11 of Oklahoma's 13 public universities. The Oklahoma Supercomputing
Symposium (MRI PI Brunson is 2011 Conference Co-Chair), the only event of its
kind held annually in an EPSCoR jurisdiction, in 8 years has had over 2000
attendees from 92 academic institutions in 24 states and Puerto Rico (including
33 in Oklahoma and 26 in 12 other EPSCoR jurisdictions), 97 private companies,
31 government agencies and 14 nonprofits. This project includes seven women
senior personnel who serve as role models and are creating interest and
excitement about computational science and engineering. This project also
includes participation of two researchers at Langston University, Oklahoma's
sole Historically Black University. Research projects include 80 graduate
students and 29 undergraduates, including 29 women, an African American, three
Native Americans and three Hispanics.