* 1126862
* MRI: Development of a Multi-Camera Synthetic Aperture Technique for Measuring High-Speed, Unsteady, Three-Dimensional Velocity Flow Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kenneth Solen, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) provides funding to develop a multi-
camera synthetic aperture technique for measuring high-speed, unsteady, 3-D
velocity flow fields. The quantitative fluids imaging research group at Brigham
Young University (BYU) is a combination of three laboratories and three PIs
focused on experimental fluid dynamics as it relates to a myriad of
multidisciplinary areas. The laboratory researchers embrace a philosophy of
welcoming participation from other researchers within the broader university
community on and off campus. The combined facilities support externally funded
research projects, as well as both undergraduate and graduate hands-on
instructional laboratories. The laboratories work together on research projects
and share resources in an effort to encourage collaboration and camaraderie
within the community. The toolset is focused on visualizing and quantifying
fluid phenomena where an understanding of their behavior is crucial to
understanding their basic physics. The phenomena include, but are not limited
to, human respiratory airway flow patterns, insect flight aerodynamics, water-
exit-entry of objects, multiphase flows, hydrophobic surface interaction, and
thrombosis growth in blood flow. Thus far these systems have able to be studied
using single-camera 2D PIV systems, hot-wire anemometry, or inferences from
high-speed imaging. However, the group lacks a 3D flow visualization system and
the ability to resolve flow fields in time. A novel new technique designed by
the PI, in collaboration with MIT, uses several high-speed cameras to extract
velocities from complex fluid flows. Velocities in the flow are quantitatively
measured in three dimensions by using several viewpoints from multiple cameras.
The planned system at BYU consists of ten high-speed cameras synchronized with a
high-speed laser to capture transient volumetric flow field image data. Through
a recombination of the 2D mages in the digital realm a 3D volume can be
constructed for each time instant, thus providing time-resolved information in
volumes as deep (Z) as the field of view (X-Y), with the tertiary advantage of
being able to see around partial occluders, allowing us to analyze densely
seeded flow volumes. This technique has the potential to become the standard for
determining velocities of fluid flows in the coming years. The system overcomes
some of the current 3D PIV disadvantages such as limited range and resolution
and low particle seeding densities. For roughly the same cost as an off-the-
shelf high-speed tomographic PIV system, larger out-of-plane dimensions and
larger seeding densities, can be achieved while developing a new state-of-the-
art system/technology that helps educate and inspire a new generation of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research performed by the fluids imaging
group is multidisciplinary and reaches across college, department, and
university boundaries to support faculty, staff, and students from the
Departments of Chemical, Mechanical and Civil Engineering as well as Physics,
Chemistry, Biology and Mathematics. The instrumentation development will broaden
the impact of the individual research projects by allowing the pursuit of a
deeper understanding of the physical phenomena being studied. The technique will
also improve understanding of future projects as the technique is disseminated
among the scientific and engineering communities through a dedicated website,
publication, and outreach activities. The development of the 3D Synthetic
Aperture system will also benefit other aspects of science and engineering on
and off the BYU campus, particularly undergraduate student education and
experience. Many of the developers and users of the system will be
undergraduates doing undergraduate research. Helping to develop a tool like this
one will enable undergraduates to receive educational opportunities normally
reserved for more advanced degree seekers. BYU is unique in this regard and a
large institutional emphasis on undergraduate research exists. Over 75 percent
of the graduates of the Mechanical Engineering program pursue advanced degrees,
and experiences using the proposed system will provide excellent training for
future impact in graduate level research and future careers. At BYU the best
mentoring model combines faculty, graduate students, and undergraduates in
synergistic research teams. The equipment will also be integrated into two
course laboratories to extend the curriculum into high-speed, 3D methods and
real world applications, while emphasizing the benefit of using
multidisciplinary approaches to study difficult science and engineering
problems. Finally, the developed system will be a high-profile system with far
reaching multidisciplinary applications that will be leveraged to attract and
recruit underrepresented students to STEM fields through outreach activities on
campus.