* 1126719
* MRI:   Acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR with cryoprobe for Integration with Existing UPLC-MS-SPE to Enable High Throughput Chemical Annotation in Plant Metabolomics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Randy Allen, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,057,587.00

A multi-institutional team of interdisciplinary researchers with a mutual focus
upon the large-scale study of plant metabolism, biochemistry, and molecular
biology (i.e. metabolomics) have joined together to acquire a 600 MHz nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with a cryoflowprobe. NMR is a
powerful tool for the chemical characterization of the thousands of diverse
metabolites found in all living organisms. Identifying and chemically
characterizing metabolites is a fundamental step in understanding their
biological, physiological, and ecological roles. The NMR instrument will be
combined with existing ultra high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to
parallel mass spectrometry detection and solid phase extraction (UPLC-MS-SPE)
which will enable semi-automated metabolite purification and concentration prior
to NMR analysis. Access to this instrument will enable and greatly enhance
productive, cutting-edge, and emerging plant programs centralized in
southeastern Oklahoma. The requested instrumentation will be located and
supported by the Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, a nonprofit research institute
whose mission focuses upon the enhancement of humanity through advancements in
agriculture. A significant proportion of the group?s metabolomics prior efforts
focused on mass spectrometry based approaches and integrated functional genomics
of the model legume Medicago truncatula. However, the scope of current and
future studies have substantially expanded to include other plant species such
as Arabidopsis thaliana (MCB 0520140 Arabidopsis 2010: MCB 0520283 Arabidopsis
2010), alfalfa, tomato, tobacco, hops, cotton, horse/hedge apple, switchgrass
biofuels, fescue and related alkaloid producing plant fungal endophytes, and
devastating fungal plant pathogens such as cotton root rot. As the diversity of
the group?s programs and staff expands, so does the number of unique
metabolites. Currently, it is estimated that there are over 200,000 metabolites
throughout the plant kingdom, and over half of these still remain unidentified.
Accordingly, the participating groups have identified a critical and urgent need
for the acquisition and incorporation of NMR technology into their metabolomics
and plant biochemistry technology base to advance their ability to
systematically identify, structurally characterize, and comparatively profile
plant metabolites. Many of the currently funded studies are focused on high
anatomically resolved experiments and limited quantities of spatially distinct
plant organs and cell types (i.e. pollen, trichomes, border cells). As a result,
biological materials and corresponding metabolites are of very low abundance.
Thus, a NMR equipped with a cryoflowprobe and coupled to on-line mass directed
solid-phase extraction provides critical sensitivity enhancements that are
absolutely necessary for obtaining structural data for minute quantities of
metabolites in a semi-automated mode to enhance throughput.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NMR instrumentation will advance the understanding of
fundamental plant metabolism and biochemistry through the identification of
important novel metabolites in key model and crop species. It will also increase
the biological context of our metabolomics programs through increased annotation
and depth-of-coverage which will proportionately enhance gene discoveries,
functional annotation of genes, and more efficient metabolic engineering of
beneficial plant traits. The enabling instrumental resource will be used to
recruit one new permanent staff member. Long term support for this instrument
and staff will be provided by the Noble Foundation. Funding will also enhance
the recruitment of future faculty, retention of current faculty, the
international competitiveness and leadership of the participants in plant
biochemistry and metabolomics, and used to leverage future state and federal
research funding for plant biochemistry and agriculture. The proposed
instrumentation will be eagerly incorporated into the existing and productive
educational and training programs at all the participating institutes which
serve a large number of diverse postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students. These specifically include: multiple hands-on, in-depth, week-
long instrumental training courses of national recognition such as our
metabolomics and proteomics user training programs; undergraduate instrumental
analyses courses; high school Science Carnivals; an instrumental "Nut &amp;
Volt" interest group; the prestigious Noble Scholars Intern Program; and high
school cooperative programs with the Southern Oklahoma Technology Center,
Ardmore High School AP Chemistry, Ardmore High School Science Club, and Oklahoma
Upward Bound.