* 1126177
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Multidisciplinary Research at The University of Texas at Dallas
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* A. Dean Sherry, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 374,360.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) that is
co-funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Mihaela Iovu from University of Texas Dallas and colleagues A. Dean Sherry, John
Ferraris, Dennis Smith and Jung-Mo Ahn will acquire a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer
equipped with two probes. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research training
and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) polythiophene-CdSe
blends for bulk heterojunction solar cells, (b) perfluorocyclobutyl (PFCB)
polymers for proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells and gas separation
applications, (c) fluorovinylene aryl ether telechelic polymers for thermal
chain extension and tandem crosslinking, (d) lanthanide complexes and polymers
as metabolic sensors for Magnetic Resonance Imaging, and (e) development of
peptidomimetics for treatment of diabetes mellitus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.