* 1126899
* MRI:  Acquisition of a DSC (Differential Scanning Calorimetry) System for R&D at CESUR (Center for Efficient and Sustainable Use of Resources) of Arkansas State University
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Robert Engelken, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 138,288.00

The research objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to
acquire a DSC (Differential Scanning Calorimetry) system to measure the
temperature and heat flow corresponding to the thermal performance of materials,
both as a function of time and temperature. The DSC instrument provides
qualitative and quantitative information on endothermic/heat absorbing (e.g.
melting) and exothermic/heat releasing (e.g. solidification of fusion) processes
of materials. The DSC system will be shared and utilized under interdisciplinary
collaboration by eight faculty members' multiple research groups. Some of the
key research that will be supported by this equipment includes: 1) experimental
study of advanced heat transfer fluids for renewable/nuclear/fossil power plant
applications and computational study of thermodynamic modeling to predict phase
transition behaviors of novel multicomponent mixtures; 2) study of
characterization of TICPET (Thermally Induced Condensed Phase Electron Transfer)
and metal halide salt chemistry; 3) identification of various oils and fats
through experimental stability analysis by detection of crystallization shift;
4) investigation of phase transitions and crystalline transitions of ionic or
other nonaqueous liquids in the absence of applied electric field; and 5)
determination of heats of combustion in solid biofuels.

The DSC system will provide opportunities to establish a collaborative, cross-
disciplinary research team exploring a set of studies related by their interest
in complex salts, ionic liquids, and other energy related projects. In addition
to the novel material development, the DSC system will provide advanced research
experience to many students over time, enhancing their competitiveness in the
thermal/fluids/energy, chemistry, and food science areas. The DSC system will be
an important addition to existing equipment supporting a wide variety of
research projects funded by NSF and other federal agencies. Furthermore, the DSC
system will enhance R&D capacity and skills for faculty and researchers at the
Center for Efficient and Sustainable Use of Resources (CESUR) at Arkansas State
University (ASU).