* 1126963
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Conservation as an Open-Air Experiment: Pricing the Environment in the Mato Grasso Region of the Brazilian Amazon
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Marina Welker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,935.00

Conservation as an Open Air Experiment: Pricing the Environment in the Mato
Grosso Region of the Brazilian Amazon.&lt;br/&gt;David
Rojas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
investigate a strategy known as REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation,
forest Degradation and improving carbon stocks) that is aimed at limiting
deforestation in the Amazon following a simple line of reasoning: Forests will
be preserved when they are shown to have greater monetary value standing than
destroyed. &lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;REDD+ projects are
advanced under the following hypothesis: Pricing the forest will align
environmental and economic objectives thereby creating a context in which
environmental scientists and Amazonian landholders will agree on (a) the
negative consequences of Amazonian deforestation; (b) the convergence of
economic and environmental initiatives; and (c) the need for articulating policy
partnerships in support of REDD+. The research will determine whether this
hypothesis holds true for REDD+ projects directed at Amazonian peasants. The
study draws on Science and Technology Studies (STS) insights into scientific
experimentation and on anthropological theories of value and the environment.
The project?s conclusions will be based on a twenty-two-month ethnographic
research that will gather data on how peasants and scientists (1) assess the
consequences of deforestation; (2) evaluate the likelihood of aligning
development and conservation; and (3) articulate REDD+ policy networks. Data
will be gathered in three spaces: Two REDD+ test sites in the Mato Grosso region
of the Brazilian Amazon; REDD+ conferences in which scientists and peasants will
participate; and two US scientific research institutions that study the
relations between Amazonian ecology and global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;REDD+ constitutes a major and ambitious new effort to stop
environmental degradation in the Amazon and limit global climate change while at
the same time promoting economic development. The proposed project will be
advanced in collaboration with Brazilian and US academic institutions in order
to provide an in-depth understanding of how REDD+ projects are being implemented
and at least one test of the guiding hypothesis.