* 1126272
* MRI: Development of an Autonomously Deployed Deep-Ocean Seismic System
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Jeffrey Babcock, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2016
* USD 1,046,484.00

The PI's request funding to develop an autonomously, deployable, deep-ocean
seismic system to provide long-term and near-real-time seismographic
observations from sites far offshore. Building upon two proven technologies,
autonomous wave-powered surface boats and ocean bottom seismometers, the
proposed new generation instrument will, if successful, provide a means of
increasing global coverage not only of seismic observations, but also of a
variety of ocean bottom observables in an affordable, practical, and sustainable
way. Real-time data from stations in oceanic areas will significantly increase
the accuracy of earthquake parameters such as location and moment. Such global
seismographic data are critical for both national and international agencies in
monitoring and characterizing earthquakes, tsunamis, and nuclear explosions.
This is particularly critical for tsunami warning systems. This new generation
instrument will provide a means of increasing access to not only seismic data,
but also to a variety of other ocean bottom observables over the global
oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new
capability would make it realistic to consider the deployment of seafloor
observatories in any remote areas of the oceans. In addition to addressing
fundamental questions of Earth structure and tectonics, providing real-time data
from stations in oceanic areas will significantly increase the accuracy of
earthquake parameters such as location and moment. Such global seismographic
data are critical for both national and international agencies in monitoring and
characterizing earthquakes, tsunamis, and nuclear explosions. This is
particularly critical for tsunami warning systems.