* 1126279
* MRI: Development of an Electron State Depletion Microscope at the University of Louisville
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Sergio Mendes, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 469,996.00

Technical Abstract

The goal of this proposal is to develop a far-field opto-electronic microscope
capable of imaging defect densities, dopants, compositional variations, and
material properties with sub-diffraction limited resolution and in three
dimensions. Far-field sub-diffraction limited imaging has been demonstrated
using stimulated emission depletion (STED) in which two overlapping laser beams
are used to simultaneously excite and deplete the fluorescence of nanometer
scale particles. A regularly shaped excitation beam is super-imposed on a donut
shaped bleaching beam so that the fluorescence is confined to the donut zero,
with all particles on the periphery being depleted. This produces an order of
magnitude improvement in resolution. Up to now, the STED technique has only been
applied for imaging of fluorescent tags in biological system. However, the state
depletion phenomenon should be generally applicable to other detection
mechanisms. By combining a STED based technique with photoexcited charge
detection we will develop a microscope that has the ability to image charge
excitation to sub-diffraction limited precision. The resolution will be an order
of magnitude better than what is achievable using electron beam induced current
(EBIC) or scanning deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS). In addition, the
technique is non-destructive to the material structure (unlike TEM), making it
applicable for in-situ device characterization.

Non-Technical Abstract

High-resolution imaging is extremely important for electronic materials
characterization, particularly in the present era of nanoscale material
synthesis and device fabrication. The goal of this proposal is to develop a far-
field sub-diffraction resolution optical microscope able to detect material
variations, defect states, disorder, and impurities, in three dimensions without
damaging the material under test. The microscope will utilize a high resolution
imaging scheme developed for fluorescence microscopy, but using charge
displacement rather than photoluminescence to generate a detectable signal. The
electrical imaging capabilities of the 3D sub-diffraction microscope will be
used by researchers at the University of Louisville to study nanowire
composition for photovoltaic applications, spatial variations in midgap states
in oxidized and hydrogenated graphene, and composition variations in organic and
inorganic solar cells. The ability to study material variations and defect
states in three dimensions, non-destructively, and on the nanometer scale is
unprecedented, and will give researchers the opportunity to correlate material
properties with device operation in nanoscale systems.