* 1126113
* MRI: Instrumentation for Enabling Data Analysis, Sharing, Storage, and Preservation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Paul Muzio, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,311,801.00

Retaining collected data and sharing it with the broader research community is
necessary for developing a better understanding of the impact of urbanization on
the global ecology and environment. The data intensive instrument to be
installed at CUNY College of Staten Island will provide data analysis and data
asset management capabilities to allow researchers to share, federate, and
retain data and will provide for reproducibility and traceability. Researchers
will be able to organize, analyze, manage and annotate metadata, and search and
share their data sets. The proposed interface will use a service-足oriented
architecture based on an open standards framework to provide a library of core
services for managing data and metadata. It includes a hierarchical storage
system with at least a 1.4 petabyte disk farm and at least a 1.2 petabyte
robotic tape system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will enable the
expanded use of computations for a large number of researchers in the
biological, ecological, environmental, and economic disciplines. In
environmental studies, it will facilitate the creation of a "virtual" urban-
oceanographic-atmospheric足-land observatory allowing four significant Research
Centers that are studying various aspects of the effects of urbanization to now
retain and share their data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will help to
accelerate the research required to understand and forecast the impact of mega
city and urban planning decisions on the local and global environment, on
ecology and ecosystem services, on energy systems, and on economic systems. It
will have similar benefits to researchers in other disciplines. The Research
Centers are committed to use the instrument to share their data and the results
of their research with each other and the broader research community. Each of
the participating Research Centers is multi-足institutional. Many of them are led
by, and most include, Minority Serving Institutions. Consistent with NSF policy
and CUNY traditions, each of these Research Centers has extensive internship and
training programs that encourage women and minority student participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fall 2009 enrollment statistics for the 23 institutions
that comprise CUNY show that 53% of its 259.515 full-足time students were Black
or Hispanic and 60% were female. Fall 2009 statistics showed 27,962 students
enrolled in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics disciplines,
including 65 American Indian/Native American, 6,195 Asian/Pacific Islander,
7,878 Black, 6,473 Hispanic, and 7,351 White students; 34% of the students were
female. These statistics and CUNY's College Now, Teacher Academy, and Discovery
Institute outreach programs attest to CUNY's commitment to broadening
participation and to the outreach initiatives of the NSF.