* 1126052
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for the Interdisciplinary Research in Computational and Integrative Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Palis, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 452,844.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funding to acquire a
high-performance computing cluster to support computational biology and
affiliated research in the newly formed Center for Computational and Integrative
Biology (CCIB) at Rutgers University-Camden (RUC). The CCIB brings together an
inter-disciplinary group of faculty from the departments of Biology,
Mathematics, Computer Science, Physics, and Chemistry, with a number of compute-
intensive, data-driven projects. This proposed acquisition will contribute to,
and substantially improve, the computing power available to CCIB projects,
affecting both computational and experimental research efforts in up to 20
laboratories at RUC. The cluster will power a large multi-departmental project
focused on the development of a common computational platform for multi-purpose
modeling of networks and pathways and will significantly facilitate research on
(a) how the development of complex body patterns in biological organisms is
controlled; (b) mechanisms of biological rhythms and clocks; (c) how normally-
occurring random fluctuations (noise) can enhance biological signaling; (d)
analysis of biological images and (e) mining the rapidly expanding world store
of genomic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computing cluster will significantly
strengthen a new interdisciplinary graduate program in CCIB at RUC, and will
also strongly contribute to inter-disciplinary curricular development as part of
Q-STEP, an innovative NSF program designed to increase the numbers
undergraduates completing degrees in the sciences and mathematics at RUC. The
state-of-the-art facility will thus form an integral component of extensive
computational training for some 20 doctoral and 60 Masters students of CCIB to
be enrolled over the next six years, and for Masters students in the existing
RUC programs. The research and educational projects enabled by this acquisition
will contribute to the mission of RUC to engage the surrounding community the
impoverished urban area of Camden, NJ. The remarkable recent success of RUC
programs in increasing participation of talented students from populations
underrepresented in undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines will allow CCIB to recruit exceptionally talented
students from those populations. The CCIB will strongly encourage the
participation of graduate students in a long-running outreach program to the
local community. The proposed management plan foresees providing access to the
cluster for external users. Minority-serving organizations, as well as research
institutions and industrial partners, particularly start-ups collaborating with
the CCIB, will be given preference. The computing cluster will enable CCIB to
broaden and strengthen collaborations with other research and medical
institutions in the area, contributing to the creation of a regional hotspot in
southern New Jersey for life science and biomedical research, stimulating the
biotechnology industry, and enhancing employment opportunities for the residents
of southern New Jersey and its vicinity (Pennsylvania and Delaware).