* 1126126
* MRI: Acquisition of a field emission scanning electron microscope for multidisciplinary nanotechnology research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Orhan Talu, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 472,115.00

Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the proposed
instrument, i.e. a high resolution field emission scanning electron microscope,
will dramatically upgrade the capabilities for surface characterization and
analysis existent at Cleveland State University (CSU). The high resolution
imaging capability of the microscope (~ 1nm at 30 kV) together with its
analytical tools that include back-scattered electron detection, and energy
dispersive X-ray mapping, will help an interdisciplinary core of researchers
from CSU and neighboring institutions to continue building a comprehensive
program in nanotechnology. Some of the research programs currently ongoing for
which the instrument will provide much needed infrastructure include: (i)
fabrication of hybrid metal - semiconductor nanostructures for light emission
applications; (ii) nanostructured materials for hydrogen storage; (iii)
characterization of minerals and artifacts of antiquity; (iv) characterization
of thermally responsive polymers; (v) biomedical applications of microfluidics;
(vi) development of nanocomposite materials with improved mechanical and
electronic properties; (vii) strain-tolerant self-sensing environmental barrier
coatings for ceramic composites; (viii) nanocomposite materials for
supercapacitors; (ix) nanostructured catalysts for biological detection; and (x)
structure analysis of lipoproteins. Additionally, the imaging infrastructure
will create the opportunity to introduce nanotechnology as part of the
educational experience offered to our science and engineering undergraduates and
graduate students, and K-12 partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non - technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and exploiting for practical
applications the unique phenomena of materials with nanoscale dimensions
requires the ability to characterize their geometry on scales down to 1 nm. The
proposed high resolution microscope will provide vital morphological and also
analytical information for projects ranging from structural mechanics to life
sciences. This infrastructure will support the work of researchers from the
departments of Physics, Chemistry, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical
Engineering and Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, across two colleges at CSU.
Work using the facility includes not only projects from CSU, but also from
neighboring institutions, such as the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.
Likewise, the availability of the instrument will have a great impact on our
courses with material in nanotechnology and surface characterization, and will
allow our faculty to expand the research programs offered to our undergraduate
and graduate students. Also, through our school partners the high resolution
microscope provides an ideal platform to provide experiential learning on the
properties of matter on the nano and microscale for K-12 students.