* 1126806
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3D laser scanner to support multi-disciplinary research in data-driven management of cultural, physical, and biological resources
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Gregory Vogel, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to enable
multidisciplinary research in data-driven management of cultural, physical, and
biological resources by acquisition of a 3D laser scanner and point cloud
modeling software. This technology would be employed to rapidly gather and model
high resolution, three-dimensional coordinate and photographic data (in essence,
taking 3D pictures). Commercially-available laser scanning and point cloud
modeling technology will advance the research, teaching, and outreach of
multiple fields, including Construction, Archeology, Biological Sciences,
Forensic Science, and Computer Science. This research forges multi-disciplinary
sustainability-related research in data-driven management of cultural, physical,
and biological resources. The level of detail and accuracy afforded by
commercially-available laser scanners enables investigators to create detailed
models of existing conditions of Intelligent Sites under investigation (e.g. for
construction, archeology, or ecological studies) over distances on the order of
hundreds of meters. The acquisition will support the investigators' efforts to:
1) test novel approaches for modeling and analysis of sites under investigation;
2) augment other data sources, such as webcam data, with spatial information;
and 3) implement hybrid models to enable multi-disciplinary research among
construction, archeology, and biology domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition will support the University's outreach efforts in several ways,
providing significant impact. The equipment will support cutting edge
instruction in data acquisition methods for multiple land surveying, forensic
science, and archeology courses. This will enhance ongoing outreach efforts to
engage high school and professionals in emerging technology applications in
engineering through annual engineering summer camps and Engineer's Week
activities, and continuing education to local industry. Furthermore, this
acquisition will support development and dissemination of undergraduate and
master's research in data-driven management of cultural, physical, and
biological resources, including such Intelligent Sites as a newly-established
380-acre nature preserve on campus.