* 1126061
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogen-free dilution refrigerator with a 12 T magnet
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Nai Phuan Ong, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 436,024.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit -- The goal of this project is
to acquire and set up a cryogen-free dilution refrigerator with a base
temperature of about 0.010 Kelvin and a superconducting magnet with a maximum
field of 12 Tesla. This equipment will be shared by eight Principal
Investigators and collaborators, and will be used by their graduate and
undergraduate students, post-docs and research staff. It will be initially
devoted to measurements of electronic properties of low-dimensional
semiconductor structures, topological insulators, and graphene. All these
material systems are at the forefront of current, fundamental solid state
physics and device research. They also have potential transformative
applications, e.g., in quantum computing and information processing.
&lt;br/&gt;The cryogen-free system will enhance the research on these materials
in several crucial ways: (1) It will allow measurements at low temperatures and
in tilted magnetic fields to learn exciting new physics. (2) Because the
operation of the proposed equipment is much simpler than the conventional
dilution refrigerators, it will tremendously enhance the efficiency of the
measurements and research progress. (3) It will allow the inclusion of
undergraduate students in research projects more easily. (4) It will replace our
existing equipment which is instrumental to our research but is over 20 years
old, has frequent problems, and does not reach below about 0.03 Kelvin. (5) Each
year it will save over $100,000 worth of materials (liquid Helium) cost. This
will have a huge impact on the ability to make measurements and produce new
results more efficiently. (6) It will save Helium, a precious noble
gas.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts -- The impact of the proposed project will be
seen in the scientific community and beyond. Results of the research will be
communicated through publications and conference presentations to the
specialized as well as general science and engineering communities. While the
subject of this project is fundamental, progress in this area will benefit
society in the long term as it may lead to novel, transformative concepts for
electronic materials and devices and information processing systems whose
operation relies on quantum and/or interaction phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;The project
incorporates a high quality and comprehensive educational component. The PIs are
dedicated to the education of both graduate and undergraduate students. They all
have typically small groups (4 to 6) of students, and their belief is that doing
good quality research, with close supervision, is the best way to teach beyond
textbooks and problem sets. The project will therefore result in the education
of students in critical, state-of-the art areas of science and technology,
including the fabrication, characterization, and physics of high quality layered
semiconductor structures and other novel materials such as topological
insulators and graphene. Well-trained students in these fields will be
invaluable resources for the US as well as for the rest of the world. The PIs
will also make every effort to attract to this project students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are committed to a broader education
of the public in science and engineering. Some of the topics and results of this
project will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses that they
teach at Princeton University. The PIs will also participate in various K-12
demonstrations and teacher training programs in electricity and magnetism and in
cryogenic temperatures, general areas that are closely linked to the topic of
this proposal. These activities include training sessions, kit development, and
demonstrations at regional schools and at Princeton University.