* 1126601
* MRI: Aquistion of Antenna Design and Measurement Laboratory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Reza Fazel-Rezai, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2012
* USD 208,933.00

Objective &lt;br/&gt;This objective of this program is to establish an antenna
design and measurement laboratory at the University of North Dakota (UND)
through the acquisition of major equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is the design of advanced and novel
antennas including small antennas for biosensors and microwave imaging, wearable
and low power antennas for spacesuits, small spacecraft and unmanned aircraft
systems (UAS) payload and sensor electronics, and smart multiple antennas for
vehicular wireless communication. Each of these active projects has potential
for advancement of knowledge. In biomedical microwave imaging and biosensors, a
novel method for diagnosis of diseased cells is proposed which is based on
wireless biosensors. These sensors need miniaturized biocompatible antennas. At
UND the spacesuit group is developing two generations of spacesuits. For
communication and health monitoring, there is a need for small efficient
antennas. The antenna laboratory will provide means of testing the proposed
novel wearable antennas on the suit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of this laboratory has significant effects on the
training students. The shortage of antenna and radio frequency (RF) engineers
with proper experience in today?fs job market calls for putting extra effort in
training students in this field. The proposed laboratory gives opportunities to
the investigators to expose students to their research and to train them more
effectively by integrating different practical examples of their research within
the undergraduate/graduate curriculum. In particular, this can impact the
attraction and involvement of under-represented female students in the field of
RFand antenna design.