* 1126351
* RAPID: Long-term Trends of the Atlantic Interhemispheric SST Gradient in the CMIP5 20th Century Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* John Chiang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2012
* USD 32,894.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.

This project examines the secular trend in the Atlantic interhemispheric sea
surface temperature (SST) gradient occuring in 20th century observations and
climate model simulations. Observations show a trend in the gradient in which
the Southern Hemisphere tropical SSTs warm faster than their Northern Hemisphere
counterparts. Previous work using an earlier ensemble of climate model
simulations suggested that the SST gradient trend is forced in part, perhaps
predominantly, by the radiative effects of anthropogenic sulfate aerosols. The
behavior of the SST gradient trend in simulations prepared for the AR5 is of
particular interest because the new generation of models incorporates
significant advances in the simulation of both direct and indirect effects of
aerosols. In this project, research focuses on 1) quantifying the magnitude of
the SST gradient trend, and assessing the spread in the trend across the
different multimodel ensemble members; 2) attributing the cause of the trend; 3)
assessing the role of aerosol indirect effects in determining the magnitude of
the trend; 4) determining the relative roles of different aerosol types in
forcing the trend, particularly sulfate aerosols and black carbon; and 5)
understanding the flattening of the trend in the late 20th century. The primary
method for identifying the aerosol radiative contribution to the trend consists
of comparisons between model simulations forced with all 20th-century climate
forcings (including aerosols) and simulations in which only the 20th century
increases in greenhouse gas concentrations are used as forcing.

The broader impact of the project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is
intended to provide information on climate change and its consequences to
decision makers worldwide. The Atlantic SST gradient exerts a significant
influence on the climate of the surrounding landmasses, and is implicated in
droughts over the Sahel and northeastern Brazil. The extent to which the SST
gradient trend is forced by aerosols, and if so which aerosols are most
responsible, is thus of great societal relevance to these regions.