* 1126054
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Fluorescence Stereomicroscope to Enhance Undergraduate Research at Colorado College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Darrell Killian, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 59,487.00

This Major Research Instrumentation grant supports the acquisition of a
fluorescence stereomicroscope and an imaging system to enhance the research
programs of Dr. Darrell J. Killian and Dr. Nancy N. Huang in the Biology
Department at Colorado College. The real-time visualization of fluorescent
molecules in living model organisms has become an indispensable technique
because it allows the direct observation and documentation of changes in gene
activity, the localization of proteins within a cell, and the tracking of cells
and tissues during development. An important question in biology is how changes
in gene activity determine sex-specific development. The Killian Lab is
interested in the identification and characterization of genes that affect sex-
specific development in the popular model organism Caenorhabditis elegans (C.
elegans), a soil-dwelling roundworm. C. elegans populations contain males and
hermaphrodites, which have some obvious morphological differences. However, sex-
specific cell type differences in the nervous system are not easy to see.
Fluorescent markers for sex-specific cell types have emerged as powerful and
sensitive tools for the identification of defects in sex-specific development.
Mutants have been isolated that are morphologically normal males or
hermaphrodites, but with neurons that are normally only found in the opposite
sex. The identification of the genes affected by these mutations and their
subsequent characterization will provide new insights into the genetic basis of
sex-specific development. Fluorescence stereomicroscopy and imaging are
essential for the observation and documentation of sexual defects that are
detected in vivo using fluorescent markers for sex-specific cell types. The
Huang Lab is interested in how cellular identity, or cell fate specification, is
established. MEX-3 is a protein that plays an important role in cell fate
specification during C. elegans embryonic development. The MEX-3 protein is
initially present in all cells of the embryo but becomes depleted from the
posterior cells by the four-cell stage. This change in MEX-3 distribution is
required for the establishment of the anterior/posterior axis of the embryo,
thus it is important to understand how MEX-3 is localized in the embryo.
Preliminary evidence suggests that MEX-3 is actively degraded in a manner that
is dependent upon two different types of protein modifications termed
phosphorylation and ubiquitination. The identification of the specific sites of
these modifications within the MEX-3 protein and the identification of genes
that regulate these modifications are of great interest. Fluorescence microscopy
will enable an in vivo study of the stability of fluorescently tagged MEX-3 when
specific sites in MEX-3 are mutated or when other genes in the C. elegans genome
are disrupted.

Colorado College is the only nationally ranked liberal arts college in the Rocky
Mountain region of the United States and enrolls approximately 2000
undergraduates from all over the United States and internationally. The Biology
Department has a strong commitment to conducting original research with
undergraduate collaboration and the fluorescence microscope and imaging system
will provide important research and training opportunities for approximately
6-10 undergraduates working in the Killian and Huang labs each year. In
addition, many courses in the Biology curriculum feature inquiry-based research
lab experiences. Students with such experiences are best equipped to handle any
postgraduate challenges that they might face. The equipment will augment and
improve laboratory activities, demonstrations, and experiments associated with
several courses and will impact approximately 200 undergraduates per year. The
imaging system will be a particularly valuable teaching tool because it will
enable the instructor and a group of students to simultaneously observe the same
sample on a computer monitor. The Biology Department also plays a strong service
role in the college by offering non-majors courses that foster a strong
appreciation for basic biology research and empower students to make informed
decisions and opinions on many popular topics in biology such as stem cell
research, gene therapy, genetically modified organisms, and environmental
issues. The fluorescence stereomicroscope will provide non-majors with unique
and exciting opportunities to observe cutting-edge science first-hand. Finally,
Colorado College actively seeks to enhance diversity on campus and the
availability of state-ofthe- art instrumentation, such as a fluorescence
stereomicroscope and imaging system, will help attract underrepresented
minorities and women to participate in biology research.