* 1126149
* Endangered Malayic Languages of Sumatra
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Peter Cole, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2017
* USD 219,983.00

The purpose of this project is to study two rapidly disappearing languages,
Jernih-Sarolangun and Lolo-Kecil, spoken in isolated locations in Sumatra
(Indonesia). These languages have unique grammatical properties that make them
important for the scientific study of cognitive/cultural variation, despite the
small number of speakers they have. They display a mixture of grammatical
characteristics typical of their language family (Malayic), and grammatical
characteristics that are otherwise unknown in frequently studied Malayic
languages like Malay/Indonesian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jernih-Sarolangun and
Lolo-Kecil differ from Malay/Indonesian in that most words in the languages have
two systematically different forms (technical term: ablaut). A major focus of
this project is to document, describe and analyze the different grammatical
factors that determine speakers' choice between these forms in each language.
For example, in Jernih-Sarolangun, one verb form appears if the verb takes a
full noun phrase as an object, or if the verb is used intransitively. The second
verb form is employed if the object is a pronoun (which might be null). In
comparison, the choice in Lolo Kecil is determined largely by transitivity
alone, regardless of whether the object is full noun phrase or pronoun. However,
if the verb is understood as contrasting with another verb, the form which
normally appears without a direct object can also appear with an overt object.
These variations are important in determining the ways that languages can differ
from each other and the ways that languages are alike (possibly due to human
genetic endowment). This project will sharpen our understanding of these and
other grammatical alternations in these endangered
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes the collection and
archiving of samples of each language, and detailed description of the grammar
and sound systems of the languages. In addition, theoretical studies will be
submitted for journal publication. The archived data will be deposited in a
publicly available archive of digital linguistic data. The research is an
international collaboration that will be carried out by linguists from the
University of Delaware and the Jakarta Field Station of the Max Planck Institute
for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany.