* 1126077
* MRI: Acquisition of Precision Wafer Aligner and Bonder for Research, Education, and Training  in 3-D Micro- and Nano- Mechanical, Electrical and Optical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the acquisition of a
wafer aligner and bonder system that will be placed in a shared user
nanofabrication facility at the University of Pennsylvania. Aligned wafer
bonding technology provides the ability to precisely stack and join multiple
semiconductor substrates to realize new types of micro- and nano-devices. The
technology significantly expands the capability of traditional microfabrication
processes based on lithography, deposition, and etching by allowing wafers of
various materials and thicknesses that are either patterned or unpatterned to be
bonded together. As a result, the technology enables the fabrication of 3D
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), microfluidic platforms, and 3D integrated
circuits and optical devices. The wafer bonding system will allow for the
precise lateral alignment and bonding of large diameter substrates using several
important processes, including direct, anodic, glass-frit, metal, and polymer
bonding. The acquisition of the wafer aligner and bonder will enhance research
capability in multiple areas, including micromechanical devices, small-scale
fluidic systems, and the manufacturing of nanoelectronic and optical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This wafer aligner and bonder system will broadly impact
both the research and training of a diverse body of students and researchers.
Tools in the nanofabrication facility can be accessed by users from the
University of Pennsylvania as well as users from other academic institutions, of
which there are many in the surrounding region, and users from industry.
Furthermore, the fabrication facility is used by undergraduate students in their
senior projects and in their undergraduate research, as well as graduate
students and postdocs from many different academic departments, many of whom
will make use of the requested instrumentation. Thus, the tool will provide
access to enhanced micro- and nano-manufacturing capability for a broad range of
users developing leading edge small-scale devices.