* 1126491
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated MultiBeam/Sediment Classification/ Current Profiling System for Interdisciplinary Research in Lake Champlain.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Thomas Manley, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2014
* USD 494,664.00

The PI's request funding for an integrated precision-depth multibeam / current-
profiling / bottom characterization (MCC) system to be used in lake-studies
research and research training (both research based lab classes and faculty-
mentored student research) at Middlebury College and within the Lake Champlain
basin of Vermont and New York. The MCC system will address a lack of detailed
bottom bathymetry, surface sediment characterization, and observations of
circulation. Existing data are quite old, of questionable accuracy, limited in
scope, and not up to current technological standards. To move interdisciplinary
research objectives in the Lake Champlain basin forward over the next 20 years,
these issues must be addressed. The MCC system requested will provide these
data.

Broader Impacts:

The PI's and overall teams record and dedication to student training and
educational programs is very strong. An outstanding aspect of the proposal and
the lake studies program at Middlebury College are their openness for students
of other institutions to experience the limnological disciplines and
instrumentation. The diversity of disciplinary areas served by the
instrumentation is high and also a strength of the proposal. The partnering
institutions within the region also suggest strong opportunity for broad
interdisciplinary and extended opportunities for students and training
functions. There are clear applied uses of datasets collected for both
scientific and societal concerns within the Champlain system spanning from water
quality, habitat and sediment/nutrient/contaminant dispersal and transport.
Multibeam capabilities will undoubtedly be a strong attraction for expanding
cooperative research initiatives and partnerships in the region.