* 1126543
* MRI: Acquisition of a Complete High-Performance Modeling and Visualization System for Research in Mathematical Biology and Mathematical Geosciences
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Yuh-Lang Lin, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 355,758.00

North Carolina Agricultural and Technical University (NCA&amp;T), the largest
HBCU in North Carolina, will acquire and operate a high performance modeling and
visualization system to support active research and training programs in
mathematical biology and mathematical geosciences involving faculty from the
departments of Energy and Environmental Systems, Physics, Mathematics, Chemistry
and Biology with research programs in storm and weather prediction; epidemiology
and system biology; protein pathways and blood coagulation; and biological based
response models of environmental pollutants. The system will include at least 16
compute nodes, 96 TB of storage and a tiled display
wall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system will enable broader impacts by supporting
work in mathematical biology and mathematical geosciences including the
integration of research activities and student development. It will
significantly advance research and training activities in mathematical and
computational modeling and scientific visualization at NCA&amp;T. The program
will synthesize research efforts that link student research engagement with
hands-on experience of utilizing the HPC modeling and visualization system to
increase the exposure to a larger number of the students and their faculty
advisors, including undergraduate students. The cross-cutting nature of the
projects that will be supported on the system will be reinforced with
integrative classroom learning.