* 1126161
* WORKSHOP: Positioning Field Stations and Marine Laboratories for Emerging Initiatives in Scientific Research and Training to be Held Oct. 5-7th, 2011 in Shepherdstown, WV
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Ian Billick, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 188,550.00

The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory is awarded a grant to support a
workshop and planning activities to assess the value of field stations and
marine laboratories in science and education, and position them strategically to
meet emerging scientific trends. Under the guidance of a steering committee
comprised of seven past, current, and future presidents of the Organization of
Biological Field Stations and National Association of Marine Laboratories, the
project team will prepare a series of reports to assist funders, managers, and
users, in making decisions concerning investment in, and management of, field
stations and marine laboratories. The goals will be accomplished through a
dialogue among the stakeholders of field stations and marine laboratories about
the future of these institutions. Specifically, the project will convene a
workshop involving a diverse set of participants to explore the relationship
between emerging scientific trends and field stations and marine laboratories.
Second, a survey will be performed to evaluate the existing status of marine
labs and field stations to better understand their capacity to serve evolving
science and education needs. The results will be disseminated widely. Finally, a
final report drawing from the results of the workshop and the survey will be
prepared with the assistance of a professional science writer, to make
recommendations concerning strategic investments in field stations and marine
laboratories. With over 350 field stations and marine laboratories distributed
among all 50 states managing a large amount of scientific equipment, research
vessels, laboratories, living accommodations, and land, there is a huge existing
investment in the field station and marine laboratory network. Because of the
diversity, complexity, and enduring nature of field stations and marine
laboratories, strategic planning is critical for ensuring that such institutions
are well positioned to meet the dynamic and changing needs of scientists,
students, and public they serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine laboratories and
field stations provide unique opportunities for students to receive scientific
training, for the general public to learn more about science, and to foster
communications between resource managers and scientists. Strategic planning will
help ensure that field stations and marine laboratories are well positioned to
integrate modern science into formal and informal educational activities, as
well as to facilitate resource management. Resource managers and educators will
be included as participants in the workshop in order to strengthen the ties
between research, education, and management. Information concerning the project
will be available starting June 1, 2011 through http://obfs.org and
http://naml.org.