* 1126244
* MRI:   Acquisition of Advanced LC/MS/MS Instrumentation for Research and Teaching to Characterize Structure-Function Relationship Dynamics of Protein Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Dennis Brown, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 651,029.00

Federal funds are being used to purchase an advanced liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) system and supporting equipment for the
Biochemistry Mass Spectrometry Laboratory in the Department of Molecular and
Structural Biochemistry at North Carolina State University (NCSU) for studying
protein structure and protein functional relationship dynamics. The configured
instrumentation will be used for ascertaining the structure-function aspects of
proteins in a variety of biological systems, which includes quantitative
proteomic analysis to determine post-translational modifications (PTMs) and
protein binding interactions and stoichiometries in both discovery- and
hypothesis-driven studies. Analytical measurements will include characterizing
PTMs such as phosphorylation, acetylation, glycosylation, and ubiquitination,
and how these modifications influence the biochemical functions of proteins,
including the ability of modified proteins to bind to their substrates, interact
with other proteins, and promote further PTM alterations. The purchased
instrumentation will provide unique capabilities not possible with any current
LC/MS/MS instrumentation on or off campus and will fill this void to support the
research of NC State faculty in various colleges requiring advanced LC/MS/MS
analysis while providing direct training of students and postdocs to enable
successful completion of their research projects. The instrumentation will be
used by the laboratories of 19 faculty members and will provide training for an
estimated 4 high school students, 38 undergraduates, 34 graduate students, 13
postdoctoral scientists, and 9 senior research/visiting scientists with the
anticipation of providing other NCSU faculty and students access as their
research develops and requires LC/MS/MS analysis of proteins. In addition, this
instrumentation will be used for special research internship programs with
students from underrepresented groups and will also be used in the advanced
biochemistry undergraduate laboratory course for biochemistry majors (with
nearly 500 majors, this is the third largest undergraduate biochemistry program
in the nation), to identify and characterize a protein purified in the
laboratory. The purchased LC/MS/MS system will join NMR, X-ray crystallography,
and electron cryo-microscopy as a tool for the study of the structure and
function of proteins and their complexes and will enable the research and
teaching programs at NCSU to more comprehensively train students and young
investigators in biochemistry, structural biology, and mass spectrometry
analysis to better prepare them for successful biotechnology research and
teaching careers.

In addition to providing significant improvements in LC/MS/MS support at NCSU,
both in terms of access and capabilities, the LC/MS/MS system will represent a
significant achievement in the long-range goal of developing a world class
structural biochemistry department at NCSU comprised of biological NMR, X-ray
crystallography, and mass spectrometry. The commitment of the University to this
end is evidenced by the completion in 2008 of a new structural biochemistry wing
in Polk Hall which houses NMR, and X-ray, and MS instrumentation and provides
space for significant expansion in each of these areas. Acquisition of this high
resolution LC/MS/MS instrumentation for studying protein interactions and
structure-function analysis can be used to more fully leverage the combined
strengths of our three structural platforms. Since the purchase of our NSF-
funded Q-Tof in 2007, currently our only high resolution MS instrument, our
successes have resulted in a significant increase in interest on campus for this
and higher resolution MS capabilities. The new LC/MS/MS system will provide
unprecedented access for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
scientists, providing them with a technologically relevant, comprehensive
LC/MS/MS background which will enable their future success in other educational
programs or in industry. With access to this technology, faculty research
programs will be progressed more quickly, efficiently, and with greater
scientific impact which will place NCSU more competitively among other research-
intensive universities for funding and attracting top talent faculty. Because of
the strong commitment of the PIs and other users on this proposal for outreach
work, the requested LC/MS/MS instrument and our MS facility as a whole will play
an active role in departmental and other campus outreach programs and activities
aimed at developing and fostering early interest in science at the middle and
high school levels, including underrepresented groups (for example, ACS SEED and
NSF AGEP programs), with the end goals of raising general awareness of the
biological sciences and encouraging talented young men and women to choose
research and teaching as a career goal.