* 1126394
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Lyudmila Bronstein, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 776,114.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers affiliated with Indiana
University's Nanoscale Characterization Facility request support for the
acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer, also equipped with
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS). X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
(XPS) is a fundamental analytical technique for surface and materials-based
research. It is the equivalent of nuclear magnetic resonance to organic
chemists, providing those studying solids with elemental composition and
chemical/electronic state information of surfaces. This dual-use instrument will
have immediate impact on research ranging from the development of organic or
inorganic materials for solar energy, chemical sensing, and catalytic
applications to fundamental studies involving structure determination of new
materials and the interactions of water or organic molecules with surfaces.
Critical to these projects is chemical and electronic state information for
prepared materials, of which XPS and UPS are the state-of-the-art methods used
to obtain such information. This instrumentation will allow us to elucidate the
complex structure-function relationships of the nanomaterials we are studying,
addressing fundamental questions while also propelling our projects forward
towards more functional materials that address societal needs. The information
garnered from these projects will have broad impacts, forging links between
scientific disciplines that include organic/inorganic/solid-state chemistry,
condensed matter physics, surface science, material science, and the geological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscience
is concerned with the unique properties of materials with sizes less than about
a millionth of a meter. The ability to measure and understand the fundamental
phenomena associated with such materials is essential to advancing many areas of
modern science, including energy production, environmental remediation, and
biomedical and information technology. Research in these fields is highly
interdisciplinary and requires access to shared instrumentation for creating and
characterizing nanoscale materials. Thus, Indiana University - Bloomington has
established a shared facility, the Nanoscale Characterization Facility, and is
requesting support for the acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer
for research and education. This instrument also will be equipped with
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy. On-site X-ray and Ultraviolet
Photoelectron Spectroscopy will allow researchers and students affiliated with
Indiana University to better understand how the structure and composition of a
given material give rise to its unique properties. This information will allow
for the better design of nanoscale materials used in a range of applications.
The acquisition of this instrument will also have broad impacts, forging links
between scientific disciplines, helping to elevate the NCF to a world-class
research facility, enhancing undergraduate and graduate training in
interdisciplinary science, and contributing to broad outreach activities in
which the IU's Nanoscience Center partners with regional academic and research
institutions (including HBCUs), industrial groups, K-12 educators, and campus
organizations.