* 1126749
* MRI: Acquisition of Mobile Flow Cytometry and Cell Sorting Facility for Microbiological Research and Minority Student Training
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Adam Martiny, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 512,047.00

The PI's requests MRI funding to acquire a mobile facility for flow cytometry
and cell sorting analysis of microorganisms and training of students, including
underrepresented minority undergraduate and graduate students. This mobile
facility will form the core of a collaborative resource center to enable
students and researchers at UCI and other research institutions to rapidly
analyze both very small microbes (e.g. bacteria or viruses) as well as larger
protozoa such as Toxoplasma gondii. The mobile capacity will allow researchers
to sort live populations at the sampling site (e.g., at sea). The facility will
be used primarily for research in three areas: 1) bacterial genomics and in situ
physiology, 2) viral abundance and interaction with marine host bacteria, and 3)
interactive parasite/host evolution studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particular strength of the proposal is its
integration of student training programs at UCI to include flow cytometry and
environmental microbiology. The inclusion of Dr. Mota-Bravo as the director of
the Minority Science Program should ensure success in attracting and training
students from underrepresented groups. The proposed equipment will also
strengthen the infrastructure for an array of environmental microbiology
programs directed by investigators in 6 departments at UCI, and collaborators at
USC, so the impact of its availability is high.