* 1126800
* MRI: Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Servohydraulic Structure Test System to Enhance Engineering Research and Research Education at San Francisco State University
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Hamid Shahnasser, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 246,454.00

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to acquire a
state-of-the-art servo-hydraulic structure test system that will serve to
continue building research capacity in the School of Engineering at San
Francisco State University (SFSU) and to expand faculty and student research
opportunities. The requested instrument will be used to establish robust,
experimentally-driven research programs at the forefront of seismic hazard
mitigation and wireless sensor technology and will comprise a key addition to
the existing Structure and Earthquake Laboratory. Specific research programs
that will be supported include: real time hybrid simulation, seismic
retrofitting of timber residential buildings, vibration energy harvesting for
wireless sensors, and energy-efficient wireless sensor networks. In addition to
these existing research projects, the instrument will provide investigators at
SFSU the platform to collaborate on long-awaited research in seismic hazard
mitigation and structural health monitoring of civil infrastructure, including
error quantification in real-time hybrid simulation, self-centering structural
systems, wireless sensor networks, cyber-structural testing platform
development, and tilt table control that is central to space simulation. It will
provide investigators at SFSU the necessary platform to collaborate both
nationally and internationally and to continue to build nationally-known student
training programs.

If successful, the acquired instrument will significantly enhance the research
capability in engineering at one of the nation?s most ethnically and culturally
diverse universities (60.1% minority; 37.5% underrepresented minorities) that is
known for its engagement, opportunity and scholarly activity. It will advance
the research careers of the researchers at SFSU by enabling them to bridge the
gap between theoretical development and experimental validation. A website will
be created to share and showcase instrument-enabled research and educational
outcomes with the scientific community. Moreover, the instrumentation will
provide a vehicle for reaching out to the broader scientific community to
advance engineering discovery by partnering with emerging leaders in the field
both nationally and internationally. The instrument will be integrated into the
existing undergraduate and graduate engineering curriculum. Enabled by the
state-of-the-art equipment, students will engage in cutting-edge research,
thereby gaining a leading edge when applying for competitive positions in
industry or Ph.D. programs. It will add a research focus to the already strong
teaching program, positioning the School of Engineering to emerge as one of the
premier engineering programs in the country. The instrument acquisition will
strengthen already-established programs with the premier Hispanic-serving
institution Cañada College and provide its students with unparalleled
opportunities to conduct summer research. Overall, the instrument will pave the
way to increase diversity while training the next generation of highly skilled
entrepreneurs in the engineering-driven technologies of the future.