* 1126034
* MRI: ACQUISITION OF A CHN ELEMENTAL ANALYZER FOR RESEARCH IN PLANT AND ECOSYSTEM ECOLOGY BY FACULTY AND UNDERGRADUATES AT CHAPMAN UNIVERSITY
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jennifer Funk, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 52,793.00

Funds from this Major Research Instrumentation award will be used to purchase a
carbon-hydrogen-nitrogen (CHN) elemental analyzer for research in plant and
ecosystem ecology by faculty and students at Chapman University, an
undergraduate serving institution in Orange, California. Carbon and nitrogen are
key elements in a number of important ecological processes ranging from plant
responses to the environment to rates of microbial decomposition and soil
formation in ecosystems. Through student-faculty collaborations, the CHN
elemental analyzer will initially be utilized to explore carbon and nitrogen
dynamics in three ecological research programs. (1) Carbon and nitrogen
sequestration through sediment deposition in coastal marshes in Southern
California. This work will explore sedimentation dynamics and sequestration of
carbon and nitrogen in salt marsh soils in order to better understand the fate
of these important ecosystems in the face of ongoing sea level rise. (2) The
importance of leaf nitrogen allocation in litter decomposition. This project
aims to elucidate the links between leaf nitrogen pools (e.g., nucleic acids,
amino acids, soluble proteins) and rates of litter decomposition. (3)
Integrating biochemical, physiological and morphological responses of plants to
changes in water availability. This work will determine how plant species
differentially respond to changes in the intensity and timing of precipitation
events and how these responses relate to plant fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of a CHN elemental analyzer will facilitate research, teaching and
outreach at Chapman University by allowing students and local educators to gain
hands-on experience with an instrument commonly used in ecological research. In
particular, the instrument will increase faculty scholarship and create new
opportunities for student-faculty mentorship with a diverse group of
undergraduate collaborators. The CHN elemental analyzer will also increase
access to modern research instrumentation for student and faculty as well as
local high school and community college instructors. Through mentored student
research and inclusion into new and existing curricula, this instrumentation
will facilitate education in a research-intensive environment and prepare our
students for future scientific careers.