* 1126115
* MRI: Acquisition of a scanning X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer with Ultraviolet Photon Source and C60 Ion Gun
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Wei Wei, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2014
* USD 628,007.00

Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray and ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopies (XPS and UPS, respectively) provide information on chemical
composition, chemical states, and electronic properties of surfaces and
interfaces, which are critical to assist the understanding and further
development of materials for a broad range of applications. The UPS capability
coupled with the C60 ion sputtering source further expands the instrumentation
capability to 'soft materials' such as organic, polymeric, and biological
materials, which have received great scientific interests in recent decades.
Examples of current NSF sponsored projects at the University of Florida that
will greatly benefit from this instrument include: (1) characterization of
organic-based semiconductors and interfaces for electronic and optoelectronic
applications; (2) surfaces and interfaces of metal phosphonate and
cyanometallate materials; (3) molecular approaches to directional growth of
nanostructures for nanoelectronics; (4) microstructure-informed design
methodology for advanced magnesium alloys; (5) graphene and other carbon-based
materials and interfaces; (6) self-assembled colloidal nanoparticles for
magnetic/biosensing applications. The Major Analytical Instrumentation Center
(MAIC) is a user facility providing analytical microscopy and spectrometry
instrumentation support to all disciplines at the university and the surrounding
community. The state-of-the-art XPS/UPS instrument requested in this proposal
replaces a 25-year-old XPS system, which not only accelerates the progress in
various research programs through the vastly increased efficiency, but also
provides new information through spatial imaging, high resolution chemical
profiling, and vast expansion of the realm of materials to be characterized. The
broader impacts of this instrumentation are also realized through a number of
educational and outreach activities at the University of Florida and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advancement of many modern technologies, such as various energy solutions
(storage, conversion, and conservation), nanotechnology, electronics and
photonics, biomaterials and biotechnology, and transportation, rests upon the
fundamental understanding of surfaces of the relevant materials and/or
interfaces between different material components. One of the most informative
surface analytical techniques is the x-ray or ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS and UPS, respectively), in which an x-ray or ultraviolet light
is shone on the targeted materials and the types of atoms and the local chemical
environment and physical properties of these atoms in the material near the
surface are revealed by analyzing the energy of electrons ejected from the
material surface. Buried material interfaces can also be probed when combining
XPS/UPS with appropriate material deposition or removal techniques. The state-
of-the-art XPS/UPS instrument requested in this proposal replaces a 25-year-old
XPS system at the Major Analytical Instrumentation Center (MAIC), a user
facility at the University of Florida which hosts an array of analytical
instrumentation for the study of various types of materials. The new instrument
provides vastly increased efficiency, new information through spatial imaging,
higher energy resolution, and vast expansion of the realm of materials to be
characterized. Furthermore, the new instrument provides unique opportunities for
the cross-disciplinary research training and education of many graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as opportunities for outreach to K-12 students
and teachers and the general science and engineering community.