* 1126619
* MRI: Development of an Integrated, Geospatial Analytics Research Instrument
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Naphtali Rishe, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2016
* USD 758,693.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-26619 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Rishe, Naphtali D.; Chen, Shu-Ching;
Christidis, Evangelos; Li, Tao; Zhao, Ming&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Florida
International University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: An Integrated, Geospatial
Analytics Research Instrument&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed: &lt;br/&gt;This
project, developing an integrated, high performance instrument designed for the
domain experts, focuses its domain on environment from which researchers can
easily process and store spatial and related data, visualize and explore data
relevant to their domains, and analyze data of interest via analytics of their
choosing. This instrument will provide a suite of cloud services and user-
centric analytic technologies via a Disaster Dataspace Services Cloud (DDSC),
open-standard APIs, and cutting-edge data visualization capabilities. The
Instrument will utilize a large-scale, optimized infrastructure to deliver high
levels of throughput and responsiveness, including an improved Hadoop/MapReduce
architecture to enable decision-support and information discovery queries on
massive amounts of structured and unstructured data. The proposed
multidisciplinary research includes: &lt;br/&gt;- Several areas of Computer
Science research, including query and data quality control algorithms on
heterogeneous, multisource streaming data, automated discovery approaches,
intelligent query/search modeling, GIS, data mining, moving objects, and
scientific data visualization; &lt;br/&gt;- Algorithms in data quality control
and indexing on heterogeneous, multisource streaming data, and knowledge
discovery algorithms with spatially aware information, such as rare event and
spatio-temporal change and trend detection; and&lt;br/&gt;- Instrument?s
applicability in the decision-making process in various fields, especially in
disaster mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project, in a
minority-serving institution, exhibits strength in broader impacts that may be
found In leveraging a number of successful ongoing projects, most notably in
computer science and geo-spatial sciences. The instrument carries potential to
transform the decision-making process in disaster mitigation. The enabled
research should benefit applications in environmental monitoring,
transportation, education, public health and safety. The instrument would be
used in classroom. Planned is recruitment that targets underrepresented minority
students (Hispanics) through innovative research and quality education programs.