* 1126413
* MRI: Development of the Habitable Zone Planet Finder Spectrograph for the Hobby-Eberly Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2017
* Jason Wright, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 12/31/2017
* USD 3,351,666.00

Astronomers have now found over 500 planets orbiting other stars. Virtually all
of these known "exoplanets" were discovered indirectly by inferring the presence
of a planet by the gravitational tug and pull its mass imposes on the star
during its orbit. This tug and pull can be observed as a periodic variation in
the velocity of the star and can be observed from earth using an instrument
called a "spectrograph" attached to a telescope. Most of the planets discovered
outside our own solar system are "gas giants" at least as massive as Jupiter and
have been found in close-in orbits to their stars and are not likely to be
capable of supporting life. But it is very likely that there are a large number
of planets that could do so. It is thought that such planets are likely to be
rocky like earth and to orbit their stars within the "habitable zone" where
conditions would allow and support the existence of liquid water. These orbits
are far enough from the star that the temperature is not too hot due to the
star's radiation but they are not so far away that any water would be
permanently frozen. Because these planets must necessarily orbit at some
distance for their stars to be found in the habitable zone and they are likely
to be smaller rocky planets (like earth), the tug and pull they effect on their
stars' velocities are considerably smaller than those of the large gas giants
close to their stars. In order to find planets in the habitable zone it is
necessary to use a highly precise and stable spectrograph that can very
accurately measure tiny changes in the velocities of stars. Dr. Suvrath
Mahadevan of Pennsylvania State University has designed such a spectrograph and
will build it and put in on the 10-meter aperture Hobby-Eberly Telescope in
Texas. This spectrograph is carefully designed to be extremely stable and to
have a very precise calibration capability that will be able to determine small
velocity changes. Dr. Mahadevan's "Habitable Zone Planet Finder" spectrograph is
funded by NSF's Major Research Instrumentation program through the Division of
Astronomical Sciences.