* 1126345
* MRI: The UNF-FSU Neutron Detector Array RESONEUT for Rare Ion Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Dennis Gay, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 143,486.00

This award will develop a new type of low-energy neutron detector array, which
is to be used at the Resolut radioactive beam facility of Florida State
University (FSU). The proposed detector systems use a combination of a
p-Terphenyl crystal with a novel type of compact "Planacon" photo multiplier to
achieve high sensitivity for low energy neutrons and pulse-shape discrimination
to suppress gamma-ray and X-ray background. Four prototype-systems for these
detectors have been assembled and tested at FSU. This proposal seeks to acquire
all components required for a detector array of twelve detectors, which will be
assembled and tested by undergraduate researchers at the University of North
Florida (UNF). The complete system will be commissioned in experiments at the
John D. Fox accelerator laboratory of Florida State University. The detector
array will enable an experimental program to study proton-resonances in the
astrophysical rapid proton capture process(rp-process), which will create
further opportunities for involvement of UNF undergraduate students in research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of the novel low-energy neutron
detector array into the Resolut radioactive beam facility of Florida State
University will enable the efficient detection of the remaining neutron from a
nuclear collision in which the proton in a deuteron is transferred to an
incident heavier nucleus. Such reactions are used as surrogates for studying and
calibrating nuclear reaction rates for the rapid proton captures by nuclei that
constitute the rp-process which is considered to be a component of explosive
stellar nucleosynthesis. This project will provide transformational learning
opportunities for undergraduate researchers at UNF who will assemble and test
the detector systems, participate in the subsequent commissioning experiments
for the neutron detector array at the John D. Fox accelerator laboratory, and
analyze data from the commissioning experiments. Following completion of this
project, UNF faculty and undergraduates will continue to collaborate on
experiments with the nuclear physics group at FSU and the neutron detector array
will be available to all users of the Resolut facility.