* 1126533
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electrospray Mass Spectrometer for Chemical Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Oladapo Bakare, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 221,239.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Professor
Oladapo Bakare from Howard University and colleagues Charles Hosten and
Lystranne Maynard will acquire an accurate-mass time-of-flight liquid-
chromatograph mass spectrometer (TOF-LC/MS) with electrospray ionization (ESI)
capabilities. The award will enhance research training and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as (a) development of fluorogenic calixarene-
based ionophores for selective optical sensing of hazardous metal ions, (b) use
of calixarenes in molecular recognition, (c) probing the in vivo degradation
pathway of polyhydroxybutyrate valerate (PHBV) copolymer, (d) catalysis of
hydrolysis of organic di- and tri-ester phosphates, (e) synthesis of cross-
linkers for the development of hemoglobin based oxygen carriers, (f) probing
functions of calreticulin through lysine acetylation, (g) characterization of
unimolecular rectifiers, and (h) chemical transformation of natural products for
anticancer drug development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometers (MS) are
used to identify the chemical composition of a sample by measuring the mass of
the molecular constituents in the sample after they are ionized and detected by
the mass spectrometer. This instrument couples a liquid chromatography system
with the mass analysis ability of mass spectrometry; the time-of-flight (TOF)
mass analyzer has high sensitivity and mass accuracy to assist the analyses and
interpretation of the resultant data. Before the sample is introduced into the
spectrometer a liquid chromatograph separates any mixture into its molecular
components. These components then flow into a mass spectrometer where they are
ionized using an electrospay source. The instrumentation will be used not only
for research but also in laboratory courses to train significant numbers of
students in the use of this important analytical technique. Many of these
students are from underrepresented groups since this university is one of the
premiere minority-serving-institutions. The instrumentation will also serve
students and faculty at neighboring colleges such as the Catholic University of
America.