* 1126274
* Do Juvenile Offenders in Adult Criminal Court Really Do "Adult Time?":  An Interjurisdictional Investigation of State Juvenile Transfer Laws & Sentencing Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Megan Kurlychek, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 59,579.00

The get tough policies of the 1990s resulted in an unprecedented number of
juveniles being transferred and sentenced in adult courts. To date there has
been a great deal of research devoted to describing the population of youth
transferred to adult court; however, significantly less attention has been
devoted to understanding the adult court outcomes of this population. The
current research is designed to further understanding in this area. More
specifically, this research constructs an inter-jurisdictional dataset comprised
of administrative data from six states which maintain different definitions of
adulthood for criminal justice processing. These six states were selected to be
representative of the pathways in which juveniles reach adult court in the
United States. Using this dataset, this research will test theories of adult
court decision-making to predict how juvenile status may act as an aggravating
or mitigating factor at sentencing. The study is framed within the larger debate
concerning the role of discretion in criminal justice outcomes, taking into
consideration the various mechanisms of juvenile transfer and the discretion
permitted to different system actors, including the juvenile court judge, the
prosecutor, and the state legislature. This research also addresses the relative
importance of various legal, extra-legal, and contextual factors in the
application of discretion in sentencing outcomes.

Because all 50 states maintain mechanisms to process youth as adults, the
results of this study will be of national interest. The study also represents
the first inter-jurisdictional analysis of this issue, and will therefore
demonstrate greater generalizability than any available research in the field.
Moreover, as the research encompasses all major pathways through which juveniles
reach adult courts, this study will be the first to allow for a direct
comparison of the mechanisms associated with juvenile adjudication in this
context.