* 1126967
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: On L1 Attrition and the Interface Hypothesis--A Case study of Spanish Attrition in contact with Brazilian Portuguese
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jason Rothman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This project speaks to the prospect that, under conditions of disues, a speaker
may not maintain his/her first language. Recent research into adult language
attrition, or language loss, questions the assumption that a first language,
once acquired, remains stable in spite of exposure to, and the acquisition of,
an additional language (or additional langueges). It also raises important
questions that help describe and explain the nature of linguistic attrition, as
well as shed light on the mental representation of human language. The goal of
this project is to contribute to the investigation of both where and why a first
language may be lost. Specifically, the predictions of the Interface Hypothesis
as applied to language attrition will be tested. This hypothesis predicts that
human language is most susceptible to attrition at points that interface with
domains of cognition that are external to language proper, such as those
properties which require a real-time knowledge of the particular discourse
context. Properties that lie internally to the linguistic system, such as those
that deal strictly with meaning or syntax, are less likely to erode. Within this
framework, the culprit of attrition is hypothesized to be either direct
interference from additional language(s) or certain language processing deficits
inherent to bilingualism. The research team will carry out an intensive case
study which tests the L1 grammar of an adult native speaker of Spanish after 25
years of uninterrupted exposure to Brazilian Portuguese. Both offline (written)
and online (timed) methodologies are used to test knowledge of a number of
properties at external and internal interfaces, as well as narrow syntactic
properties, at points where the L1 and L2 converge and diverge. Monolingual
native-speaker data serves as a basis of comparison. The results of this study
will not only allow for an examination of possible domains of attrition but also
for more precise look at the cause(s) of attrition.