* 1126378
* Participant Support for the 20th International Meshing Roundtable; Paris, France; October 23-26, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Yongjie Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Demitris Kouris
* 07/31/2012
* USD 20,787.00

The International Meshing Roundtable is a unique conference that aims to bring
experts together to discuss mesh generation and related topics, which plays an
important role in computational mechanics and related areas. This is a rare
opportunity for researchers in the field of mesh generation to exchange ideas
and also an excellent educational opportunity for students and postdoctoral
fellows who are working on the meshing research and related applications.
Potential topics for discussion in the conference include: CAD and computational
geometry issues for meshing, surface and volume mesh generation, analysis and/or
demonstration, software design, and implications of application on finite
element/volume analysis, geometric modeling, computer graphics, scientific
visualization, and other novel applications. The event will be held on October
23-26, 2011, in Paris, France. This is also the first time that this conference
will be held outside the US in the past two decades. The conference includes
four short courses, presentation of conference papers, presentation of research
notes, a poster session, and a professional development session targeting
students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the event
consists of knowledge dissemination of a field of research essential to modern
technologies. The symposium will include graduate students, post-docs and young
researchers. The event will bring together international researchers and
developers from academia, national labs, and industry in a stimulating, open
environment to share technical information on mesh generation and related
topics.