* 1126683
* MRI Consortium: Development of a Magneto-Electrostatic Spectrometer for High Precision Measurements of Neutron Beta Decay
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Ricardo Alarcon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,752,097.00

This MRI project will build a large, novel magneto-electrostatic spectrometer,
highly optimized for precision measurements of four key parameters describing
neutron beta decay: "a", the electron-neutrino correlation, "b", the Fierz
interference term, as well as "A/B/C", the beta/neutrino/proton asymmetries. The
device will be mounted at the Fundamental Neutron Physics Beamline (FnPB) of the
Spallation Neutron Source (SNS), Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). The
proposed spectrometer will be a premier instrument for precision study (at the
level of a part in ~1000) of neutron beta decay in the US and in the world. The
experiment is expected to provide critical results toward resolving longstanding
discrepancies in the neutron decay world data set. The proposed device, coupled
with state of the art neutron beam, will enable the collaboration to set
stringent limits on certain processes that would extend the Standard Model, with
strong implications in astrophysics. The spectrometer will be developed and
built by a consortium comprising University of Virginia (UVa), Arizona State
University (ASU), and ORNL, with UVa as the lead
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides advancing fundamental science, the
proposed project's impact is mainly in higher education. The UVa and the ASU
groups have established records of training Ph.D. and postdoctoral scientists
who have proceeded to assume productive roles in academia, research, and
industry. Several undergraduate students will gain valuable research experience
working on the proposed project; four have already been deeply involved in the
design phase. As well, the PIs' groups have an established record of including
members of underrepresented minorities (in recent past there have been two
African American Ph.D. students, as well as women Ph.D. students, postdocs, and
undergraduate students). The PIs are strongly committed to attracting members of
underrepresented groups, to help broaden the human resource base of the field.