* 1126230
* MRI: Acquisition of a Quadruple Resonance (QCI)-Cryoprobe for NMR Research and Training at MUSC
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Mirko Hennig, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 261,421.00

This NSF MRI award funds the acquisition of a quadruple inverse (QCI) cryoprobe
to substantially increase the sensitivity of the high-resolution 600 MHz NMR
instrument in the NMR Facility at the Medical University of South Carolina
(MUSC). The proposed QCI has all the capabilities of state-of-the-art probes for
biomolecular NMR including optimized direct detection of 1H, 13C and 31P
frequencies, simultaneous irradiation at 1H, 2H, 31P, 13C, and 15N frequencies,
and actively shielded z-axis gradient. The versatile QCI configuration permits
investigations of nucleic acids and proteins without changing probes and without
compromising flexibility. The three- to four-fold increase in sensitivity
afforded by cryoprobes over conventional room temperature probes translates into
nine- to sixteen-fold reduction in acquisition times, thereby significantly
enhancing throughput. An added benefit of increased sensitivity of the cryoprobe
is the lowered sample concentration requirements. Thus, studies of samples that
are expensive to produce, prone to aggregate at high concentrations, or are
otherwise chemically unstable are readily facilitated, thereby opening up the
possibility of tackling research problems previously inaccessible using existing
NMR instrumentation. The QCI facilitates novel avenues for NMR methods
development. Phosphorylated metabolites have been difficult to study through
direct 31P detection because of low sample concentrations. With the increased
sensitivity available with the requested cryoprobe featuring a cooled 31P
preamplifier, studies on such metabolites will provide new information not
available using current technology. The successful acquisition of a QCI-
cryoprobe opens new opportunities for fundamental studies that are important for
RNA-protein recognition and corresponding underlying principles of affinity and
specificity.

The impact of the QCI acquisition reaches across many disciplines and
institutions of higher education in SC. MUSC, the College of Charleston (CofC),
the University of South Carolina Columbia (USC), and Clemson University (CU)
have a long history of cooperation and this inter-institutional project
strengthens the collaborative research and education programs of all four
universities. The requested instrumentation becomes part of MUSC's shared NMR
facility and more effectively meets the growing scientific needs of as many as
eleven academic and governmental research groups working in basic science
programs at USC, CU, and three Charleston institutional locations (MUSC, CofC
and the Hollings Marine Laboratory (HML)). Projects that benefit from the
acquisition of the QCI include structure, function and dynamics studies of RNA
and proteins as well as structure determination and macromolecular interactions
of bioactive lipids and metabolites. The diverse and interdisciplinary research
enabled by a spectrometer equipped with a QCI provides a rich learning
environment for graduate students, undergraduates at CofC and a fertile training
ground for undergraduates participating in MUSC's Summer Undergraduate Research
Program (SURP). Students are exposed to ongoing, cutting-edge NMR research,
integrated within the Center for Structural Biology at MUSC. Faster NMR data
acquisition generally facilitates teaching efforts utilizing classroom
projections from the remotely operated NMR console. A key outreach effort, the
bi-annual Charleston NMR Summer Camp, involving the PI and researchers at the
HML also benefits from the QCI. The Camp's long-term goal is to attract and
develop the next generation of scientists with a passion for cutting-edge NMR in
SC, with special emphasis on SC's four-year colleges and minority-serving
institutions. It complements MUSC's College of Graduate Studies commitment to
recruiting and retaining underrepresented minorities.