* 1126992
* Systems Analysis of Protein Interactome in Cytosol and Nuclei of Developing Soybean and Rapeseed Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Dmitry Korkin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 01/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Jay Thelen (University of Missouri-Columbia)&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Dong Xu,
Dmitry Korkin (University of Missouri-Columbia)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seeds are
carbon- and nitrogen-dense structures that serve as the (plant) propagule and
the (human) socioeconomic foundation for modern agriculture. Genetics and
environmental conditions dictate the developmental program that ultimately
determines both seed yield and composition, although the underlying regulatory
proteins and mechanisms are only now beginning to be understood. Regulation of
seed development has recently focused on transcriptional and epigenetic control
of both embryogenesis and maturation. From a biochemical perspective, few
regulatory processes take place within a cell without direct or indirect
involvement of proteins, and protein-protein interactions. The nucleus and
cytosol are the major locations for transcriptional, translational, and post-
translational regulation. A quantitative inventory of the proteins involved in
these processes and their interactome network, would be a valuable resource to
develop testable models for regulatory control of embryo maturation. The main
focus of this project is the parallel characterization of nuclear and cytosolic
protein interactomes from developing embryos of soybean and rapeseed using a
combination of biochemical, proteomic, and bioinformatic approaches. The major
objectives of this project are to: 1) systematically and quantitatively analyze
protein-protein interactions from cytosolic and nuclear fractions of developing
embryos from soybean and rapeseed using a multi-dimensional biochemical strategy
that includes protein crosslinking, co-sedimentation, and quantitative mass
spectrometry; 2) perform bioinformatic and statistical analyses of potential
interacting proteins using data from aim 1 for comparison between soybean and
rapeseed, and develop generic protein complex identification tools for such
data; and 3) disseminate software, proteomic and protein interaction data by
deposition into extant databases (PRIDE, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/; Database
of Interacting Proteins, DIP, http://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/; Soybean Knowledge
Base, http://soykb.org) and develop a new web
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the research project targets the protein
interactome in developing soybean and rapeseed embryos, it has broader
significance for studying plants (especially crops) in general. This study will
greatly enrich the data describing plant protein interactions, which is
currently limited. These data can be used as a template for studying protein
interactomes of other plants. Besides the data and their analyses, the
techniques and bioinformatic tools that will be developed can also be applied to
study interactomes of other species; in particular, experimental protocols and
bioinformatic tools (including source code) will be made freely available to the
public. The project will provide critical interdisciplinary training in plant
biology, proteomics, and bioinformatics for undergraduates, graduate students,
and postdoctoral scholars. Current discipline-based education provides very
limited training on integrating biology, biotechnology, and bioinformatics,
which is often needed in large-scale biological projects. This project provides
a problem-based, interdisciplinary environment to provide training in this
regard. Students and postdocs will be mentored in scientific writing, scientific
presentations, publishing, grant applications, constructive peer review, project
management, time management, and personnel management in an effort to direct the
next generation of scientists towards the realistic and professional
expectations of modern academic or commercial research. Efforts will be made to
recruit people with diverse backgrounds to work on this project. Undergraduate
researchers in life sciences and journalism will have opportunities to gain
unique experience in computational biology and scientific communication through
support from a recently awarded Howard Hughes Medical Institute grant.