* 1126516
* MRI: Acquisition of an automated sequencer for research, training and education at Tulane University and partner institutions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2014
* USD 130,987.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award funds the acquisition of a high-
throughput capillary sequencer and related instrumentation to enhance research
and educational programs at Tulane University and partner institutions in the
greater New Orleans metropolitan area. The instrumentation will build on
university and departmental strategic investments and major realignments in
support of environmental research and educational initiatives. By providing cost
effective high-throughput capacity for acquisition and analysis of locus-
specific, multi-individual DNA sequence data and multilocus genotype data, the
instrumentation will greatly expand shared-use genomics infrastructure available
to university faculty, staff and students. The instrumentation will therefore
meet steadily growing demands from expanding research and training programs
emphasizing use of molecular techniques to address questions in ecology,
evolutionary biology, and related environmental science
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a high-throughput DNA sequencer
and supporting instrumentation will serve competitively funded research programs
at Tulane University and partner HBCU institutions (Xavier University, Dillard
University, Southern University at New Orleans) and institutions serving large
minority populations (University of New Orleans). The instrumentation to be
acquired includes an ABI3730xl DNA Analyzer with a computer control system and a
Franek FT1-B3730X-DA uninterruptible power supply. This instrumentation will
support a rapidly expanding user community, including core users undertaking
studies on topics such as molecular phylogenetics of freshwater fish and
Neotropical birds, the evolutionary ecology of plant-animal interactions,
speciation genetics, microbial remediation of contaminants, and the development
of genetic methods for environmental assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ready
access to high-throughput capacity will accelerate the pace and scale of
research and training at Tulane and partner institutions, which will immediately
increase the number of faculty and investigators able to pursue leading-edge
research. By helping bridge disciplinary research programs, particularly those
in the biomedical and environmental sciences, it will support university-wide
and cross-university initiatives to establish national research centers in New
Orleans. Expanded capacity also will broaden opportunities for classroom and
mentored research training in STEM fields, including NSF-funded programs
intended to advance participation of underrepresented groups in environmental
biology.