* 1126511
* US-Taiwan Workshops on Materials and Systems Challenges in Electrical Energy Storage
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Trung Nguyen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 03/31/2013
* USD 59,000.00

This award provides funding to support two related workshops bringing together
US and Taiwan researchers, 12 from each side, to discuss issues related to
electrochemical energy conversion and storage. The objectives are 1) to identify
challenges and barriers to more efficient systems as targets of research and 2)
to foster research and educational collaboration between the two groups. The
first workshop will be in Taipei, Taiwan, in April 2011. In addition to
technical talks, there will be a tour of relevant Taiwanese industry and
laboratories. The second, follow-up workshop will be in Minneapolis, MN, in
October 2011, in conjunction with the national meeting of the American Institute
of Chemical Engineers. The latter meeting will provide an opportunity to
showcase the topic and to engage the US research community more
extensively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two workshops will engage leading
researchers in this field. Taiwan is a leader in the field of batteries, both
from a fundamental as well as a manufacturing perspective. The participants are
well qualified to identify key issues and research opportunities for improvement
of electrochemical systems for energy storage and conversion. Such systems range
from very small batteries for portable applications to power sources for
transportation to large units for storage of energy from intermittent renewable
sources, such as solar or wind. The technical challenges to improving
efficiency, energy density and power density need to be attacked by application
of the latest developments in materials science as well as engineering analysis
and design. The participants are well qualified to identify the most promising
opportunities and to disseminate the information to the broader research
community.