* 1126196
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Tykhon Zubkov, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 497,500.00

Funding for this project supports the acquisition of a transmission electron
microscope (TEM) to augment research and education opportunities at Ball State
University and beyond. The new TEM will enhance existing research projects
spanning the biology, chemistry, physiology, nanoscience, and physics
departments. Some of these projects include: 1) structural plasticity in the
developing nervous system; 2) the effects of chemical stressors on aquatic
ecosystems; 3) the role of metabolism in organ development; 4) development of
novel luminescent thin films for non-invasive biological imaging; 5) cellular
mechanisms of endocytosis; 6) synthesis of functional carbon nanotubes; 7) and
development of novel photocatalytic solid surface materials for organic
decontamination and air purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new TEM will be
housed in Ball State University?s newly constructed Micro-Imaging Center that
serves the greater East Central Indiana region. This instrument will be
available to all departments within the university and used by both nearby
undergraduate institutions and industrial partners. Students in a graduate
course will work on individual projects aimed at optimizing conditions for
investigators? sponsored research projects currently underway or those about to
be undertaken. Such an approach aims to blur the lines between education and
research, ultimately resulting in increased research productivity and direct
student participation. The TEM will be demonstrated to local high school
students who routinely visit the facility as a means of promoting science and
research. The instrument will also be used to strengthen our existing ties to
the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation program, for which multiple
investigators currently serve as mentors. This device will be the only one of
its kind in the region, and will serve as a critical component in broadening the
education and research opportunities of the&lt;br/&gt;diverse student body at
Ball State University and beyond while also promoting scientific collaboration
among interdisciplinary researchers.