* 1126534
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual Size Exclusion Chromatography-Asymmetric Flow Field Flow Fractionation Instrument
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Judy Riffle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 255,265.00

MRI Proposal DMR 1126534_McGrath &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; MRI: Acquisition of a Dual Size Exclusion Chromatography-
Asymmetric Flow Field Flow Fractionation (SEC-AFFFF) Instrument, James McGrath,
Kevin Edgar, Richey Davis, Richard Turner and Judy Riffle, Depts of Chemistry,
Wood Science and Forest Products, Chemical Engineering and the Macromolecules
and Interfaces Institute, VA Tech, Blacksburg, VA &lt;br/&gt; A centralized,
multi-user SEC-AFFFF facility is requested to characterize absolute molecular
weights and sizes of a diverse array of homo- and copolymers and macromolecular
colloidal assemblies. The sizes of macromolecules in solution are intrinsically
related to their molecular parameters such as the type, amount and locations of
ionic groups, copolymer microstructure, hydrophobic/hydrophilic nature,
architectures, phase structures, tacticities, and intra- and inter-molecular
interactions. In turn, the sizes control functions such as mechanical, thermal,
and transport properties as well as the propensity for cooperative complexation
to assemble into supramolecular constructs. Polymer research at VA Tech
emphasizes the synthetic chemistry of macromolecules, particularly on charged
and multi-phase structures, high and low molecular weight materials with
extensive hydrogen bonding, and on molecules with varied architectures, and such
systems present great challenges for accurate characterization of their sizes.
Moreover, our growing emphasis on natural polymers including functionally-
modified polysaccharides and highly-charged nucleic acids present unique
difficulties in measurements and interpretation of molecular weight analyses. An
analytical SEC-AFFFF facility with multiple integrated detectors to measure on-
line refractive indices, UV absorbance, dilute solution viscosities and light
scattering, to handle aqueous and organic solvents, and to operate over a wide
range of molecular weights is requested to characterize these polymers and self-
assembled structures. The SEC-AFFFF facility will allow measurement of absolute
molecular weights, intrinsic viscosities, virial coefficients, degrees of
branching, aggregation characteristics, complex sizes, chemical stability, and
biodegradation for a vast collection of chemical compositions. SEC and AFFFF
methods will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate coursework, academic
year research and summer undergraduate programs. Our goal is to impact society
through research in alternative energy solutions, water purification, gas
separations, medical diagnostics and new molecular carriers for
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; MRI:
Acquisition of a Dual Size Exclusion Chromatography-Asymmetric Flow Field Flow
Fractionation (SEC-AFFFF) Instrument, James McGrath, Kevin Edgar, Richey Davis,
Richard Turner and Judy Riffle, Depts of Chemistry, Wood Science and Forest
Products, Chemical Engineering and the Macromolecules and Interfaces Institute,
VA Tech, Blacksburg, VA&lt;br/&gt; Molecular weights and sizes of macromolecules
and nanoscale polymer aggregates represent one of the most critical parameters
that define their properties and potential applications. The sizes control
functions such as mechanical, thermal, and transport properties as well as the
capacity to assemble into nanomaterial complexes. Polymer research at VA Tech
emphasizes the design, synthesis and properties of multiphase and charged
polymers with a wide range of molecular weights that present great challenges
for accurate characterization of their sizes. The functionality and phase
structures of these polymers lead to materials for alternative energy solutions,
water purification, gas separations, medical diagnostics and new molecular
carriers for therapeutics. This proposal requests a dual SEC-AFFFF for a
centralized, multi-user facility. SEC is the premier characterization tool for
determining the molecular weights of both synthetic and natural polymers. AFFFF
is a relatively new analytical method that particularly enables separations of
very high molecular weight polymers, charged polymers, micelles, polymer-drug
complexes and nanoparticles. The facility will be integrated into coursework and
research at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, and will also be
available to regional institutions outside of VA Tech.