* 1126468
* MRI: Development of a Versatile High Energy Resolution Ion Nanosope for Nanoscale Ion Spectroscopy, Ion-based Materials Fabrication and Ion Milling
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Torgny Gustafsson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,640,493.00

Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a new research
instrument for nanoscale elemental analysis and materials modification using
scattering of noble gas ions creates opportunities for materials science
unachievable to date. Intellectual challenges include the creation of the tool,
understanding energetic ion-solid interactions with a nano-beam, and
applications, both in materials analysis and materials modification. Our project
integrates two recent technological developments: Focused nanoscale ion beams
available as the Zeiss ORION® He microscope and picosecond timing electronics
with high throughput by Ionwerks®. Analysis applications include the first ion
beam interrogation of individual nanostructures and determinations of lateral
film uniformity. The instrument will also be used for materials modifications
such as graphene based counters for single molecule analysis, development of
qubit based superconducting junctions for quantum computing and studies of the
behavior of defects within nano-structured materials. Also included is the
development of nanoscale Ne beams for materials modification and sample
preparation, an entirely new ion beam capability. Such beams may be used for ion
milling on the nm scale, semiconductor amorphization and implantation with nm
precision, spatial control of 'single ion upsets' in electronic devices, new
tests of inter-granular defects for fusion applications and the creation of new
materials from ion-carved graphene and other two dimensional materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale
materials have an enormous impact on basic and applied science. Unanticipated
phenomena and functionalities are being discovered and exploited commercially at
an ever increasing pace. New experimental tools are therefore needed to reliably
perform materials characterization and modification at the same level. This
project introduces a significant advance through the development of a versatile
ion beam facility for true nano-scale ion spectroscopy, ion beam materials
modification and ion beam milling. The project integrates new ion beam
technologies to allow analysis of individual nano-particles as well as materials
modification of nanostructures and ion sculpting and milling with unprecedented
spatial control, involving the development of a new, heavy ion nano-beam. This
represents a leap in ion beam oriented materials science. New science and
technology is anticipated such as the investigation of the ligand binding of
gold nanoparticles used in cancer drug delivery, the creation of nanometer
orifices to explore DNA sequencing and the formation of quantum structures for
advanced computing and communications.&lt;br/&gt;The direct and visually
oriented nature of the information from this instrument will illustrate the
excitement of materials science to students ranging from middle school to
advanced graduate students through a well developed local infrastructure. As
Rutgers has an extraordinarily diverse student body, the project will be
particularly useful in attracting underrepresented groups. The instrument will
provide excellent opportunities for hands-on experience in the development and
use of sophisticated scientific equipment for undergraduate students and enrich
the graduate curriculum. The general public will be involved through open houses
and lectures. As a 'one of a kind' instrument this instrument will attract world
leaders in the diverse fields addressed by nano-materials. Together with other
recent NSF awarded instrumentation, this instrument will establish Rutgers as a
national center for nano-scale microscopy.