* 1126123
* MRI-Acquisition: Puerto Rico Atmospheric Major Research Laser Instrumentation Program (PR-LASER)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Jonathan Friedman, Universidad Metropolitana
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2015
* USD 658,049.00

The investigators will acquire a state-of-the-art laser transmitter for the
potassium Doppler resonance lidar at the Arecibo Observatory. This will replace
the current transmitter, which is almost 15 years old and is difficult to
maintain. The purpose of the upgrade is to 1) enhance upper-mesospheric research
activities using new laser technology at Arecibo, 2) improve data quality,
system reliability, and increased access to and training in the use of modern
research instrumentation by scientists, engineers, and graduate and
undergraduate students, and 3) implement a research training program in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields in optics with an emphasis
on atmospheric remote sensing for students from pre-college through graduate
school and science teachers from Puerto Rico at Universidad Metropolitana's
Puerto Rico Optical Sciences Institute (PROptScI). The improved performance of
the lidar will enhance the accuracy and precision of its measurements of
potassium density and temperature and ultimately enable the measurement of winds
in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT). When coupled with the
ionospheric radar, the improved lidar will lead to around-the-clock measurements
of MLT temperatures and winds, and daytime atmospheric air densities. The
acquisition will create new synergy between the Arecibo Observatory and a
majority-Hispanic university. Undergraduates from UMET will have the opportunity
to participate in and learn the details of middle atmosphere research using
state-of-the-art electro-optic technologies. These students will become leaders
in their chosen careers because of the unique opportunities presented by this
partnership. UMET will partner with the CRRL/CTC to develop lidar technologies
and train undergraduate and graduate students who will be the next generation of
lidar scientists.