* 1126234
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Volumetric PIV (V3V)/Computer Modeling System for the Study of Biological Phenomena
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Christopher Sanford, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 360,809.00

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Animals and plants reflect the physical properties of the
medium in which they live, and variation in anatomy that enhances performance is
the basis of natural selection and fitness. However, the insights that nature
provides has often been limited by the technology available at the time. To
date, the large body of experimental work that has been conducted in the field
of hydrodynamics and aerodynamics of organisms has been limited to two
dimensions (2D), driven in large part by the use of 2D or planar PIV (Particle
Image Velocimetry). Yet the 3D nature of organismal design and fluid movements
is what drives the massive diversity of body plans and designs that exist.
Attempts have been made to extrapolate 2D information to provide theoretical 3D
models of fluid flows resulting from biological systems, thus the precise
hydrodynamic advantage of different body shapes or movement patterns remains
elusive. One of the most exciting recent developments in the study of fluid
flows is a new V3V or Volumetric 3-Component Velocimetry system that uses laser
illuminated, neutrally buoyant reflective particles and a three camera system to
provide a quantitative visualization of fluid flows in 3D. This research will
use the Integrated Volumetric PIV (V3V) computer modeling System (IVCMS) to
explore biologically relevant fluid flows in true 3D across a wide range of
biological phenomena. The projects are specifically designed to quantitatively
understand and visualize in 3D how aquatic organisms perform ecologically
relevant tasks that influence fitness. Research topics range from suspension
feeding and locomotion in invertebrates to ventilation, feeding and locomotion
in aquatic vertebrates; and across multiple scales. The multi-user equipment
will increase access to cutting-edge technology by bringing together individuals
from multiple disciplines and institutions (including international
collaborations). Research programs of all major-users will be greatly enhanced
and will foster collaborations that will provide a research-rich environment,
and stimulate the flow of progressive biological ideas designed to meet the
challenges of science in the 21st century.

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPORTANCE: Understanding fluid flows in biological
systems can provide key insights into biologically-inspired engineering designs.
The research will use a state of the art technique to study biologically
important and biologically induced fluid flows in true 3D. Reconstructing fluid
flows in true 3D has not been possible to date and this system will generate
important data that can be used to directly understand how organisms have
overcome the challenges of living and moving in water. The system will be
located at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution (PUI), and will integrate
research and education in an environment that is conducive to the excitement of
scientific discovery and student driven research. This modern-day equipment will
directly broaden the participation of individuals from underrepresented groups.
The proposed research and cutting edge techniques will achieve the goals of
providing increased access to the next generation of major instrumentation to
both students and advanced level researchers. The results generated are visually
appealing and likely to attract more students and retain them in the biological
sciences, as well as engage them in exciting and dynamic research. Results from
this research can also provide important information to improve the efficiency
of aquatic engineering designs.