* 1126582
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Nano-Mechanical Tester for Micro/Nanomechanical Characterization of Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Yanyao Jiang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2014
* USD 248,725.00

The goal of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project is to strengthen
the research capability in micro/nanomechanical materials characterization at
the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR). To do so, a critical mass of researchers
with interdisciplinary research interests at UNR proposes to acquire a new and
critical instrument, the Hysitron TI-950 Triboindentor nano-mechanical testing
system. Northern Nevada including UNR does not have a nano-mechanical tester,
thus the lack of such an instrument (or quick access to a nearby instrument)
imposes significant challenges to researchers at UNR and local industry partners
in advancing materials research and development. Acquiring a state-of-the-art
nano-mechanical testing system will immediately support a number of research
projects at UNR and initiate transformative research and industry
collaborations. The instrument will also support undergraduate and graduate
courses and train science and engineering students in state-of-the-art materials
characterization techniques. The nano-mechanical tester performs indentation
tests by driving a nanometer-sized diamond indenter into the specimen surface
and dynamically collecting the applied force and displacement data. The measured
load and the indentation depth can be used to derive mechanical material
properties such as hardness, elastic modulus, and storage and loss moduli for
materials, thin films, coatings, and substrates. By making these measurements as
a function of time, viscoelastic properties such as creep and relaxation can be
determined at the micro/nano level. Together with testing fixtures available at
UNR, the system can be also used for in situ observations of the microstructure
evolution at different length scales. In addition to supporting the projects by
the core investigator team, eleven researchers from three institutions will
collaborate with the core investigator team to use the new instrument for
research.

The nano-mechanical tester will significantly enhance the research capability at
UNR in the emerging areas of bio-materials, nano-materials, active materials,
and other structural and functional materials. Particularly, the instrument will
improve UNR?s research support infrastructure by giving UNR a unique set of
resources with which to pursue funding in the micro/nanomechanical aspects of
material behavior. The outcome of the research conducted with the requested
instrument will add significantly to the knowledge base in the areas of nano-
materials, bio-sensors, testing of materials and structures, nanomanufacturing,
processing of nanocomposites, and micro-characterization of material properties.
The instrument will be shared by many laboratory groups at UNR and thus will
encourage collaboration and spark synergistic research. The instrument will be
used to train and better prepare the future work force in advanced materials
research. Also, the instrument will be used by UNR NSF GK-12 graduate fellows
exploring energy research for characterizing novel materials including thin-film
solar cells and membranes for energy-related applications. Graduate and
undergraduate students who interact with the instrument will gain valuable
hands-on skills and state-of-the-art training in nanoindentation and materials
characterization. The participating research groups have a tradition of
involving women, minorities and undergraduates in the research activities and
this tradition will be continued in the micro/nanomechanical regime with the
newly acquired instrument. Detailed digital data will be made available on a
designated website to disseminate the research results and findings.
Additionally, a collection of course-related projects will be made available to
a large pool of instructors, practicing engineers, undergraduate, and graduate
students.