* 1126747
* MRI Consortium: Development of Instrumentation for Measuring the Dependability and Quality of Cloud Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sukumaran Nair, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 487,352.00

This project, aiming to develop instrumentation that enables rigorous
experimental quality and dependability assessment of cloud computing systems,
including cloud service-oriented architecture&lt;br/&gt;(SOA) systems,
dramatically enhances the validation capability of cloud platform services and
cyberinfrastructure. Cloud platforms must meet specified service level
agreements (SLA) and provide mechanisms to support the minimization of the power
used in cloud data centers without adversely affecting the quality of service
(QoS). Also, some safety-critical emerging cloud applications, such as health-
care and transportation applications, must meet stringent dependability
requirements, that include high availability, reliability, performance,
resilience, safety, and security. The proposed work establishes a high
performance, metrics-driven instrument enabling rigorous evaluation for the
following research projects on cloud performance: &lt;br/&gt;- Assurance of QoS
in Service Clouds,&lt;br/&gt;- Optimization of Dependability in Evolving
Clouds,&lt;br/&gt;- Mobile Device Power Management in Service
Clouds,&lt;br/&gt;- Achievement of Highly Secure Compositions in Service Clouds,
and&lt;br/&gt;- Testing and Validation of Secure Hardware-Software
Architectures.&lt;br/&gt;The work aims to develop a flexible instrument for
validation and verification of cloud performance, seen to be a key element in
the future of computing services. In recent years, computer services have been
moving to remote virtual machines ?in the cloud.? The commercial success of this
new business model is based on service quality guarantees, which are becoming
increasingly hard to verify as the complexity and volume of cloud services
increase. Testbeds of this type are critical to the economic and research
vitality of the academic and industrial
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This
instrumentation substantially raises the quality, scale, and scope of
experimental research in dependability enhancement methods for cloud computing
systems. It helps foster a strong scientifically based experimental paradigm for
computing and provides capabilities that will greatly enhance the quality of
undergraduate and graduate courses in computer science and engineering, as well
as senior design projects by enabling students to work on realistic platforms.
The instrumentation enhances the facilities of an NSF I/UCRC and will be
available to researchers at the participating institutions and industrial
partners.