* 1126179
* MRI: Acquisition of Electron-Beam Lithography System for Nanofabrication and Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Chris Hessenius, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2015
* USD 1,263,380.00

MRI: Acquisition of Electron-Beam Lithography System for Nanofabrication and
Processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives and Approaches: The
objective of this research is to acquire a state-of-the-art electron-beam
lithography (EBL) system critical for fabrication and investigation of nano-
structures. The approach is to use the EBL system to define nanoscale features
in cutting-edge interdisciplinary research in nano-photonics, electronics and
sensing. The instrument will be an integral part of the unique Nano-Fabrication
and Processing (NF&amp;P) facility at the University of Arizona for the
exploration of nano-structured components and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The EBL system will be
essential in realizing the state-of-the-art research in silicon photonics and
integration of optics with electronics and software on silicon chips. The
feature sizes for the silicon photonic chips are reaching sub-50 nm that would
be reliably supported by the EBL system. This research would also be
instrumental in the NSF Engineering Research Center on Integrated Access
Networks (CIAN) and will be useful to researchers from other partner
universities within CIAN. Furthermore, the requested system will enable a wide
range of novel opportunities in nano-scale R&amp;D, providing a unique
capability especially for the young faculty and students with innovative
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Advances in nano-technology is
revolutionizing the fields of information technology, alternative energy,
environmental sciences, healthcare, and homeland security. The EBL will be an
essential tool in the education and training of students in nano-science and
technology. Also, faculty and researchers associated with the minority serving
schools that are partnered with CIAN ERC including Norfolk State University and
Tuskegee University will be able to take advantage of this facility.