* 1126804
* RAPID: Decadal Variability of the American Monsoons--An Assessment of CMIP5 Simulation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Charles Jones, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2013
* USD 30,000.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.

This project examines the simulation of the American Monsoon System (AMS) in
simulations of the recent past from the Climate Model Intercomparison Project
verson 5 (CMIP5). The main goals are to develop an extensive assessment of how
realistic simulations are in representing the observed characteristics of the
American Monsoon System (AMS) in the recent past, and to assess uncertainties in
projected decadal climate changes in the AMS. More specifically, the project

1) Assesses the skill of CMIP5 model simulations in representing the
climatological and statistical characteristics of the monsoons in the Americas
including: circulation and precipitation features, subseasonal variance, onsets
and demises, amplitudes and cross equatorial transitions.

2) Determines which CMIP5 models realistically represent the spatiotemporal
variability of the monsoons in the present climate including near-term trends,
frequency of very dry/wet seasons and statistical distributions of extreme
precipitation events.

3) Examines which CMIP5 models skillfully represent the observed relationships
between remote forcings and the American monsoons. These include the Madden-
Julian Oscillation (MJO), El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO), North Atlantic
Oscillation (NAO), Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), Antarctic Oscillation
(AAO), Atlantic Ocean and Intra-Americas Sea forcings.

4) Seeks to determine how much of the climate changes projected for the next
decades in the Americas are explained by natural decadal variability and how
much by greenhouse gases increases.

The broader impact of the project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is
intended to provide information on climate change and its consequences to
decision makers worldwide. The AMS affects water resources, agriculture, human
health, ecosystems and biodiversity throughout a large and densely populated
portion of the Americas. The impact of climate change on the AMS is not known,
and this research will help to determine the extent to which models used to
project climate change are capable of accurately representing the AMS system and
its variability and change over the observed record.