* 1126656
* MRI: Acquisition of a UHV multi-source sputtering system for multidisciplinary material research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Walter Smith, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 239,550.00

Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary team of researchers
from Bryn Mawr College, Haverford College and Villanova University propose to
acquire a customized AJA Orion-8 UHV multi-source sputtering system with the
capability of fabricating a variety of multi-layered or single-layered thin
films with sub-nanometer thickness control under ultrahigh base vacuum and
controlled atmosphere. The research projects that will be enabled or greatly
enhanced by the acquisition of this sputtering system include (1) spin dynamics
in magnetic nanostructures; (2) templated electrodeposition of nanoporous
materials; (3) many-body interactions between ultracold highly-excited atoms;
(4) photo electronics research; (5) nanomechanical characterization of
interfaces; (6) high strength and toughness ceramic materials; and (7) silicon
nitride nanofibers. The results from these projects will shed light on a variety
of fundamental physics and engineering subjects in nanoscience and
nanotechnology, and lead to applications in data storage and sensing, energy
generation and storage, and biomedical engineering. The use of this instrument
will also be incorporated into teaching activities to expose more students to
the capabilities of advanced nanofabrication techniques. The addition of this
sputtering system into the three institutions will enhance the instrument-
sharing infrastructure for research and education in the three institutions;
facilitate cross-disciplinary interactions and lead to the realization of
previously undiscovered synergies in research at the three institutions; give a
diverse group of undergraduate students and graduate students in the three
institutions an opportunity to carry out hands-on research in materials science
using cutting-edge technology; and provide opportunities for faculty belonging
to under-represented minority groups to carry out cutting-edge research, which
in turn will attract more women into these research areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructured materials, with one or more
dimensions at the nanoscale, often exhibit new and enhanced properties over
their bulk counterparts. Sputtering, a technique for precisely depositing thin
layers of materials onto sample surfaces, is one of the most important
nanomaterials deposition methods. For example, the giant magnetoresistance
effect (2007 Nobel Prize in Physics) was discovered in nanoscale multilayered
films fabricated by the sputtering method. A multidisciplinary team of
researchers from Bryn Mawr College, Haverford College and Villanova University
propose to acquire a customized AJA Orion-8 UHV multi-source sputtering system.
The research projects that will be enabled or greatly enhanced by the
acquisition of this sputtering system include studies in nanomagnetism,
ultracold atomic systems, photo electronics, and nanomechanical engineering. The
results from these projects will shed light on a variety of fundamental physics
and engineering subjects in nanoscience and nanotechnology, and lead to
applications in data storage and sensing, energy generation and storage, and
biomedical engineering. The addition of this sputtering system into the diverse
and dynamic environment existing in the three institutions will facilitate
enhanced cross-disciplinary interactions, give a diverse group of undergraduate
students and graduate students in the three institutions an unparalleled
opportunity to carry out hands-on research in materials science using cutting-
edge technology, and provide opportunities for faculty belonging to under-
represented minority groups to carry out cutting-edge research, which in turn
will attract more women into these research areas.