* 1126762
* MRI: Development of a high pressure and temperature, biaxial deformation apparatus for earthquake and landslide studies
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Andreas Kronenberg, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 687,482.00

Recent laboratory experiments investigating the frictional properties of rock
indicate that faults are profoundly weakened at dynamic sliding rates typical of
earthquakes. Understanding the cause and extent of dynamic weakening is critical
to advance predictive models for nucleation, rupture propagation, and energy
radiation patterns of earthquake slip events that can help mitigate the hazards
of earthquakes and tsunamis. At this time our ability to investigate dynamic
weakening is severely limited because laboratory instruments capable of
replicating the conditions of earthquake nucleation and rupture in the Earth do
not exist. This project will design, construct, and commission an instrument
that can simultaneously achieve the conditions of elevated confining pressure,
pore fluid pressure and temperature, variable slip rates from Âµm/s to m/s, and
shear displacements of at least several centimeters to systematically
investigate slip instability in the Earth. The apparatus will employ a novel
biaxial frame housing a pressure vessel to accommodate double-direct shear and
triaxial shear configurations, and servo-hydraulic and pneumatic loading
systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The instrument will 1) advance basic research in
areas relevant to mitigating natural hazards associated with earthquakes, 2)
provide a state-of-the-art laboratory facility for training the next generation
of researchers through an integrated graduate education and research program in
geophysical rock mechanics at Texas A&amp;M University, and 3) provide new
opportunities for education and outreach to students across the STEM fields,
particularly undergraduate and graduate students in engineering and geoscience.
With respect to this project, the principal investigators are committed to
national and international research collaboration, shared use of the new
apparatus and laboratory facilities, long-term maintenance of the equipment, and
sustaining a research and education program that values diversity.