* 1126893
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for a Shared Imaging Facility for Research and Undergraduate Research Training at Occidental College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Eileen Spain, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 318,771.00

This project establishes a high resolution light microscopy imaging facility for
biology and chemistry research and undergraduate research training at Occidental
College. Grant funds will be used to purchase a Leica TCS SP5 II Spectral
Confocal System for a shared microscopy core facility. Occidental faculty will
use the SP5 Confocal System to study diverse problems in biology and
biochemistry including the regulation of microtubules and axon outgrowth during
C. elegans neural development, ion channel physiology in zebrafish, cone-snail
prey-capture mechanisms, nutrient uptake and urease activity in tropical
bromeliads, microbial symbiosis in newly discovered marine invertebrates, and
the chemistry of bacterial biofilms. The imaging facility will update and
greatly improve research and training capabilities, enable the current biology
faculty to undertake new and collaborative research projects and provide
undergraduate students with skills in advanced research technologies they are
likely to use in their future graduate studies and work
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Occidental College is a nationally recognized
liberal arts college located in Northeast Los Angeles that serves a diverse
student population. Between 2005 and 2011, 54 percent of science majors have
been women, and 22 percent were underrepresented ethnicities. Occidental has
been a leader in integrating research and undergraduate education, encouraging
students to engage in collaborative research with faculty throughout the
academic year. The college sponsors an annual summer research program that has
grown to include over 150 students each year and a K-12 science education
initiative to prepare recent graduates for careers in science teaching at Los
Angeles area schools. The Leica TCS SP5 II Spectral Confocal imaging
instrumentation will help Occidental improve the quality and range of research
opportunities available to students. The project will have a long-term impact on
maintaining excellence in research and undergraduate training at Occidental
College and supports development and retention of a talented and diverse STEM
workforce.