* 1126311
* MRI: Development of a Light-Tethered Undersea Robotic Vehicle for Seafloor Intervention in Ice-Covered Environments and Ship of Opportunity Deployment
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Chris German, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,996,965.00

US ocean and polar sciences currently lacks an effective capability for routine
under-ice inspection, sampling, and instrument manipulation, whether at the ice-
ocean interface, in the water column of ice-covered oceans, or at the underlying
high latitude ice shelves and coastal grounding lines. The US oceanographic
community additionally lacks appropriate remotely operated vehicle (ROV)
capabilities that can be regularly deployed from typical Global Class support
ships. This is particularly challenging if they are to be accommodated alongside
substantive multi-disciplinary research teams on the same vessel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polar seas and ice covered oceans present additional
challenges. Conventionally tethered ROVs may be restricted in their placement,
as the ice-resistant research ships from which they are deployed may be forced
to drift with migrating ice over distances of &gt;1 km in a matter of hours
while over-the-side operations are underway. Consequently, such ROVs may not be
able to stay on station in locations of specific interest, nor systematically
survey across targeted sections of either the seafloor or, for other key science
needs, the underside of floating ice-shelves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-
institutional team of oceanographic engineers and scientists will use the
lightweight fiber-optic tether and optical modem technologies that have recently
been pioneered at WHOI Deep Submergence to provide solutions to both of these
obstacles. Specifically, it is sought to develop a new polar remotely operated
underwater vehicle, provisionally denoted PROV, capable of deployments in polar
(including ice-covered) ocean regions traditionally considered inaccessible,
except for the specific case of thick ice cover that can be accessed from
vehicles and instrumentation designed for through-ice deployment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In polar oceans, the vehicle will have a unique research
role to play at the coastal seafloor, in mid-water, and at ice-ocean boundaries,
ranging from studying heat-flow beneath the Arctic ice-cap, investigating
melting beneath the terminal glacial outlets of Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets, investigating ecosystem function and productivity associated with the
calving of icebergs, and annual onset and melting of sea-ice. The PROV will
equip the polar ocean sciences research community with unique capabilities
otherwise not available, enabling US polar and ocean scientists to continue to
lead compelling and urgent research into one of Earth's most pristine and
increasingly changing natural environments.