* 1126938
* Plant Host Control and Feedback Responses to Phyllosphere Microbes:  Change in Metagenomes and Plant Traits in Response to Environmental Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Barbara Methe, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 08/31/2015
* USD 601,475.00

PI: Ann E. Stapleton (University of North Carolina -
Wilmington)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Barbara Methé (J. Craig Venter
Institute), Bradley W. Goodner (Hiram College), and Stuart G. Gordon
(Presbyterian College)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant growth and water relations can
be affected by microbes on the leaf surface (the phyllosphere), either
negatively through increased cuticle permeability or positively by increased
water use efficiency. Plant leaf features thus interact with microbial
characteristics and the abiotic environment to shape the adaptive landscape of
the above-ground community. Limited water availability reduces maize (Zea mays
L.) yield world-wide. Projections of crop effects under climate change indicate
that water availability will decline, and water demand will increase. Maize leaf
microbial community features are correlated with drought tolerance loci. The
project will examine the association of phyllosphere microbes with maize drought
responses using metagenomics to identify relevant functional genes. Better
understanding of plant above-ground interactions with microbial inhabitants has
the potential to fundamentally change breeding approaches for drought
tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biology taught to high school students and
undergraduates is increasingly distant from research biology. As a result, many
of the best high-school students leave science behind as they choose college
majors. Bridging these gaps is important to convince talented students that
biology is relevant in their lives and that they can understand and be part of
the scientific research enterprise. A decade ago genomics and bioinformatics
started to provide integrated, "same-time" teaching/learning/research
opportunities. Metagenomics is the next step up not just in terms of new
research techniques and findings, but also in terms of getting students at
multiple educational levels to connect genetics to ecology and physiology, and
to better appreciate the roles of the vast diversity of microbes in natural and
human altered habitats all over the planet. The project will build on past
success in merging genomics research with education to include large
metagenomics datasets. There is ample evidence from previous work that students
can make significant research contributions. The project will develop the
connections from the proposed experimental work to courses and develop cutting-
edge functional tests compatible with undergraduate labs for biochemical
activities emerging from the gene set found in the phyllosphere. All sequence
data can be accessed at the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) and/or the European
Bioinformatics Institute's European Nucleotide Archive (ENA). Metadata
associated with the sequence reads and other types of data such as assemblies,
annotation and metadata will also be deposited with the sequence reads as
allowable through GenBank.