* 1126854
* MRI: Development of a COIFM with Lateral Modulation for Studying Interfacial Water
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Byung Kim, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 342,001.00

Technical Abstract

The purpose of this project is to develop a cantilever-based optical interfacial
force microscope (COIFM) with lateral modulation (CLM) to study interfacial
water confined between two surfaces both in ambient and fluid environments. The
CLM enables us to measure both normal and friction forces between two surfaces
without the snap-to-contact problem associated with conventional atomic force
microscope systems, by using a voltage-activated force feedback. The three-year
project consists of two years of development phase and one year of research
phase using the instrument. During the development phase, the PI and students
will design and construct the CLM, and will demonstrate its capability by
revealing the hidden structure of interfacial water. During the research phase,
the CLM will contribute to diverse interfacial water research projects across
several disciplines, including physics, biology, chemistry, and biochemistry.
The successful development of the CLM will allow us to explore the origin of the
surprising oscillatory forces found recently by our existing COIFM, as the
nanoscale distance between two surfaces was varied. The CLM will also be applied
to investigate the roles of water in inter-molecular/ inter-surface friction and
in the reduction of the friction in water-based bio-materials such as artificial
cartilage. The hands-on experience acquired through this project will help
prepare students for competitive placement in graduate programs or careers in
nano/biotech industries. Three graduate and three undergraduate students will be
involved in the research project for over a three-year period. In addition, the
project will help develop a biophysics curriculum strand for a future
interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in Biomolecular Sciences at Boise State
University.

Non-technical Abstract

The purpose of this project is to develop a cantilever-based optical interfacial
force microscope (COIFM) with lateral modulation (CLM) to study interfacial
water at the molecular scale. This CLM will enable us to measure interfacial
forces generated by interfacial water for all distance ranges between two
surfaces. The CLM's force-distance curves will provide unprecedented information
on interfacial water to understand its structure and mechanical properties. The
three-year project consists of two years of development phase and one year of
research phase using the instrument. During the development phase, the PI and
students will design and construct the CLM, and will demonstrate its capability
by revealing the hidden structure of interfacial water. During the research
phase, the CLM will be applied to investigating the roles of water in (1)
mediating inter-molecular interactions between two surfaces, and in (2) reducing
the friction in water-based bio-materials, such as artificial cartilage. This
instrument will promote research collaborations among disciplines, including
physics, biology, chemistry, and biochemistry. It will greatly improve the
research infrastructure at Boise State University (BSU) and the surrounding
areas, as BSU is the only research-level educational institution in southwestern
Idaho, which is the population center of the state. In addition, the project
will help develop a biophysics curriculum strand for a future Ph.D. program at
BSU. This project will provide research opportunities for three graduate and
three undergraduate students over a three-year period.