* 1126150
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Research and Undergraduate Research Training at Pace University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Horne, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 335,972.00

This NSF MRI Award funds the acquisition of a confocal laser scanning microscope
that will facilitate student and faculty research at Pace University. The most
fundamentally important functionality that will be gained by this acquisition is
the ability to do 3-dimensional imaging in live organisms. Some of the research
projects that will be facilitated include 3-dimensional imaging of neuronal
differentiation in live zebrafish embryos; in vivo imaging in juvenile squid in
order to assess the molecular mechanisms important for a symbiotic relationship
between bacteria and squid; 3-dimensional imaging in Arabidopsis plants to
assess the molecular mechanisms, and environmental influences, of stomatal
development; and multicolor fluorescent protein imaging in cancer cells to
assess the subcellular localization and interaction of specific molecular
pathways controlling cell growth, division, and apoptosis. For all of these
projects, the ability to image non-invasively in vivo greatly increases the
physiological relevance of the research questions that can be
addressed&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this confocal microscope will
also give the diverse undergraduate student body at Pace University exposure to
leading-edge experimental approaches. The undergraduate curriculum in biology,
chemistry, and physics requires an independent student research project. Thus,
with the acquisition of this confocal microscope, students will have the
opportunity to gain firsthand experience with imaging of cellular and molecular
processes in vivo, in live organisms. This gives students an opportunity to gain
an appreciation for how current approaches allow researchers to address more
meaningful questions about the molecular mechanisms important for biology, and
an understanding and appreciation for the possibilities of a career in the basic
sciences. In a similar vein, an established relationship between Pace University
and the Ossining High School Fundamentals of Science Research course will give
high school researchers the opportunity to employ current microscopy approaches
for their independent research projects.