* 1126572
* MRI: Development of a Sub-waivelength THz Spectral Imager for Photonic and Phononic Metamaterial and Devices Research at the Univesity of Arizona
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Pierre Deymier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 530,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to design and construct a state-of-the-art terahertz near-field
spectral imager. The approach is to combine recently developed computational
sensing techniques and metamaterial-inspired electrically-small antenna
technologies to achieve highly sub-wavelength imaging capabilities. This
enhanced imaging capability will transform the current understanding of physical
and biological processes as well as the engineering of terahertz devices and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
contrast to existing commercially available terahertz instrumentation, the
combination of advanced technologies will produce a terahertz near-field
spectral imager with unprecedented signal-to-noise ratio and
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;Participating students, postdocs, and faculty will gain
invaluable practical experience as the individual components are integrated over
the course of the project into a functioning state-of-the-art system that is
then used to explore cutting-edge applications in biology and materials. In
addition, the resulting instrument lays the groundwork for further research of
all types in the terahertz band.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting instrument will be made available not
only to local researchers, but also to the wider terahertz community including
local industry and national and international collaborators. This will allow the
instrument's unique capabilities to be brought to bear on a variety of terahertz
research areas with high societal and economic impact, including spectroscopy of
phononic nanostructures; investigations of passive and active metamaterials; and
studies of biological processes in single cells. These opportunities will
strongly encourage students, especially from underrepresented groups and
ethnically diverse populations, for example, the Native American Tohono O'odham
Nation, to participate.