* 1126887
* MRI: Development of a basin-scale water-balance instrument cluster for hydrologic, atmospheric and ecosystem science
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Roger Bales, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,985,280.00

1126887&lt;br/&gt;Bales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
grant supports development of a basin-scale (4,500 km2) integrated hydrologic
observation system in the Sierra Nevada Mountains spanning the rain-snow
elevation transition in the American River basin. The basin-scale instrument
will include 23 local sensor clusters each with 10-20 snow depth sensors and
meteorological sensors to include temperature, precipitation and humidity. A
subset of the clusters will have sensors for the measurement of incident and
reflected solar radiation, soil moisture and temperature and tree sap flow
sensors, the latter to elucidate the elevation dependent timing of the onset of
evapotranspiration in the spring. The basin-scale instrument design takes into
consideration the needs for integrated measurement of key water cycle
reservoirs, fluxes and their controlling factors in the high Sierras with sensor
cluster sitings across variable elevation, aspect, slope and vegetation cover.
All of the sensor observations will be tied with a wireless communications
strategy delivering real-time observations to a central information management
system that will be open for public access via the web. The need for
quantification of key water cycle reservoirs and the balances between them at
increased spatiotemporal scales is a long standing goal of the hydrologic
science community. The proposed hydrologic observation system focuses on a
snowpack dominated mountain ecosystem that supports the water needs of
California's Central Valley agribusiness empire and the needs of tens of
millions of California residents. The American River basin hydrologic
observatory will be unprecedented in scale and leveraged on existing NSF
investments in smaller prototype snow hydrology observations in the southern
Sierras and more widely distributed and focused ecohydrologic observations
funded through the Division of Earth Sciences Critical Zone Observatories (CZO)
program as part of the Southern Sierra CZO. Partnerships with relevant state
agencies including the California Department of Water Resources and the
Sacramento Municipal Utility District will foster and support the development.
Data generated from this observation system will inform new classes of modeling
tools to produce quantitative climate assessments, influence hydrologic
forecasting, probe system response to climate and land-cover perturbations,
increase process understanding of basin-scale water cycles, and provide
defensible scenarios for infrastructure planning at a scale currently not
possible. Scientific questions that will be addressable using collected
observations will include: 1)) How do physiographic and ecological patterns
influence the variability of mountain water fluxes?; 2) How do hydrologic
systems that are subjected to multiple perturbations respond?; 3) How do pulses
and changes propagate through the hydrologic system?; and 4) How can the
predictive ability for these responses be improved? &lt;br/&gt;The PI team
includes faculty at UC-Merced, a non-Ph.D. granting institution, with expertise
in hydrology and environmental engineering, and a USDA agency hydrologist. The
development will engage undergraduate students in construction and the wireless
telecommunication strategy and development will be accomplished through subaward
to support acquisition of wireless radio and miniaturized computing
architectures and for a collaborating computer scientist at UC-Berkeley who
specializes in wireless communications development to design and complete the
network topology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***