* 1126410
* MRI- Consortium: Acquisition of Cryogen-free Cryocooler-based Physical Property Measurement System to Support Transformative Device and Materials Research in the Rio Grande Valley
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Anvar Zakhidov, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 437,970.00

1126410&lt;br/&gt;Martirosyan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this grant
application is to acquire a cutting-edge commercial multi-functional instrument
Cryogen-free Cryocooler-based Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS
EverCool-II, Quantum Design, USA) to support fundamental and interdisciplinary
research projects and the applied physics education program in the Rio Grande
Valley, South Texas region. The equipment will be installed at the University of
Texas at Brownsville and will be used as a shared characterization facility.
This instrument is designed to measure a variety of materials properties
including magnetic, transport, and thermal under different temperatures (1.9 -
1000 K), magnetic fields (up to 9 T) and environments (from atmospheric pressure
to high vacuum). The system is cryogen-free and no costly liquid cryogens are
required. The attractive feature of the PPMS is a cryocooler to achieve
cryogenic temperatures. The PPMS EverCool-II is a highly automated instrument.
It can perform unattended measurements after the user has installed a sample and
configured the measurement. This acquisition will enhance the existing research
and educational infrastructure and will provide the state-of-the-art measurement
system to a broad range of users in State of Texas, thereby elevating advanced
materials research and educational programs in the Rio Grande Valley to a
globally competitive level.