* 1126224
* MRI: Acquisition of Electron-Beam Lithography for Nanofabrication in the North Texas Region
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Walter Hu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 700,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches: The objective of this research is to enable
the highest level nanoscale research within the entire north Texas region. The
approach is to acquire a Raith e-LiNE Plus E-Beam Lithography (EBL) tool. It
will be placed in the UTD Cleanroom Research Laboratory (CRL) to provide
advanced lithographic capabilities. There is no EBL capability in north Texas to
facilitate university and corporate research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This EBL tool will accelerate existing research and enable new research
avenues in an astonishing array of fields. Example areas enhanced include:
Nanoscale Electronic Devices, Sensors, Manufacturing, Materials, and Photonics.
Many researchers will be enabled by this EBL tool combined with the capabilities
already resident in the CRL. The CRL has a large and growing user base (&gt;210)
and the capability to make this EBL tool productive in the long term. UTD
faculty and staff, together with colleagues throughout north Texas have the
funding and expertise to make the most of this capability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The EBL acquisition will enhance a broad
range of activities, people, research areas, and institutions. It will enhance
research and education in the CRL including a variety of classes in multiple
disciplines, both graduate and undergraduate (crucial to UTD?s teaching
mission). In addition, it will enhance the training of high school students
through summer research programs. All nanoscale research can be enhanced and it
will foster new industrial collaborations. It will enable the researchers of
numerous major universities and companies throughout north Texas and beyond.