* 1126444
* MRI:Development of Gas Electron Multiplier Based Fluorescence X ray Detector for Dilute Elements
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Elhag Shaban, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2016
* USD 84,860.00

Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM) based
fluorescence X-ray gas detector is an indispensable tool for characterizing
dilute elements of 10 parts per million (ppm) and below using X-ray Fluorescence
Spectroscopy (XFS). When atoms of a dilute element in a sample are excited by a
tuned energy synchrotron radiation beamline, they emit weak X ray fluorescence
signal. The fluorescence X-ray signal has low penetrating power, is severely
attenuated by air, and ionizes few electrons in an ionization chamber. Detecting
the small primary electronic charge signal is very difficult using conventional
fluorescence detectors with low signal to noise (S/N) ratio. To improve the S/N
ratio, we propose to use a single and multiple gas electron multiplier (GEM) to
amplify the ionized primary electronic charge without noise in an ionization
chamber. The amplified charge will enhance the S/N ratio, improve the detection,
analysis, and facilitate to characterize dilute samples. Conventional
fluorescence detectors are affected by micro phonic vibrations, temperature,
light, have small S/N ratio, and occasional gain drift with time. The GEM based
detector is rigid, gas leak proof, allows cascaded multiple GEMs for gain
control, avoids spark discharge from high fields due to a single GEM, has noise
free electron amplification, and allows measuring fast signal with high rate
capability. The detector has flexible window size for x-ray entrance, flexible
solid angle of acceptance, variable GEM dimension, uses multiple gas mixtures,
operates at atmospheric pressure, and at room temperature. This project is
performed in collaboration with Morgan State University, Brookhaven National
Laboratory (BNL), and Southern University Baton Rouge to enhance, educate and
train minority students in building new detectors that will be used at the
National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) and at other national and international
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting dilute elements of ten parts per
million and below, in natural or manufactured samples requires a high signal to
noise (S/N) ratio detector. When a dilute element under test is excited by a
tuned energy synchrotron beamline, it releases a characteristic fluoresce X-ray
that is used to ionize a noble gas producing a charge signal. This primary
charge signal is too small to be detected because of the large noise
interference introduced by electronic amplifiers. The proposed detector uses a
gas electron multiplier (GEM) that multiplies or amplifies the small primary
charge created by the dilute element fluorescence X-ray. The GEM amplified
charge signal amplitude far exceeds the level of the noise produced by the
electronic amplifiers providing a high S/N ratio. This will allow better
detection and characterization of dilute elements in various samples. This
project is performed in collaboration with Morgan State University, Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL), and Southern University Baton Rouge to enhance,
educate, and train minority students in building new detectors that can be used
at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) and at other national and
international laboratories.