* 1126710
* MRI: Acquisition of An Isothermal Titration Calorimeter for Research and Teaching Creative Activities
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jean-Luc Montchamp, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 124,936.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Professor
Sergei Dzyuba from Texas Christian University and colleagues Jean-Luc Montchamp,
Onofrio Annunziata and Youngha Ryu will acquire an isothermal titration
calorimeter. The award will enhance research training and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as (a) functional nanogels based on poly(vinyl
alcohol)-ligand complexation, (b) non-hydrolyzable phosphinic DNA analogues, (c)
determination of interactions within supramolecular polymer networks, (d) ionic
liquid-assisted gelation of organic solvents, and (e) preparation of thiamine
pyrophosphate (TPP) analogues and evaluation of their binding affinity to the
TPP riboswitch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) is a
very sensitive thermodynamic technique that is used to characterize binding
interactions between species such as those between a small molecule and an
enzyme. ITC measures directly the heat absorbed or released during a binding
process. This provides insight on the strength of chemical and biochemical
binding interactions. The calorimeter will also be incorporated into several
upper division level laboratory classes at Texas Christian University but it
will also be accessible to neighboring institutions such as Texas Woman's
University, UT-Arlington, University of North Texas and the UNT Health Science
Center. This instrument will be used not only in research but also in
educational and outreach activities.