* 1126462
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Materials Characterization at Hope College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jennifer Hampton, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 214,750.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Professor
Jennifer Hampton from Hope College and colleague Mary Anderson will acquire an
atomic force microscope. The award will enhance research training and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) exploration of underlying
physical and chemical forces directing the assembly of asymmetrically-shaped
particles, (b) study of the morphology and surface functionalization of
intermetallic thin films and particles fabricated by solution-phase solid-state
chemistry methods, and (c) investigation of controlled nucleation and crystal
growth based on underlying thin organic films that are assembled on curved
surfaces and within constrained geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An atomic force
microscope is used to characterize surface topography on a nanoscale level,
distinguish different molecular coverage on surfaces, unfold polymers, calculate
substrate stiffness, and quantify interaction forces. The AFM generally has a
cantilever with a sharp point at its end used to scan the specimen surface. When
the tip is brought into proximity of a sample surface, forces between the tip
and the sample lead to a deflection of the cantilever. This deflection is often
measured using a laser spot reflected from the top surface of the cantilever
into a detector. This instrument will be used not only in research but also for
research training of students and for outreach activities.