* 1126357
* MRI: Development of a Shared Underwater Acoustic MIMO Networking Testbed
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Stella Batalama, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Proposal #: 11-26357 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Melodia, Tommaso; Atkinson, Joseph F;
Batalama, Stella; Pados, Dimitris A; Su, Weifeng&lt;br/&gt;Institution: SUNY -
Buffalo&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Shared Underwater Acoustic MIMO Networking
Testbed&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a novel
instrument and testbed environment based on a MIMO (Multiple-Input Multiple-
Output) networking testbed for underwater deployment. The proposed instrument is
based on a commercial system, i.e., Teledyne Bethos Telesonar modem, which would
be extended for reconfigurability and rapid deployment, and thus adopted for
wider usage. The basic extension of the existing commercial modem is the
addition of an external controller hosting an open-source software communication
suite. This software suite would provide the functionalities for reconfiguration
of various networking functions for underwater deployment. The proposed
instrument is expected to enable research in (i) underwater networking, (ii)
acoustic signal processing and communications, and (iii) environmental ecosystem
monitoring, modeling, and engineering, including:&lt;br/&gt;- MIMO underwater
acoustic transceiver designs via high-end Digital Signal Processor (DSP) and a
data recorder (hosted on the modems) for testing MIMO functions. &lt;br/&gt;-
New MAC and routing protocols for underwater MIMO links and their testing under
realistic conditions;&lt;br/&gt;- Collection of useful data that can be used in
analysis and validation of theoretical models; &lt;br/&gt;- Access interface in
order to allow other researchers to access the hardware;&lt;br/&gt;-
Applications in a variety of important water and sea floor observation
challenges, including earthquake and tsunami prediction, early warning and
observation applications, as well as long term observations on water quality,
currents, etc. in the Great Lakes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This
project, unique in its goals and expected results, will provide the research
community with an experimental platform for testing underwater communication
ideas. The testbed will benefit research on underwater networking, acoustic
underwater communications, and environmental monitoring. The developed testbed
will be a research and training facility for undergraduate and graduate
students, with unique theoretical and system design skills in underwater signal
processing, communications, and networking. The PI and Co-PIs have a strong
history and a current demonstration of their ability to attract and train both
women and minorities in their areas of research. Students, including minority
and women, will be engaged and a new course will be developed.