* 1126884
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TIMS) to strengthen collaborative inter-University programs in isotope geochemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Dennis Geist, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2017
* USD 726,786.00

Chemical and isotopic signatures allow us to age rocks, follow the fate and
transport of nutrients, reconstruct climate trends and study the migratory
behaviors of animals. As the need for high precision isotopic techniques in the
geological, ecological and climate sciences increases, it is critical to have
both the research infrastructure to address regional research needs as well as
the ability to train students on state-of-the-art equipment. This proposal is
for the acquisition of a Multi-Collector Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer
(MC-TIMS) at the University of Idaho. This major acquisition is intended to
foster an interdisciplinary regional center for isotope geochemistry and
environmental tracers, the Palouse Biogeosciences Collaborative (PBC), which
would support a wide array of ecological, biogeochemical and geological studies
and would fill a critical research and training need within the 3 partnering
universities; the University of Idaho (UI), Washington State University (WSU)
and Eastern Washington University (EWU). The methodological development and
application of environmental and isotopic tracers is an existing regional
strength as evidenced by several interdisciplinary research groups focused on
isotopic analyses of large-scale ecological, atmospheric, geologic, and
hydrologic phenomena. Investment in the new MC-TIMS technology will enable us to
build on this existing strength while we strategically foster research programs
that expand jointly across the three campuses. A Thermo Fisher Scientific MC-
TIMS, the Triton Plus along with the requested New Wave Micromill will provide
the capacity for high-precision and high resolution sampling for isotopic
analyses of geologic and biological materials. The requested instrument will
enable researchers to quantify the isotopes of solid-state, low-ionization
elements such as Nd, Pb, Ca, and Sr to understand origins, fates and transport
of materials from systems across spatial scales to better understand the life
history migratory salmon, the provenance of metamorphic belts, the origin and
evolution of magmas, and the source of atmospheric pollutants. Examples of
collaborative, interdisciplinary efforts that will be supported include
employing geochemical techniques and geologic principles to understand the
diversity and evolution of salmon migration in the Columbia
River.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three major integrated elements of this funded award
include: 1) a Multi-collector Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TIMS)
designed specifically for the high precision analysis of radiogenic and
cosmogenic isotope ratios; 2) a Retarding Potential Quadropole (RPQ) Lens, which
provides a selective filter for ions that are in high abundance and influence
the resolution of neighboring ions; and 3) a New-Wave Micromill for high spatial
resolution microsampling of solid materials such as melt inclusions, volcanic
crystals, and fish otoliths or earstones. Funding will complement existing
facilities at UI and WSU, establishing a powerful regional consortium for
training and engagement of isotopic and environmental tracers. The acquisition
of a MC-TIMS and emerging partnerships with new faculty at UI (Harpp) and young
investigators at EWU (Nezat), will galvanize a concerted effort to 1) create an
interdisciplinary program in biogeosciences that spans fields of ecology,
biogeochemistry, and geologic sciences and 2) recruit female students into the
field of isotope geochemistry. This critical mass of instrumentation and
personnel will provide the tools and resources to offer comprehensive programs
for training, outreach and engagement of undergraduates, graduate students, and
post-doctoral researchers across the region. The collaborators propose a new,
unique set of integrated undergraduate and graduate courses as well as workshops
to maximize the impact of the instrumentation. The University of Idaho has
pledged match to ensure the immediate acquisition and continued support of the
isotope facility, as the PBC directly aligns with signature areas of research
excellence for UI. Broad support across the participating universities
acknowledges the advantages of building a strong regional program in isotope
geochemistry.