* 1126375
* MRI-RUI: Acquisition of a Micro-Raman-Photoluminescence Instrument for Materials-Related Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Robert Mayanovic, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 391,765.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Micro-Raman spectroscopy is an indispensible investigative
tool for multicomponent analysis of non-transparent materials, quantitative
speciation analysis in aqueous fluids to supercritical conditions, local
mechanical stress analysis, and spectroscopic imaging of small sample domains.
Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy is invaluable for band gap determination in
semiconductors and analysis of impurity levels, optically active centers and
point defects in materials, whereas micro-PL is indispensible for resolution of
small optically active domains. The acquisition of a combined micro-Raman and
micro-PL system at Missouri State University will significantly enhance the
scientific performance of faculty and students in several materials-related
areas, including biomaterials and biodevices, hybrid biomolecular/inorganic
nanomaterials, opto- and magneto-electronics, and materials under extreme
environments. The micro-Raman-PL system will be used to investigate the
following areas of research at Missouri State University: 1) nanomaterials and
solutes in aqueous fluids to supercritical conditions for energy applications,
2) the optoelectronic properties of transparent conducting oxides for
photovoltaic and light emitting diode applications, 3) biomolecular interactions
between nucleic acids and proteins attached to nanomaterials, 4) lattice
structures and hydrate forms of WO3 nano- and micro-crystallites, 5) structural
properties of carbon nanotubes and graphene, 6) biomolecule-Co/Au-nanoparticle
interactions, 7) functional surface modification of metal oxide nanoparticle
(MONP)-biomolecule hybrid systems, and 8) ferroelectric domain dynamics in
multiferroic thin films. The micro-Raman-PL system will also contribute greatly
toward outreach and educational programs, broaden interdisciplinary cooperation
between science departments at Missouri State University, and enhance
collaborations with other institutions and high-tech
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: &lt;br/&gt;The advancement of
materials-related technologies, such as for energy applications, nanotechnology,
photonics, electronics, biotechnology, transportation, and for drug delivery
systems and medical diagnostics, depends upon the fundamental understanding of
the bonding, vibrational, structural, and other physico-chemical properties of
the relevant materials. From interaction with light at the atomic level, Raman
spectroscopy provides extremely valuable information about the vibrational
properties, which are directly related to the bonding and structural properties,
of a given material. Similarly, by stimulation from light, PL spectroscopy is
able to provide information about the energetics of itinerant vs. bound
electrons and impurities in semiconductors, and of the optical properties of
point defects and active centers in materials. The state-of-the art micro-Raman-
PL instrument requested in this proposal will provide an extremely valuable new
research and teaching tool to complement an array of existing facilities and
characterization tools utilized for investigation of a wide range of materials
at Missouri State University. The utilization of a laser micro-beam probe with
Raman or PL will provide for high-resolution imaging of optically active micro-
regions, micro-crystallites, and ferroelectric domains in materials. The
valuable training provided to students on the micro-Raman-PL instrument through
work on research projects outlined in this proposal will be useful for their
future employment in high-tech industry and research labs. The micro-Raman-PL
system will contribute greatly toward outreach and educational programs
targeting K-12 students for pursuit of careers in science and engineering. The
micro-Raman-PL system will help stimulate collaboration among faculty and
students within Missouri State University and enhance collaborations with other
institutions.