* 1126750
* MRI:   Acquisition of New Fluorescence/DIC Microscope with Computing Station for Research and Student Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* James Johnson, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 161,483.00

Central Washington University (CWU) is a Baccalaureate and Masters Granting
Institution located in a rural agricultural region about 110 miles east of
Seattle on the other side of the Cascade Mountains. CWU has a student population
of about 9,000 students with about 20% minority enrollment. The five
investigators from the departments of Biology and Chemistry are requesting
acquisition of instrumentation to enhance their existing microscopy facility.
This acquisition will greatly enhance the teaching, training and research
infrastructure at CWU. The specific instrument is a new Leica DM5500 compound
microscope system with fluorescence and differential interference contrast (DIC)
capabilities. The proposal includes a vibration isolation table and a
computational workstation that are necessary for utilizing the full capabilities
of the microscope. To facilitate fluorescence visualization in multiple colors
the microscope will be equipped with fluorescence-compatible objective lenses; a
broad-spectrum (ultraviolet through infrared), high intensity light source; and
multiple filters that allow specific wavelengths to be used for different
experiments. Fluorescence microscopy will be used by nearly all the
investigators to analyze fluorescently labeled cell organelles such as nuclei,
mitochondria and axons. It will also be used to characterize multiple genes and
proteins that are present in the cells of organisms ranging from extremophile
bacteria to microscopic worms to developing chick and adult mouse brains. The
DIC capability will allow investigators to visualize (and ultimately measure
sizes of) structures within a tissue or within cells that have not been treated
with a fluorescent or histological stain. This optical capability is necessary
for investigators who study the growth of diverse fungi and those who need to
visualize unstained cells and tissue in the worm and chick brain. Similar to the
fluorescence capabilities, these DIC optics require highly specialized objective
lenses, filters and prisms in the light path of the microscope. In order to
document results of experiments, digital cameras and a computer are necessary.
Because some investigators will photograph with brightfield (normal white) light
and others will photograph fluorescent images, two different cameras are
required. Each is specialized for high image quality and accurate, quantitative
representation of the brightfield or fluorescent specimen. Additionally, intense
computational power is required for many of the analyses that will be performed
on the images obtained. The requested computer has storage space for the many
large images that will be collected, and it will be equipped with state-of-the-
art software for performing the following functions: Deconvolution is a
technique to analyze multiple focal planes of a specimen to digitally subtract
unfocussed material in order to highly clarify the final image. Quantitation of
fluorescence intensity will allow automated counting and measurement of sizes of
labeled structures such as bacteria, axons, and mitochondria; it will also allow
comparison of biochemical and DNA differences among experimental groups.
Computerized control of the microscope stage allows stage movements to be
calibrated and quantitated in order to measure the size of a three-dimensional
specimen that cannot be visualized completely in one image.

The investigators involved in this proposal are studying areas of Biology that
are as diverse as cell and developmental neuroscience, systematics and biology
of fungi and fungus-like protists, microbial ecology of extreme environments and
mitochondrial mechanisms of protection from oxidative stress. Each of these
areas requires the scientists to be able to correlate molecular and biochemical
changes with changes in cell structure and behavior. The most advanced
microscopy instrumentation is required to analyze and document cellular and
subcellular processes, such as changes in neuronal connections during
development and behavioral adaptation, morphological differences among known and
newly characterized fungi and protists, viral interactions with extreme
microbes, and alterations to mitochondria in response to stress. Acquisition of
this instrument will enable the investigators to establish and extend their
research in these areas and to continue to train undergraduate and graduate
students in their laboratories. Indeed, the Biology and Chemistry departments at
CWU are able to incorporate many undergraduate students in the ongoing research.
Undergraduates find it relatively easy to get involved with at least one
research professor and typically disseminate this research through presentations
and publication. Furthermore, the faculty are committed to incorporating
inquiry-based teaching and technical training of students in laboratory classes.
The acquisition of this instrumentation will allow even more undergraduates and
masters-level graduate students to have access to state-of-the-art research
microscopes as they train to become future scientists. CWU has established and
provided support for several programs such as the Science Honors Program for
undergraduate research and competitive funds for research and travel. CWU also
has externally funded programs such as the NSF-funded Science Talent Expansion
Program and Department of Education's McNair Scholars Program, both of which
include efforts to increase recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups
in science. CWU is implementing interdisciplinary watershed research into local
middle and high schools through the NSF-supported GK12 Grant, Yakima WATERS,
which places graduate fellows into schools to incorporate inquiry-based
education into the curriculum. The investigators on this proposal are actively
involved in these programs.