* 1126420
* MRI: Acquisition of a flow field-flow fractionation system to enhance colloidal research and education at USM
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2012
* USD 161,910.00

The PI's request funding to acquire an asymmetric flow field-flow fractionation
(FFF) system. This instrument will support cross-disciplinary faculty research
that integrates graduate and undergraduate education with research. The
requested instrument will add new research capabilities, support and augment
graduate education and ongoing research projects in natural colloids and
nanoparticles in aquatic systems. It has been shown that colloids and
nanoparticles are important intermediaries in regulating the concentration and
speciation and thus the fate, transport and bioavailability/toxicity of many
chemical species and contaminants in aquatic environments. However, quantitative
characterization of natural colloids and knowledge of their environmental
behavior remains scarce. Flow field-flow fractionation is a chromatograph-like
elution technique capable of simultaneous separation and characterization of
colloids, nanoparticles and macromolecules. It has the advantages of providing a
continuous size distribution or size spectrum of colloids and other
nanoparticles. By interfacing directly or indirectly with other online or
offline detection techniques such as ICP-MS and gamma/alpha spectrometer, it
will allow the elucidation of pathways and mechanisms in the interactions
between colloids/macromolecules and trace metals and radionuclides in aquatic
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
requested instrument will add new research capabilities, support and augment
graduate education and our ongoing research projects in natural colloids and
engineered nanoparticles in aquatic systems. The new instrument will integrate
graduate and undergraduate research training with education in marine
biogeochemical and environmental research. USM is an EPSCoR institution with
over 27% minorities so this facility would enhance the training and support of a
diverse workforce. Collaborators from several nearby academic institutions and
federal agencies have also declared that this system would be utilized by them
if brought to USM.