* 1126709
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hybrid GPU Computing Cluster High-End Applications in Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Brett Esry, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2014
* USD 700,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-26709&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Andresen, Daniel; Caragea, Doina;
Dodds, Walter K; Esry, Brett; Steward, David R. &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Kansas
State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/ Acq.: A Hybrid GPU Computing Cluster
High-End Applications in Science and Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a hybrid computing cluster for high-
end applications in science and engineering, services, among others,
bioinformatics, ecological modeling, and physics. GPU-based computing support
for distributed memory parallel applications constitutes a specific novel
feature of the cluster.&lt;br/&gt;The work aims to support the following
activities:&lt;br/&gt;- Modeling genomes, hyper-extractive economies, and
ecological forecasting (by bringing much greater computational power)
and,&lt;br/&gt;- Enabling new science utilizing the instrument to develop new
algorithms in physics modeling and genomics. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Mainly, the multidisciplinary nature of the proposed research
provides the broader impacts. Expected are large broader impacts on basic
physics research. It is expected to also impact on medicine through the
development of better molecular models to view how our proteins and membranes
interact. Planned are training activities of a new generation of researchers in
tools and techniques for high-performance computing. The PIs would build on the
broad past experience in preparing widely-used undergraduate and graduate
educational materials, allowing students to perform real-world projects and
impacting K-12 and STEM education. Hence, the project aims to significantly
enhance and integrate our educational efforts at the K-12, undergraduate and
graduate levels in bioinformatics.