* 1126998
* IPGA:  Developing an Effective, Portable Annotation Engine for Plant Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2016
* Ning Jiang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 10/31/2016
* USD 3,626,169.00

PI: Mark Yandell (University of Utah)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Kevin Childs,
Ning Jiang, Shin-Han Shiu, and Yanni Sun (Michigan State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's DNA sequencing technologies are greatly
increasing the availability of genome sequences. These genome sequences have
great potential to increase agricultural productivity and provide a foundation
for modern, genome-based research. Unfortunately a genome sequence in-and-of
itself is of little use unless the locations of the genes within it are
identified and their parts properly mapped. The process of locating and mapping
the structures of genes within a genome sequence is called genome annotation.
Researchers are finding that plant genomes are difficult to annotate for several
technical reasons; for example, plant genomes tend to be repeat rich and are
often polyploid. The purpose of this project is to adapt and extend MAKER, an
established annotation tool, for use on plant genomes. Doing so will help to
unlock the potential of sequenced plant genomes to empower genomics- based plant
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
produce a plant genome optimized annotation pipeline that can be widely used by
the plant research community and will be incorporated as part of the iPlant
Cyberinfrastructure. The project will also provide outreach to the plant
genomics community by means of tutorials given at various scientific meetings in
genome annotation on how to use the MAKER-based plant genome optimized
annotation tool. These tutorials will allow smaller plant genome projects to
annotate their genomes and to distribute the resulting gene models; in turn,
this will enable downstream comparative and functional genomics studies by third
parties. Source code will be freely available and distributed in publicly
announced releases at http://www.yandell-lab.org. Stable versions will be
available by anonymous FTP and HTTP as software archives (*.tar.gz files).
Finally, developer and candidate releases will be managed via subversion
repositories. MAKER download pages can be accessed at http://www.yandell-
lab.org/software/index.html.