* 1126119
* MRI: Acquisition: MALDI-TOF/TOF Mass Spectrometer for Multidisciplinary Research and Teaching at an Undergraduate College for Women
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Gary Harris, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 398,177.00

A grant has been awarded to Wellesley College under the direction of Dr. Vardar-
Ulu to acquire a Bruker Daltonics Autoflex Speed MALDI-TOF/TOF mass
spectrometer, with the capability for MS/MS Peptide sequencing, MALDI imaging,
and matrix-free targets for small molecule analysis for interdisciplinary
research at an undergraduate college. A mass spectrometer is an instrument that
can very accurately determine the mass of intact proteins, fragments of proteins
(peptides) or even their building blocks (amino acids). In the past ten years,
mass spectroscopy has become the method of choice for biologists, biological
chemists, and chemists studying the structural and functional features of large
molecules. Since the acquisition of the first mass spectrometer Omniflex MALDI-
TOF in 2003 (also acquired through the NSF-MRI program), mass spectrometry has
become a key element in the research programs of many of the Wellesley College
faculty and has been impetus for the development of discovery-based teaching
laboratories for several courses at the college. However, this instrument is now
a discontinued platform that can no longer meet the current research and
training needs of the faculty and students. This new instrument will not only
enhance the existing research capabilities, but also provide additional
capabilities for new research in this rapidly advancing field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to allow undergraduate
students and faculty from several departments both within and outside the
college to engage in collaborative efforts to address important research
questions in biology, chemistry, and neuroscience. As summarized below, the
described projects are very diverse in their scope and will utilize many of the
new features of this instrument as well as its routine uses. Several projects
involve organisms whose genomes have been solved and will use the MALDI-TOF to
identify novel proteins within interacting complexes, while others will benefit
from the additional new capabilities this instrument offers such as protein
sequencing and MALDI Imaging. Project 1 (chemistry) will use MS to identify the
exact cleavage site from the potential autolysis of a crucial signaling molecule
(Notch protein) while Project 2 (Biology) will verify phosphorylation sites
within Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins that specifically require cytoplasmic
mitotic cyclins for phosphorylation. Projects 3 (biology), 5 (chemistry), 7
(neuroscience) will use MS to identify proteins that interact with the blue
light receptors PHOT1 and PHOT2 in leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana, intracellular
targets of histone-derived antimicrobial peptides, and novel proteins in the
steroid receptor complex from female mouse brain, respectively. Project 4
(Biology) will use the new MALDI imaging feature to image the internal tissues
of insects while project 6 (chemistry and biology) will use it to demonstrate
the feasibility of using gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) as targeted vehicles for
biomedical research. There are also specific plans to enhance the curricular
uses for the instrument in the undergraduate lab settings at both intermediate
and advanced levels through a discovery-based laboratory in proteomics, as well
as in organic chemistry and biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
merit of these projects and their focus on the teaching and research training of
female undergraduates, speaks directly to the intellectual merit of this
proposal. Wellesley's productive record in the education of women scientists,
along with its recent progress in attracting more underrepresented minorities to
the sciences, bodes well for the sustained and broad impact of this
instrumentation on research and training, and justifies its acquisition as a
critical investment in the next generation of scientists. The encouragement of
talented young women to choose careers in the sciences will ultimately
strengthen the infrastructure of the scientific community in the United States
and yield benefits to all members of our society. The primary mission at
Wellesley College is the undergraduate education of women who will make a
difference in the world. This commitment has taken on a special meaning in the
sciences where women have traditionally been underrepresented. The permanent
faculty of 14 in the Department of Biological Sciences, 12 in Chemistry and 4 in
the Neuroscience program maintain high standards for both research and research
training for undergraduates with extramural funding supporting productive
research programs that also are focused on training undergraduate students.
Therefore, the mass spectrometer will not only have an impact on research
training, but will also enhance the research environment for a high proportion
of our faculty. The results of these research efforts will be broadly
disseminated via abstracts, reviewed publications and by active participation of
students and faculty at professional meetings. The benefit to society as a whole
will be the increased participation of women in the scientific community of the
United States and increased scientific literacy in the population.