* 1126327
* MRI: Development of Custom Platform with Parallel Application from Rapid Simulation (PARS) Interconnecting DSPs and FPGAs for High Performance Computing.
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Tai-Chi Lee, Saginaw Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2014
* USD 123,144.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-26327&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Lee, Tai-Chi; Freed, Alan D;
Hallouche, Farid; Kotsidou, Kassiani&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Saginaw Valley State
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Custom Platform with Parallel Application
from Rapid Simulation (PARS) Interconnecting DSPs and FPGAs for High Performance
Computing.&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing an
instrument for high performance computing based on PARS technology with multiple
digital signal processors (DSP) and field programmable field arrays (FPGAs) (as
well as inclusion of an embedded processor with custom instructions capability,
a development tool from Altera EP1C12 NIOS II), allows users to run their
applications on the entire system within the Simulink environment and then
automatically generate code for multi-DSP and multi-FPGA in the system. The
research activities enabled by this instrument are expected to spotlight the
need for adding the capabilities of parallel processing and reconfigurability
offered by FPGA and DSP, as well as suggest important applications of the
instruments in various areas of science. These areas include mathematics (number
theory, fixed point mapping), computer science (data structures, algorithm
analysis, computer architectures, and networking), and engineering. The
instrument will service the following five projects: &lt;br/&gt;- Fractal image
compression, &lt;br/&gt;- Cryptosystem with elliptic curve, &lt;br/&gt;-
Experimental soft-tissue mechanics, &lt;br/&gt;- Image processing, and
&lt;br/&gt;- DSP implementation for measuring ultrasonic
waves.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the platform
will provide the faculty members from many disciplines a parallel platform
including both DSPs and FPGAs, and expose cutting-edge computing to students.
Students will be trained in the use of new and novel technologies that might
impact an economically depressed area by providing a trained workforce. SVSU has
good outreach to secondary school teachers and K-12.