* 1126540
* MRI:  Acquisition of Digital Image Correlation System for Real-Time 3D Measurements and Closed-Loop Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Gangbing Song, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project involves acquisition of a
Digital Image Correlation System. The photogrammetric technology provides full-
field non-contact measurements of 3D displacements of complex test systems in
real-time. The intent is two-fold, (a) to detect and visualize emerging cracks
and strain concentrations on test articles without the use of traditional
contact measurements such as strain gauges and differential transducers, and (b)
to develop an adaptive feed-back signal for controlling the force input in the
pre- and post-failure regime. The 3-D DIC measurement system by Trilion Inc.
includes four pairs of 12 megapixel digital cameras, the Tritop coordinate
measurement system, an image processing workstation and controller, and the
Aramis processing software with a real-time interface for control. Each pair of
digital cameras is mounted on a tripod with dedicated lighting to provide a
series of stereoscopic images of the test article within the field of view. The
Aramis processing software tracks the coordinates of 10,000+ facet points. It
provides deformation field data for structural materials testing up to and
beyond their maximum load resistance, and progressive failure such as crack
initiation and propagation in structural components and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The portable instrumentation system will provide
new opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to acquaint themselves
with the capabilities of digital image correlation systems and their application
to a variety of research projects spanning from testing materials and
infrastructural components to biomedical applications. Under the direction of
eleven faculty, students in Civil and Mechanical Engineering will be trained in
(a) the use of powerful imaging to track emerging failure mechanisms, and (b)
the field of servo-controlled testing of materials and structures.