* 1126935
* Intersection of the Plant Epigenome and Bioenergetics in Phenotypy
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Sally Mackenzie, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2013
* USD 599,998.00

S. Mackenzie, PI, University of Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;M. Fromm, coPI, University of
Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;B. Yu, coPI, University of Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;A. Lorenz,
coPI, University of Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;D. Wang, collaborator, University of
Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;J.-J. Riethoven, collaborator, University of
Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondria and chloroplasts serve as
bioenergetic focal points of the cell, compartmenting the metabolic
underpinnings of cellular function. Likewise, they act as key environmental
stress sensors, and are vital to processing plant defense responses. Yet, their
integration to a systems model for the plant cell has been complicated by
inability to perturb their functions with adequate specificity. This research
team has implemented an elegant approach to alter mitochondrial and chloroplast
properties that focuses on manipulation of a single nuclear gene, MSH1 (MutS
homolog 1). Loss of MSH1 function produces organelle changes to condition
distinct plant growth phenotypes without altering genotype of the plant. These
include dramatic changes in growth rate, flowering time, reproduction,
chloroplast development, and biotic and abiotic stress responses. it is
postulated, as the central hypothesis to this research, that the msh1-associated
organelle alterations cause heritable, programmed changes to the plant
epigenome. The planned investigations capitalize on recent key observations
involving MSH1, and implement cross-species comparative analysis in transcript
profile-based dissection of emergent phenotypes. The project tests for msh1
effects on small RNA and DNA methylation changes, using Arabidopsis as an
initial model for future tests in sorghum and soybean. The collaboration
combines expertise in organelle biology, quantitative genetics, epigenetics and
next-gen sequence technologies to investigate the influence of organelle signals
on the plant epigenome. These studies address major unanswered questions in
biology regarding the mode of trans-generational transmission of stress signals
and the role of organelles as stress sensing components of the plant
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Since Darwin's time, geneticists
have speculated about the underlying basis of hybrid vigor and trans-
generational adaptations to stress. While more recent evidence has suggested an
epigenetic nature to these phenomena, direct investigation of the process
linking bioenergetic or environmental sensing with epigenetic programs in the
cell has generally been intractable. The system we investigate may prove
invaluable in addressing these processes. Consequently, this research could have
important implications for the plant breeding process and for our understanding
of plant defense and adaptation. These studies will incorporate high school and
undergraduate students in summer research activities, as part of our program to
encourage careers in science research.