* 1126282
* Development: A Single-Ion Penning Trap Mass Spectrometer (SIPT) for Very Rare Isotopes Produced via Projectile Fragmentation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Georg Bollen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 585,564.00

High-precision Penning trap mass spectrometers have been developed at several
rare-isotope facilities around the world due to the extraordinary precision and
accuracy that has been demonstrated in determining a fundamental property of a
nucleus, its mass. Penning trap mass spectrometers determine the mass of a
charged particle via a measurement of its cyclotron frequency in a strong
magnetic field. At present, Penning trap mass spectrometers for rare isotopes
employ a time-of-flight ion cyclotron resonance (TOF-ICR) detection scheme which
is universal but typically requires at minimum rate of rare isotope ions of at
least a few ions per hour. In order to overcome this sensitivity limit the group
will develop, build, and install a dedicated Single Ion Penning Trap
Spectrometer (SIPT) mass spectrometer using a 6 Tesla magnetic field provided by
a superconducting solenoid and employing the narrowband Fourier Transform Ion
Cyclotron Resonance (FT-ICR) method. The technique will be optimized for the
study of very rare isotopes provided only at very low rates, one per day or
week, a rate that prohibits the use of the TOF-ICR technique. The narrowband FT-
ICR method uses a tuned, superconducting circuit to amplify the signal generated
by a single charged particle on the electrodes of the Penning trap as it moves
around inside the trap. By performing a Fourier analysis on the amplified
signal, the cyclotron frequency can be determined. As narrowband FT-ICR is not
as universal as TOF-ICR, it is best used on candidates with extremely low
delivery rates and of great scientific interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed SIPT mass spectrometer will have a broad significance and importance by
improving our ability to determine the mass of rare isotopes with unusual ratios
of the number of neutrons and protons, much different from those found in stable
isotopes, as they exist on Earth. The determination of the masses of such exotic
and often very short-lived rare isotopes is of utmost importance since it
provides direct information on how tightly the neutrons and protons are bound in
the atomic nucleus. Masses of rare isotopes serve as input data in a variety of
fields of science, such as nuclear structure, nuclear astrophysics, and
fundamental interactions. For example, rare isotopes are produced in abundance
in stellar environments and play a key role in the star's evolution but the
production on earth in rare isotope beam facilities is very challenging, and for
many important isotopes the beam rates are very low. SIPT's highly sensitive
technique will be capable of making a mass measurement with only a single rare
isotope ion, pushing the frontier of precision mass measurements of rare
isotopes to more exotic isotopes. The development of this technology will also
be of benefit for future use at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB). We
believe that the interdisciplinary nature of the SIPT project is well suited for
attracting and educating students from underrepresented groups, resulting in a
stronger research program and greater cultural awareness for everyone involved.