* 1126845
* MRI: Acquisition of a Powder/Thin Film X-ray Diffractometer
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* David Belanger, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2014
* USD 250,510.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to
establish the first modern powder/thin film X-ray diffractometer on the UC Santa
Cruz campus. At present, thin film, in-situ variable temperature/atmosphere,
reflectance, scattering and powder refinement data are not possible on campus.
Current research needs across multiple departments in both the science and
engineering divisions guarantee that the proposed instrumentation will operate
and remain at full capacity immediately upon installation. Space for the
instrument has already been assigned in the X-ray facility (PI Oliver is the
director). The very user-friendly Rigaku SmartLab system and its automated
changing of sample stages would facilitate the multiuser environment and thus
training of graduate, undergraduate and postdoctoral researchers across many
disciplines. Samples from nearby state university campuses will also be
analyzed. The equipment will impact several NSF and NIH funded campus minority
programs as well as a series of undergraduate and graduate courses. The
multidisciplinary aspects of the project tie in perfectly with the goals of the
MRI program and the campus initiative in materials. Within the last two months,
plans have initiated to establish a Department of Materials Science and
Engineering at UC Santa Cruz, led by Co-PI Ramirez who is also Dean of the
School of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UC Santa Cruz campus is in desperate need of
state-of-the-art equipment that will allow researchers to study materials in a
variety of areas important to society including electronics, alternative energy,
sensors and biomaterials. The instrument uses X-rays to gain understanding of
the internal structure of bulk powders and thin films, which will allow them to
evaluate and further their externally funded research projects. Users across
campus in both science and engineering rely on these data and would continually
make use of the instrument. It would also impact several nearby state campuses
that are studying materials. A series of courses in chemistry, physics and earth
sciences would study the theory and use of the instrument, some with hands-on
training. Transfer students from nearby community that are involved in UC Santa
Cruz bridge programs would also make use of the instrumentation in their
research and courses. This proposal matches well with the expansion by UC Santa
Cruz into the area of materials, with a possible new Department of Materials
Science and Engineering with ties to industry in nearby Silicon Valley.