* 1126249
* MRI Consortium: Development of a Monochromator System for Enabling New Imaging and Submicron Probes for High Pressure Research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Guoyin Shen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 715,400.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks funds to acquire a
cryogenically-cooled, double-crystal, x-ray monochromator system for usage by
the HPCAT synchrotron consortium at the Advanced Photon Sources (APS), Argonne
National Laboratory. Acquisition of the state-of-the-art monochromator will
enable us to harness the full capacity of the new, powerful, canted undulator
source which is scheduled for installation this Fall according to the APS x-ray
source upgrade program. By handling the 5-10 times higher heat load from the
upgraded undulator and preserving the source size, stability, and coherence, the
proposed new monochromator system will improve the spatial and temporal
resolutions of high-pressure x-ray diffraction, spectroscopy and imaging
experiments by one to two orders of magnitude and will double the effective user
beam time. Such unprecedented advance in high-pressure synchrotron technology
will greatly enhance high-pressure physics research in areas of
superconductivity, ferroelectricity, colossal magnetoresistivity, phonon
dynamics, Fermi-surface nesting, d-electron spin pairing, f-electron
delocalization, and insulator-metal transition, and chemistry research in areas
of high-pressure syntheses and characterizations of novel nitrides, hydrides,
oxides, molecular compounds, crystal amorphization, bonding changes, and
photochemistry. The progresses in fundamental research, in turn, impact on the
applied sciences, ranging from the understanding the Earth's and planetary deep
interiors to the creations of novel and technologically important materials. The
timely upgrade of the world-class high-pressure synchrotron consortium is
essential for the U.S. high-pressure research and education community, and
benefits students and postdoctoral researchers who are the dominant users of the
consortium facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;Pressure is a fundamental environment that alters all states of
matter. In the currently accessible pressure range of 300 gigapascals (that is
three million times the pressure of the Earth's atmosphere at sea level),
ordinary materials transform to novel forms that may possess extremely useful
properties for modern technological applications. Realization of the enormous
potential in science and technology, however, relies upon the advancement of
instrumentation for probing these properties under the extreme pressures. We
propose to acquire a state-of-the-art high-pressure x-ray instrument, namely a
monochromator assembly, that can harness the full capacity of the powerful x-ray
source at the newly upgraded HPCAT facility. The proposed instrument will
provide atomic-scale clarity and millionth-of-a-second time resolution for
investigation of a wide range of pressure-induced phenomena. It will lead to
unprecedented advances in high-pressure materials research in physics, chemistry
and Earth sciences. The deep secrets hidden under the extreme pressures and
temperatures in the Earth's and planetary interiors will be unraveled.
Technologically useful materials will be discovered in the vast, unexplored,
high-pressure regime, and recovered for usage at ordinary conditions. The timely
upgrade of the world-leading high-pressure consortium facility is essential for
the U.S. high-pressure research and education community, especially for the
benefits of students and postdoctoral researchers who are the main users of the
facility.