* 1126200
* MRI:   Acquisition of an FEI Quanta 250 ESEM with EDS for research and  training in the HSU College of Natural Resources and Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Reiss, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 530,305.00

The College of Natural Resources and Sciences Core Facility at Humboldt State
University is a recently established shared-use laboratory for student and
faculty research. This award will allow the addition of a modern environmental
scanning electron microscope (ESEM) with back-scattered electron (BSE) imaging
and energy dispersive x-ray spectrometry (EDS) and supporting sample preparation
equipment to the facility, greatly increasing the range of studies that can be
undertaken. Planned research activities in the biological sciences include
investigations of the olfactory epithelium of amphibians, plant gravitropism,
bryozoan phylogeny, bee genitalia, fungal systematics, the neurobiology and
ecotoxicology of freshwater worms, the stomatal features of the world?s tallest
trees, developmental defects associated with sperm protein knockdown in C.
elegans, and bacterial interactions with mineral particles in acid lakes at
Lassen Volcanic National Park. In the earth sciences, studies will include
analyses of high-temperature, high-pressure mineralogy and petrology
experiments, the microstructures and rock textures formed in active fault zones,
the weathering properties of minerals and formation of soils, and the
microstructure of fossil plants. In the physical sciences, studies on the
surface properties of test masses will allow precise testing of the
gravitational inverse-square law. Humboldt State currently has no ESEM or EDS
capabilities, and is located in a rural area of northern California, far from
other universities and comparable instrumentation. The addition of an ESEM will
allow researchers and students interested in examination of fresh (hydrated)
biological specimens, and advanced elemental, textural, and material analysis to
conduct cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new CNRS Core Facility
represents the first major endeavor on the HSU campus to create a true
interdisciplinary, shared-use facility in the sciences. The ESEM will serve as a
keystone addition to the facility by bringing together researchers from
departments across the college. The instrument will enhance the experience of
students in the Electron Microscopy course, as well as in mineralogy, petrology,
and structural geology courses. Because the new instrument can be operated
remotely, it will also facilitate outreach activities to the local community
that are not currently possible. In particular, a permanent exhibit on
microscopic natural history will be established at the HSU Natural History
Museum, and live remote operations will be conducted there at yearly events.
Training institutes for secondary science teachers over the summer will be
followed in the fall by the opportunity for the teachers to remotely operate the
instrument to examine specimens that their students have collected, providing a
unique opportunity to high schools throughout rural northern California.