* 1126301
* MRI: Acquisition of Tip Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy System
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Joseph Gardella, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 325,645.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program that is
co-funded by Chemistry, Professor Frank Bright from SUNY Buffalo and colleagues
Joseph Gardella, Athos Petrou, Esther Takeuchi and Sarbajit Banerjee will
acquire a tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) system. The proposal is aimed
at enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) nanocrystalline sensor platforms, (b) vanadium dioxide and metal
vanadate (MxV2O5, where M = Na, K, Cu, Zn) nanowires, (c) biodegradable repair
and delivery constructs, (d) magneto-polarons within single ZnMnTe quantum dots,
(e) advanced energy storage materials, (f) nanodiamond-based separations, (g)
nanoscopic heterogeneity within antifouling and fouling release film surfaces,
(h) hydroxyapatite nucleation and growth, (i) organic nanotubes and periodic
nanomaterials, (j) substrate-catalyzed monolayer photolithography and energy-
conversion, (k) photo-crystallization within amorphous selenium, (l) development
of terahertz technologies based on graphene heterostructures, and (m) flexible
hybrid xerogel/Bragg grating platforms for wound sensing and
restitution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman spectroscopy is a vibrational
spectroscopy technique that serves as a powerful analytical tool to identify
sample structures. However, the intensity of normal Raman spectroscopy is not
very strong and thus ways to enhance the signal are essential. The tip-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (TERS) method is based on the combination of Raman
spectroscopy, surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and atomic force
microscopy (AFM). The TERS effect uses a metal-coated AFM tip as an antenna that
enhances the Raman signal coming from the sample area in contact with the tip.
Because the AFM tip is on the nanometer scale, it is possible to obtain
localized enhancement on the same scale. By differentiating the tip enhanced
Raman from the normal Raman (tip away from the sample) it is possible to obtain
Raman information from areas &lt;100 nm in diameter. The requested TERS system
will facilitate the characterization of thin films, nanostructures, and porous
surfaces and will serve to train undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
postdocs. It will also be used in outreach activities at the K-12 level.