* 1126382
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High-resolution Multi-material Printing System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Robert Peattie, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,702.00

The objective of this proposal is to obtain support for the purchase of a state-
of-the-art, ultra-high-resolution, 3-dimensional printing system for rapid
prototyping and rapid manufacturing of parts with complex shapes and complicated
material properties. The printing system will find its primary use in the
activities of the Tufts University biomechanics, biology and biomedical
engineering groups. The term "rapid prototyping" refers to the automated
construction of physical objects directly from computer aided design or
animation software. A variety of competing rapid prototyping technologies are
now commercially available. However, for our purposes, the least costly, easiest
to use, fastest and most flexible technology in terms of the variety of
different materials that can be processed to fabricate parts is 3-dimensional
printing. In this approach, photopolymer liquids are forced through inkjet print
heads to create the layers of the part, which then are cured and fused together
by ultraviolet light. The printing system will be the centerpiece of a
biomimetic biomechanics facility, in which it will be used to fabricate
essential parts that are the basis of the research activities of the Tufts
University biomechanics group, and that cannot be produced by any other method.
Use of this printing system in our interdisciplinary approach to biomechanics
will lead to (1) major breakthroughs in the understanding of biologic mechanical
systems and (2) novel applications of biologically inspired principles to
engineer mechanical devices and systems. A particularly novel aspect of this
work is that we seek to understand the role of tissue material properties in
living movements and to exploit materials to show similar properties to design,
build and control devices emulating biologic mechanical systems. Thus
acquisition of the printing system will significantly advance the field of
biomechanics, by providing a crucial part of the key instrumentation used in a
novel and innovative, biologically inspired, closed loop research and design
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By allowing the fabrication of complex parts with
advanced, non-uniform material properties, acquisition of the 3D printing system
will permit us to undertake a large set of projects that are presently not
possible due to part fabrication limitations. These projects will be central to
the biomimetic biomechanics facility, allowing us to design and fabricate novel
biomimetic devices and systems. Development of such devices and systems can in
due course significantly impact understanding of biomechanical systems and
thereby underlie new biologically inspired research and design approaches.
Furthermore, the proposed project will permit the PIs to continue to engage
undergraduate as well as graduate students in our ongoing research efforts,
expanding the research training, educational experience and opportunities
available to the students involved. Moreover, formal courses in which the
printing system will be used have been identified from the Tufts Departments of
Biology, Biomedical and Mechanical Engineering, and the Tufts Gordon Institute.
In addition, as part of the process of recruitment of students into our
projects, full attention will be given to the infrastructure in place at Tufts
for recruiting and retaining women and underrepresented minorities in research.
These include the New England Board of Higher Education Excellence through
Diversity Program, a major forum for recruitment of underrepresented minority
students, and formal ongoing outreach programs in Computer Science, Biomedical
Engineering and robotics, as well as the Tufts School of Medicine NIH-funded
minority outreach program, which has been highly successful in attracting
underrepresented undergraduate students to summer internships for the last ten
years.