* 1126027
* RAPID: Documenting Whistled Speech Among Chinantecans
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2012
* David Yetman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 10/31/2012
* USD 14,389.00

Whistled speech encodes a spoken language into a language of musical pitch that
can communicate across much greater distances than the voice can shout. Whistled
languages have arisen in history in cultures with inhabiting landscapes so
rugged as to make face-to-face communication economically and physically costly.
They have been used by herders and agriculturalists and have even been used by
militaries as secret codes, as when the Guanches of the Canary Islands rebelled
against the Spanish in 1488. Whistled speech in Sochi치pam Chinantec [cso] of
Cuicatl치n, Oaxaca, Mexico has quickly fallen out of use in the community. It
once had a central role in the day-to-day governing of the town where it was
used as a channel to carry information across a difficult landscape informing
local government authorities and committees of the times and places for meetings
and carrying news up and down the mountainsides. Long distance whistled language
has now been replaced with walkie-talkies. Today there are only about 25 elder
men capable of using the code fluently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from
the programs in Documenting Endangered Languages and Cultural Anthropology, this
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award will enable three researchers to carry out
the documentation of a disappearing whistled language of Mexico and its cultural
contexts of use. To respond to the serious endangerment and the absence of
documentation an interdisciplinary team combining a cultural ecologist, an
ethnographic linguist, and a videographer will record whistled speech in high-
definition video and uncompressed audio, and work with Sochi치pam elders to
transcribe the recordings. The investigators will host an educational workshop
for the community during their work in Sochi치pam. The project materials will be
useful for the speaker community in their efforts at cultural preservation, the
intellectual community to understand how much of a language can remain
perceptible when transformed into whistles, and to provide the raw video footage
to develop a public television documentary, a valuable tool for educating the
U.S. and Mexican publics about language endangerment.