* 1126544
* MRI: ACQUISITION OF AN IMAGING SURFACE PLASMON RESONANCE SPECTROMETER FOR QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF SURFACE ADSORBING SPECIES
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Ali Dhinojwala, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is an
evanescent wave refractive index measurement made at a metal-coated surface and
has been demonstrated to be a quantitative, sensitive, and label-free technique
for measuring the binding kinetics of proteins, DNA, cells, and small molecules
to surface-immobilized capture agents. The combination of imaging with SPR
(SPRI) allows sensitive and accurate quantification of cell areas and dynamic
changes in cell-substrate interactions such as membrane ruffling. SPRI also
affords quantification of secretion of proteins from cells, and changes in
surface protein density as a function of time and location. The custom-designed
SPRI will aid researchers in studying adsorption of peptides, nanoparticles,
proteins and other bioconjugates on polymers, self assembled monolayers and even
live cells in culture. The fluorescence microscopy configuration will enable the
capture of cell morphology information, spatial distributions of ligands and
receptors and competitive molecular uptake studies which when coupled to the
adsorption and kinetic data from SPRi will provide opportunities for
quantitative and statistical measurements of cell material interactions. In
2009, Dr. Becker initiated a long-term outreach effort with St. Vincent / St.
Mary High School (STVM). It has grown to include 10 additional faculty members
at UA. Uniquely, EVERY year, at each grade level, EVERY student is required to
complete a year-long, inquiry-based science project as part of the science
curriculum. The science inquiry method encourages students to ask in depth
questions and then to apply themselves, including conducting experiments, to
find the answers, rather than merely memorize facts. The students research and
identify a problem that they proceed to solve or answer by carefully and
methodically performing experiments, conducting research and consulting with the
teams of faculty, graduate students, high school teachers and students. Results
are formulated into ACS POLYMER PREPRINT style manuscripts. Collectively the
efforts of 11 teams (student, faculty, teacher) led to STVM in winning the
Harold C. Shaw Outstanding School Award and named as the outstanding high school
science program in the State of Ohio in both 2010 and 2011. We aim to use real
data collected by the students in the science inquiry program to demonstrate
physical phenomena of refractive index, optical adsorption and protein
adsorption which will be incorporated into new modules in the high school
physics curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interactions of molecules with surfaces play
an important role in many biological and physical processes. The adsorption of
these biomolecules are important for designing materials that have antimicrobial
properties, developing scaffolds for tissue engineering, bone growth, and drug
delivery. The acquisition of Imaging Surface Plasmon Resonance Instrumentation
(SPR) will provide information on adsorption of proteins, peptides and
nanometer-size particles on surfaces. This new capability at the University of
Akron (UA) will provide opportunities for students and faculty members in twelve
research groups to investigate fundamental and applied problems in the area of
biomaterials. This additional capability will accelerate the development of new
biomaterials and provide important training to graduate and undergraduate
students. In addition local high school students participating in a year-long
science inquiry program at UA will use the instrumentation to study kinetics of
adsorption. We aim to use real data collected by the students to demonstrate
physical phenomena of refractive index, optical adsorption and protein
adsorption which will be incorporated into new modules in the high school
physics curriculum.