* 1126898
* MRI: Acquisition / replacement of an electron microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Rainer Newberry, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,001,229.00

Funds from NSF's MRI program will be used to purchase a new electron microprobe
at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF). The new instrument replaces an
aging instrument and will allow continued teaching and research in several core
fields of Alaskan and global importance. Worldwide demand for precious and
industrial metals is accelerating, but fundamental processes that lead to ore
concentrations are poorly understood. Furthermore, Alaska's basic geology is
still being worked out. UAF research in collaboration with the Alaska Division
of Geological and Geophysical Surveys is continually refining the understanding
of Alaska's geology and mineral resources. The new instrument will enhance
cutting-edge research in how metals, such as gold in arsenopyrite, are
concentrated in Earth's rocks. This type of research leads to more efficient
precious-metal beneficiation. On a more fundamental level, analyses that
determine the pressures and temperatures at which rocks form and deform are
helping to create models that explain how magma moves in time and space, and how
deeply exhumed rocks flow in fault zones. One of the most societally important
roles of the UAF microprobe is through its link with the Alaska Volcano
Observatory (AVO). Understanding active volcanism in Alaska is of international
importance because of ground, airborne, and climatic effects from Alaska's 52
active volcanoes. The existing microprobe has played a crucial role in providing
the AVO with rapid analyses of new volcanic materials during eruption crises.
UAF's research on active magmatic systems requires high-quality elemental
analyses of volcanic rocks on a microscopic scale, which will be possible with
the new instrument. Studies of eruptive products will elucidate past eruptions
and help predict the nature of potential future eruptions. Biologists will use
the new instrument to reconstruct life histories of fish - many species of which
are important in commercial, sport, or subsistence fisheries - through analysis
of otolith growth rings. The new instrument, the only facility of its kind in
the state of Alaska, will be broadly available to researchers and students and
will enhance UAF's research enterprise through novel applications and by
fostering national and international collaborations.