* 1126426
* MRI: Acquisition of autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) for shelf, coastal, and estuarine oceanographic studies
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Nicholas Nidzieko, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,249,159.00

The PI's requests MRI funding to acquire an instrumented autonomous underwater
vehicle (AUV) for physical, biological, and chemical oceanographic studies in
estuaries and coastal waters. The proposed AUV is specifically equipped for
operation in shallow coastal and estuarine environments, and includes: a
guidance system that responds to real-time measurements, so that the AUV can be
programmed to autonomously follow scalar gradients; a 1200-kHz current profiler,
to make higher-resolution velocity profiles; a forward-looking sonar for
improved terrain following at low altitudes for bottom boundary layer
investigation and work in shallow water; modular payload packages, which
increase the versatility of the AUV for either benthic or water column research;
and submersible chemical sensors and imaging equipment. Collectively, these
capabilities will facilitate new investigations of hypoxia dynamics, larval
transport, estuarine physical processes, harmful algal blooms, fisheries, and
sediment dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of note include fostering
collaborations, and interactions with the general public and school groups via
web portal, displays and demos. The PI's also identify opportunities for
including the AUV in ongoing middle/high school HPL programs. Presently, no
similarly capable AUV in terms of endurance, navigation accuracy, and
instrumentation, is operated within the Chesapeake Bay area and greater Eastern
seaboard. Acquisition of the proposed AUV instrument would enhance the
infrastructure for coastal and estuarine research and education at the
University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences. The benefit of the
proposed facility to society is the improved understanding of coastal and
estuarine marine environments. The AUV will be extremely useful in surveys of
coastal and estuarine marine processes of importance to public health and
society such as harmful algal blooms.