* 1126570
* MRI: Development of a Cross-Platform Infrastructure for Natural Interaction Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* John Cook, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal #: 11-26570&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Kong, Jun&lt;br/&gt; Cook, John R.; Shi,
Jing; Yu, Nan&lt;br/&gt;Institution: North Dakota State
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev. : A Cross-Platform Infrastructure for
Natural Interaction Research&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project
from an EPSCoR state, aiming to develop a cross-platform infrastructure that
supports natural interaction research by providing automatic modality
adaptation, radically alters the paradigm for human/computer interaction (HCI).
Distinct from previous approaches, the proposed approach quantifies the
usability of each modality and then formalizes the adaptation issue as searching
for a set of input/output modalities that produce the highest usability, i.e.,
an optimization issue. In addition to the interaction context, our approach also
considers the effects of computing infrastructures (e.g., system resources and
networking) on the modality adaptation. The proposed work establishes the first
Natural Interaction Laboratory in North Dakota, enabling the following research
projects in Adaptive Natural Interaction:&lt;br/&gt;- Establishing common
interaction context across multiple scenarios,&lt;br/&gt;- Device-aware
establishment of modality space,&lt;br/&gt;- Device-aware establishment of
usability space, and&lt;br/&gt;- Quality of service in the human/computer
interaction context.&lt;br/&gt;The work aims to develop a unifying
infrastructure for research by providing a common programming interface across
multiple devices. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation
should provide a unique research facility for faculty and graduate students to
conduct research on user interaction-enhancing technology and education. The
proposal enhances PhD production in an EPSCoR state, encourages underrepresented
students into research via the NATURE (Nurturing American Tribal Undergraduate
Research and Educations) and WISMET (Women in Science, Math, Engineering, and
Technology) programs, provides research opportunities to undergraduate students,
and impacts industry and economic development in North Dakota.