* 1126957
* Implications of Fractal Scaling in Sensorimotor Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Steven Lowen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2014
* USD 299,255.00

In this project, the investigators will develop a set of computational tools to
investigate long sequences of continuous data from physiological systems. One
interesting property exhibited by these data sets is called "fractal scaling."
This means that the data are "self-similar" on different time scales, so that
short sections of data, when rescaled properly, resemble larger sections of data
and this scaling holds true over a large range of time intervals. This is a
defining feature of a fractal. Another fractal property is that the data exhibit
fluctuations on many different time scales. Not all physiological data sets show
this attribute. Some show instead a particular time scale at which the
variability is most prominent. Many analytical and computational tools to study
fractals have been developed over the last two decades. However, the large
number of these tools makes it difficult for many investigators to make the
proper choice when analyzing any given data set. Furthermore, different
computational tools are susceptible to different types of artifacts and
different tools are valid for different data types. Erroneous or misleading
results can be obtained when the tools are improperly applied. It is very
difficult for a non-expert in fractal mathematics to understand and keep track
of all of these issues, which can inhibit progress in the investigation of many
physiological and behavioral systems. In this project, the research team will
assemble a set of established computational tools for fractal time-series
analysis, apply them to a variety of data sets with known and unknown properties
(i.e., artificially generated data and real physiological data), and determine
when different tools break down, when they are most effective, how to detect
when erroneous results are being generated, and how to interpret the results.
This will provide increased confidence in the application of these tools and
encourage their widespread use.

Fractal fluctuations are common in the behavior of biological systems. They have
been found in heartbeat intervals, stride intervals, firing rates of neurons,
human reaction times, and many other cases. However, the source and significance
of these characteristics are unclear. They could arise from fractal properties
of ion channels in neurons and have no special role or relevance. On the other
hand, they could be deliberately produced at the behavioral level and confer a
physiological benefit. By developing and making freely available a standard set
of computational tools that implement the most modern algorithms for assessing
data for fractal properties, the current project can further our understanding
of how sensorimotor systems organize, how behaviors are produced, how sensory
information is processed and how perceptions emerge.