* 1126732
* MRI: Development of measurement and testing equipment for distributed wireless communications and localization systems and propagation channels
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
the development of measurement instrumentation that will enable (i) measurement
of distributed wireless propagation channels with ultra-wide bandwidth and (ii)
design, measurement and validation of distributed wireless systems for
communications, localization, and radar. The instrumentation is thus intended to
explore both the fundamental principles of distributed wireless propagation
channels and systems, as well as to enable the development and testing of
practical distributed wireless systems that go far beyond current systems. The
approach is based on a combination of state-of-the array channel sounding with
electro-optical signal conversion. By converting wideband microwave signals to
optical signals, which are transmitted via optical fibers, widely separated
antennas can be operated by a single high-precision signal source/receiver in a
synchronized manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Firstly, the development activity will push the frontiers of
electro-optical modulation. Secondly, the instrument enables many measurements
that will for the first time answer some of the fundamental questions related to
wireless propagation in distributed systems, such as the correlation of
shadowing, delay spread, and angular spread at widely separated
transmitters/receivers. Further intellectual merit is obtained from the use of
these measurement results to stimulate and test novel theoretical ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:&lt;br/&gt;Measurements with the developed
instrumentation will help to enable novel applications of distributed wireless
systems (many of which are ?Grand Challenges? defined by the National Academy),
such as wireless health and remote monitoring of vital signs, distributed
localization for emergency responders, high-efficiency video distribution
systems, and many more.