* 1126100
* MRI: Acquisition of a field emission scanning electron microscope with cryo transfer and EDS systems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Janine Caira, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 597,600.00

This award provides funds to purchase a Field Emission Scanning Electron
Microscope (FESEM) with a cryo transfer stage and an energy dispersive x-ray
spectroscopy (EDS) system for the Electron Microscopy Laboratory (EM Lab), a
multi-user facility at the main campus of the University of Connecticut. The new
instrument replaces a heavily used 15-year old FESEM, thus ensuring continued
FESEM availability and providing new capabilities to enhance and expand both
research and research training at the University of Connecticut. The FESEM
provides images of a variety of materials at resolutions previously unattainable
in this facility. A charge compensation system minimizes image degradation in
poorly conducting samples. A backscatter detector and EDS system provide
compositional information and the ability to detect immunogold particles
conjugated to macromolecules within cells and tissues. The cryo transfer system
allows samples to be rapidly frozen, transferred to the microscope and viewed at
high resolution in the fully hydrated state, with minimal contamination by water
or hydrocarbons. Controlled sublimation of water at the surface reveals surface
morphology without major structural change and identifies the location of water
in the sample. These features are especially beneficial for study of highly
hydrated samples such as plant tissues or biofilms, which tend to shrink and
collapse with removal of water. The cryo transfer system also allows samples to
be fractured and/or coated after freezing and prior to transfer and viewing. The
major users of the new instrumentation represent a wide range of disciplines
from evolutionary biology to bioengineering. The group includes both senior
investigators with well-established programs and junior faculty members
developing their careers. One senior faculty member is from Connecticut College,
a predominantly undergraduate institution with no FESEM instrumentation. The
projects these investigators are carrying out include studies of water transport
and conservation in woody plants and bryophytes, systematics of tapeworms in
elasmobranchs, morphology of green algae, ecology of desert biotic crusts,
structure of porous metal oxide nanoparticles, molecular biology and physiology
of plant cell walls, ecology and biogeography of freshwater chrysophytes,
nucleation of minerals in marine biofilms, and biomechanics and microstructure
of heart valves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system provides state-of-the-art
electron imaging capabilities to a highly active and multidisciplinary group of
faculty and students, enhancing both research and research training. Their
research is helping to identify and classify new species of tapeworms found
around the world. It is characterizing microbe-mineral interactions at the
interface between the bio- and lithospheres that are critical in the search of
the origin of life, life on other planets, the characterization of natural
reservoir (porosity and permeability), and carbon sequestration. Studies of a
variety of plant species are contributing to understanding of the ability of
land plants to withstand desiccation and transport water and of the composition
and function of the plant cell walls. Structural data on chrysophytes and
diatomes found in Arctic lake systems of the early Cenozoic are providing an
unprecedented opportunity to understand how Arctic ecosystems may change under
future greenhouse climates. Structural and compositional studies of porous oxide
catelysts and octahedral molecular seive manganese oxides are potentially useful
for oil spills and remediation of pollutants. Studies of the fibrous structure
of heart valves are providing data to help generate computational models of how
human heart valves respond to minimally invasive heart valve repair and
replacement. The purchased equipment is helping to drive new research
initiatives and promote collaborative research within this group of
investigators and beyond.