* 1126565
* Conference: "2011 Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages"; to be held August 2-7, 2011, in Madison, Wisconsin.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Malcolm Winkler, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 05/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

Scientific Impact. This NSF grant will fund travel awards for graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and some starting investigators who lack funding, to
attend the 2011 Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference to be held
at the University of Wisconsin, Madison from August 2-7, 2011. Applicants will
be recruited by advertisements in scientific journals and direct emails to past
and probable conference attendees. The advertisement directs the recipient to
the conference web site (http://www.union.wisc.edu/phages/index.html), which
contains instructions for applying for a travel grant. All applicants for the
travel awards are required to submit an abstract for an oral or poster
presentation and a letter outlining financial need. The applications and
abstracts are reviewed by the conference organizers, who award travel grants
based on scientific merit and financial need. The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria
and Phages conference is the direct descendent of the original ?phage meetings?
organized by Delbruck, Luria, Hershey, and colleagues in the 1940s, and thus is
the oldest scientific gathering focused on prokaryotic molecular biology. The
conference site now alternates between its historical home at the Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratories and the University of Wisconsin, Madison. While the focus of
the meeting has expanded over the years, it still remains dedicated to the
problem-oriented philosophy of the physicists, chemists, and microbiologists who
founded the meeting. The conference provides a forum for the presentation and
discussion of the latest research findings and technical advances in modern
prokaryotic molecular biology. It is the primary scientific meeting for many
laboratories working with prokaryotes, and when held in Madison, the average
attendance is over 325. A central aspect and major attraction of the meeting is
the breadth of the research presented, ranging from basic phage genetics to
organismal genomics/proteomics, from atomic level structure-function analyses to
microbial cell biology, from single-molecule biochemistry to viral self-
assembly, and from host interactions to ecology and evolution. The diversity of
research areas is mirrored by the diversity of organisms investigated, including
model organisms as well as environmentally and medically relevant bacteria and
phages. Broader Educational Impact. A key objective of the meeting is to provide
a broad educational experience for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
other young scientists who constitute over half of the attendees of the meeting.
Nearly all the graduate students and postdoctoral fellows attending this meeting
give a poster or oral presentation. It is one of the few remaining open-program
meetings, where the majority of the oral presentations are selected from
submitted abstracts and all of the vibrant poster sessions run for the entire
meeting. Consequently, most of the presentations are given by the people
actually performing the research. In addition, leading scientists are invited to
present comprehensive introductions to the 10 scientific sessions and short
talks on their own works. The session chairs represent a mixture of established
senior investigators and prominent emerging investigators at earlier stages of
their careers. Two keynote lectures will also given by world-renowned
scientists, Dr. Carol Gross and Dr. John Roth. The session leaders and keynote
speakers remain on site for the entire meeting. As such, scientific experts are
always in the audience, which ensures high scientific standards and critical yet
supportive questioning and commentary at the conclusion of talks. The close
proximity of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior and senior
faculty generates a unique atmosphere for scientific interactions. The
organizers take into account gender balance and try to include as many minority
scientists as possible as session chairs and presenters. Some of the most
important findings in the field of bacterial and phage molecular genetics are
presented and discussed yearly at this meeting.