* 1126208
* MRI: Development of Multifunctional CARS (Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy) Imaging System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Paul Black, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2014
* USD 266,460.00

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to develop a
versatile, multifunctional coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS)
imaging system that will be capable of nondestructive and noninvasive
measurement for nanoscience, biology, and medical research with 3D confocality
and nanoscale resolutions. The project will integrate morphology
characterization, microscale CARS-based multimodal nonlinear optical imaging and
tip-enhanced CARS imaging capabilities in a single system. Deliverables include
a multi-functional CARS system, documentation of research results, and
engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results
of this project will create a key equipment in a core facility that serves as a
cross-disciplinary and multi-organization research and education platform in the
region. The instrument will support education for graduate and undergraduate
students for a diverse group of people, including women and underrepresented
minority students. The successful development of this instrument will open many
research opportunities in nanoscience/technology, material science, cellular
biology and other fields in the United States. Graduate and undergraduate
students will benefit through involvement in the research and classroom
instruction. The engagement of K-12 students and teachers in this project will
also establish new partnerships between the University and K-12 schools.