* 1126892
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra-Centrifuge to Enhance Geoenvironmental Research and Education at California State University Los Angeles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2014
* Crist Khachikian, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 11/30/2014
* USD 441,737.00

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to acquire
an ultracentrifuge with high payload capacity. The ultracentrifuge uses
centrifugation forces to speed up the measurement of hydrogeological and
contaminant fate and transport properties. The ultracentrifuge G Force ranges
from 0 to 250 with a maximum 20,000 G-lbs at 600 RPM. The acquired equipment
will enhance research training and education at all levels, especially in the
following areas: (a) hydraulic conductivity dependence on saturation level in
low conductivity soils under unsaturated anisotropic conditions; (b) long-term
deterioration of containment barriers; (c) characterization of hydrogeological
and transport properties using anisotropy coefficient of porous media; (d)
isotope transport in low permeability sediments in the vadose zone; and (e)
chemical weathering of soils in areas used for carbon
sequestration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurement of unsaturated hydraulic
conductivity in low conductivity soils can take years to be performed using most
common approaches. Under steady-state centrifugation (SSC), which will be
enabled through the acquisition of this equipment, the same measurement can be
performed in a matter of days or even hours. The results will be widely
disseminated to support research in the areas of underground contamination
mitigation and groundwater protection. The instrumentation will be readily
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate research and teaching programs
available at CSULA.