* 1126711
* MRI: Acquisition of confocal microscopy instrumentation for undergraduate research and research training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Elizabeth De Stasio, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 552,666.00

Technical Project Description&lt;br/&gt;Research programs of at least six
faculty members and their students will be expanded significantly by the
acquisition of a confocal microscope at Lawrence University. Use of the
microscope by students involved in Lawrence's summer research program, honors
research and Senior Experience programs will enhance and modernize their
research training. Two research groups are using C. elegans as a model system,
one to study the role of an RFX transcription factor in the maintenance of
synaptic protein levels during aging and another to identify and characterize
new genes involved in sensory-specific aspects of neuronal cilia. Putative new
sensory-specific ciliary genes were first identified using a comparative genomic
approach and their expression patterns are being characterized. Both research
groups will use confocal microscopy to characterize gene expression patterns in
particular tissues of the worm. Similarly, GFP-tagged Vg1/Gdf1 will be used to
study the kinetics of production and secretion of this important signaling
molecular during early development of the zebrafish. The time-lapse capabilities
of the instrument will be key to the success of this project. A fourth research
group is interested in the host-parasite relationship of snails and Schistosoma
mansoni, the causative agent of schistosomiasis. This group has identified a
neuropeptide that may regulate host physiology in response to infection. They
will use the confocal microscope first to locate the expression of this peptide
in the snail nervous system to determine its function and then track changes in
expression upon infection. This group is also interested in mapping neurogenesis
in the snail, a project that will require confocal microscopy. Identifying and
localizing particular caspases involved in apoptosis in primitive plants is the
goal of another group. Immunofluorescence and fluorometric tunel assays will be
used to assess the magnitude of cell death and its key regulators. FRET analysis
using the new microscope will be undertaken by another research group to
elucidate the protein:protein interactions of human angiogenin, a protein
implicated in tumorigenesis and blood vessel growth. Lastly, a group at UW-Fox
Valley will use the instrumentation to study the cytoskeletal structure of newly
evolved probiotic bacteria used to preserve "wetcake", a by product of ethanol
production that is fed to cattle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance&lt;br/&gt;Confocal microscopy will greatly enhance undergraduate
research training at Lawrence University and UW-Fox Valley. Lawrence is ranked
37th nationally in baccalaureate institutions whose students go on to earn PhDs
in STEM disciplines, and thus contributes greatly to the pipeline of STEM
researchers. Research programs of at least six faculty members and their
students will be supported by new confocal microscopy instrumentation as
follows. One research group is characterizing genes involved in building the
structures involved in sensory perception in a variety of organs including the
retina, kidney, and lungs. Another group will identify and characterize genes
involved in maintaining nerve function during the aging process. Thirdly,
students and faculty will characterize the role of particular nervous system
proteins in the snail host of the human parasite that causes the human tropical
disease, schistosomiasis. A fourth group will study the process of cell death in
plants, an active recycling program that increases the efficiency, and allows
proper development, of living things. The role of a particular signaling
molecule needed to create the proper arrangement of internal organs during the
early stages of development from fertilized egg through later embryo will be
studied by another group. Lastly, one research group is working to understand
the role of a particular protein in human tumor growth, specifically the
mechanisms by which tumors obtain new blood supplies. A researcher at
neighboring UW-Fox Valley will use the confocal microscope to study cellular
structures of bacteria used as probiotics added to cattle feed.