* 1126839
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scalable Petascale Storage Infrastructure for Data-Collections and Data-Intensive Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Thomas Hauser, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 699,945.00

The Center for Research Computing (CRC) at the University of Colorado Boulder
(CU-Boulder) will acquire, deploy and maintain an expandable petascale storage
instrument, the CU-Boulder petaLibrary. This instrument, consisting on an
integrated disk and tape system, will enable faculty, staff, postdocs, graduate
and undergraduate students to build, store, share and merge large and growing
data collections. The petaLibrary will be made available to all CU-Boulder
researchers at no usage charge other than the cost of the
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The petaLibrary will serve as the infrastructure for
a number of data services provided by the University Libraries, the Museum, the
National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) and the CRC to the CU-Boulder campus
community. The services will include the deposit and discovery of a wide range
of digital resources, including digital surrogates of archives and special
collections materials owned by libraries and museums on campus, openly
accessible resources, digital media only library resources and the scholarly
output of the campus. Data-intensive projects include digital collections; high
fidelity, high definition recordings of human interaction; global-scale land
remote sensing; bio-digitization efforts by the Museum; as well as research
programs utilizing CU-Boulder's computational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include the
development of workshops on data archival and long-term data formats for
researchers, research projects and educational opportunities with the CRC for
graduate and undergraduate students. Other efforts will include working with The
Colorado Coalition for Gender and IT (CCGIT) and the National Center for Women
and Technology (NCWIT) to address the limited diversity in IT, specifically in
the area of cyberinfrastructure by providing summer internship opportunities for
female faculty in data management related topics.