* 1126008
* MRI: Acquisition of an Acoustical Measurement System for Structural Health Monitoring Research and Teaching at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Payam Matin, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 94,182.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funding for the
acquisition of an acoustical measurement system. The acquisition of the
measurement system enables a new program for structural health monitoring for
environmental changes on Maryland's Eastern Shore. It facilitates research of
structural health monitoring using guided acoustic waves that can propagate a
long distance in solid materials such as bars, plates and pipes. Specific
research objectives include: (1) investigation of a time reversal Lamb wave
communication system using steel pipes or bars as communication channels; (2)
research of new methods for assessing material stress behaviors based on the
Hopkinson' bar testing using strain sensors; and (3) development of novel
approaches to extracting baseline free and baseline dependent defect features
using integrated signal processing and machine learning techniques. The projects
that will be supported by this equipment will enable understanding of the
characteristics of the local civil structures and new design of SHM systems
specific to the Eastern Shore's coastal environment.

If successful, the acquisition of this equipment will allow the University of
Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) to facilitate a new program to address the
significant aging infrastructure problem facing the Eastern Shore area, but more
widely the nation. It will enhance the quality of student research and
instruction and provide faculty with the necessary tools to pursue aspects of
their research which are presently not available to them. Each year, two
undergraduate students will be intensely trained to operate this instrument. In
addition, laboratory projects utilizing this equipment will be incorporated into
several upper level undergraduate courses and senior design capstone projects
affecting a minimum of thirty students per year. This instrument will also
enhance collaboration with Salisbury University and the Northrop Grumman
Technical Service facility, also located on Maryland's Eastern Shore.