* 1126032
* MRI: Acquisition of a Bench-top Olympus Confocal Microscope to Advance Biological Research at an HBCU
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Vincent Fondong, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 217,335.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award funds the purchase of a bench-top
laser scanning confocal microscope for biological research in the department of
Biological Sciences at Delaware State University (DSU). Laser confocal
microscopy enables visualization and imaging deep within both living and fixed
cells and tissues, and provides the opportunity to collect sharply defined
optical sections from which three-dimensional renderings can be generated. Until
recently, gaining the full benefits provided by confocal microscopy required
expertise in the set-up, acquisition, processing and analysis of images. In
large research institutions, this expertise is provided by well-staffed core
facilities. However, in a small institution such as DSU, faculty and students
must conduct their own imaging experiments. The simpler, more automated Olympus
Fluoview FV10i confocal laser-scanning microscope system will provide DSU
researchers and students the full benefits of confocal microscopy for their
research projects. Most of the planned research projects involve acquisition of
time-lapse images in live-cells, which is available in the FV10i bench-top
confocal microscope. Research projects benefiting from this instrumentation
includes: studies of plant virus-host interactions, development of the
neurotransmitter phenotype of motor neurons, protein interactions in
Caenorhabditis elegans behavior mutants, and steroid hormone function in neural
development and others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Laser confocal microscopes allow
non-destructive and non-invasive microscopic imaging in three dimensions for the
analysis of intact samples. The Fluoview FV10i confocal microscope represents
the next-generation multi-user laser confocal microscope and significantly
enhances the research capability of DSU, a Historically-Black university. The
Department of Biological Sciences where this instrument will be housed has
graduate programs in biology and neuroscience. The user-friendly nature of
Fluoview FV10i confocal microscope will allow students and researchers at DSU to
image live-cells and tissues. It will also facilitate integration of several
outreach programs that DSU offers to K-12 students and teachers and thus promote
teaching, learning and research training.