* 1126542
* MRI: Acquisition of analysis tools for rapid optical fiber characterization with nm-scale resolution
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Martin Richardson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 09/30/2012
* USD 129,500.00

The objective of this program is to advance both capability and efficiency of
our optical fiber fabrication through the acquisition of a research instrument
that will enable us to rapidly characterize optical fiber directly on their
fabrication site. The performance of an optical fiber is determined by its
internal physical structure and the distribution of the refractive index across
its cross-section. The instrument proposed for acquisition is a refractive index
profiler that will provide advanced process control for next-generation optical
fiber fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is the unique
ability of integrating novel materials and nanometer sized structures into
optical fibers and the fundamental importance of advanced optical fibers to many
areas of scientific research. The program will allow exploration of new physics
in fibers with special form factors and material combinations and opens a vast
new vista of optical fiber technology. Research areas that utilize specialty
fibers include classical and quantum optical communications, fiber lasers, fiber
optic sensing, and new bio-medical diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are provided through a multitude of
collaborations within UCF, other universities, as well as government and
industrial laboratories that critically dependent on our advanced optical fiber
facilities. Through our educational programs, the unique fiber optics center at
CREOL is a key contributor to the training of a skilled and diverse workforce to
lead the next-generation optics, photonics, and laser industry.