* 1126360
* MRI: Acquisition of a Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope at Washington and Lee University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Kenneth Van Ness, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2014
* USD 355,319.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a variable pressure scanning electron
microscope (SEM) for Washington and Lee University. The SEM is a powerful
analytical tool that enables detailed analysis of materials too small to be
resolved with standard light microscopes. Furthermore, the new SEM will include
specialized devices that enable semi-quantitative chemical analysis and the
characterization of crystallographic orientation of minerals and other
materials. Together, these state-of-the-art tools will provide essential
infrastructure to advance important research objectives and prepare the next
generation of emerging scientists and engineering professionals. The equipment
will be well-integrated into the undergraduate curriculum at Washington and Lee
University, with at least nine courses across five departments utilizing the
SEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research applications made possible by the
SEM include the quantification of deformation within the Earth's crust, fission-
track dating of zircon crystals, the characterization of novel polymers, the
reconstruction of paleoclimate and paleoenvironment through the characterization
of corals, the study of weathering rates and landscape evolution, the chemical
analysis of materials in art paintings, ecological studies based on fish otolith
growth, and the characterization of anti-reflective coatings. Washington and Lee
University strongly supports undergraduate research, and students will continue
to be involved in all of these endeavors.