* 1126478
* MRI: Development and Deployment of an Operational and Programmable Diverse-Spectrum Access Network
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Edward Knightly, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,956,000.00

PI(s): Knightly, Edward; Reed, William S; Sabharwal, Ashutosh; Zhong, Lin;
Institution: William Marsh Rice University Title: MRI: Development and
Deployment of an Operational and Programmable Diverse-Spectrum Access Network
Project Proposed: This project, SPAN, a system for Spectrum-Programmable Access
for Next-generation Deployments, proposes a novel instrument and testbed
environment with wireless access in diverse spectral ranges, which is open,
disruptive and unconstrained by any standard. This project will yield three key
developments, including the SPANnode, SPANscope, and SPANnet, which include the
wireless node, unique network scale monitoring systems, and a wireless networks,
respectively. SPANnode is a programmable wide-band node, with a unique level of
high performance, spanning 100 times more spectrum and aggregate multiple bands
to yield 4 times greater transmission bandwidth than any currently available
open-source platform. SPANnode will yield the world?s first full-duplex transit
node and first multi-user beam-forming gateway. SPANscope is a unique network-
scale monitoring tool across vast spectral, spatial, and temporal scales.
Finally, SPANnet is a wireless network comprising SPANnodes, SPANscope monitors,
SPANscope-compliant smartphones, and community-owned legacy 802.11 clients. SPAN
enables research in - Spectrum Aggregation: The project will develop and
experimentally evaluate an algorithmic toolkit that enables network operators to
aggregate diverse spectral bands to best meet their service objectives. -
Networked Multi-antenna Services: The project will exploit a novel multi-antenna
features to develop new communication modes including multi-user beam-forming
backhaul, full-duplex transit nodes, and enhanced security via a managed spatial
footprint. - Network-Scale Energy Optimization: The project will study energy
efficiency performance tradeoffs brought by dynamic spectrum access and multi-
antenna transceivers to reduce the operational cost of high-performance wireless
network infrastructure and improve the battery lifetime. Broader Impacts: This
project, unique in its goals and expected results, carries potential for large
broader impacts in the areas of spectrum policy, standards, industry, and the
research community. The measured data sets collected by in the project will be
shared with the broader research community. The researcher is potentially
transformational. SPANnet will serve primarily Hispanic community, and the
project includes outreach to high schools in the underserved community. The
project team actively engages multiple Hispanic and under-represented Ph.D.
students. All code will be open-source and proposed are the community events
that will promote wide usability of the SPANnodes which will be made available
to the research community.