* 1126754
* MRI: Acquisition of ICP-RIE Capability at Texas State University - San Marcos
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Edwin Piner, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2014
* USD 486,599.00

Texas State University-San Marcos is aggressively developing a new Materials
Science, Engineering, and Commercialization (MSEC) Program based on
collaboration amongst the Departments of Biology, Chemistry/Biochemistry,
Engineering Technology, Physics, and the Ingram School of Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this MRI acquisition of an inductively coupled
plasma-reactive ion etching system is to enhance the present capability of the
university by providing performance and process consistency necessary to meet
the goals of the university?s strong emphasis on interdisciplinary research
central to the MSEC program. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is in
significantly benefitting ongoing research programs including the development of
microelectronic devices, micro-actuators, and nano/biomedical applications.
Hence, the new service facility is expected to be a catalyst that strengthens
current interdisciplinary research partnerships. Furthermore, the
multifunctional system being acquired offers a broad capability to the
university research community and industrial and government collaborators. The
system will be supported, and its effectiveness for research and education
sustained, through the development of a user-university-state partnership for
stewardship of shared resources. &lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of this program is
to serve as a primary shared resource for Texas State University?s growing
public and private sector activity in MSEC. In addition, the university will
integrate the use of the system into the students? course, capstone, and
research experiences. In summary, the system is essential to the advancement and
growth of current research in materials science and engineering linking
academic, federal government, and industry labs at Texas State addressing areas
of societal concern in the security, health, energy and environmental sectors.