* 1126728
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Microprobe (EMP) for analysis of inorganic elemental concentrations in solid-state materials: Expanding science research and teaching in Iowa.
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Ann Budd, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 987,742.00

1126728&lt;br/&gt;Ukstins-Peate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation grant supports acquisition of a state-of-the-art electron
microprobe (EMP) equipped with five wavelength dispersive spectrometers (WDS),
an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), and cathodoluminescence spectrometer.
The EMP will support a range of research and research training across multiple
departments on campus with broad themes including: 1) Earth Processes; 2)
Sustainability &amp; Climate Change; 3) Pollution Prevention &amp; Remediation;
4) Planetary Geology &amp; Meteorite Impacts; 5) Geoarchaeology; and 6) Public
Health, all with needs for microspatially resolved quantitative chemical
analysis of solid materials. Example research applications include innovative
and promising studies of the conditions of magmagenesis as recorded in arc
volcanics and tectonic investigations relying on study of metamorphic rock
suites through use of EMP geothermbarometric techniques as well as studies of
bolide impact processes, paleoclimate investigations of relict lake deposits,
and studies of nanoparticle aggregates and the role of microbes in the chemical
cycling of heavy metals. The PIs plan to engage underrepresented students in
research experiences using the EMP through an extant Alliance for Graduate
Education and Professoriate (AGEP) and the Ethnic Inclusion Program in Iowa
Engineering institutional wide programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***