* 1126840
* MRI:   Development of a Southwest Experimental Garden Array (SEGA) for Integrating Genetics and Climate Change
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Paul Flikkema, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,848,876.00

To integrate genetics and climate change research, the Southwest Experimental
Garden Array (SEGA), combines reciprocal transplant and provenance trial
experimental designs with state-of-the-art multi-factor climate change
manipulations. This facility will allow research that scales from genes to
ecosystems to test the genetic basis of plant performance along environmental
gradients. This facility allows users to test the fundamental hypothesis that a
genetic by environment approach is central to understanding climate change
impacts on the biomes of the world, and feedbacks of these biomes to the climate
system. Such studies will become essential if managed translocation strategies
are adopted. The potential of this powerful experimental approach, so
successfully used in agriculture, has not been realized in climate change
research. It requires an integration of genetics with community ecology,
ecosystem science, climatology, and land management, disciplines that have
traditionally lacked a genetics perspective. The promise of this approach is
demonstrated by reciprocal transplant experiments showing that locally adapted
tree species are now becoming locally "maladapted" due to strong genetic
interactions with the environment, which in turn affects hundreds of associated
species. Using a series of 10 common gardens (5 in each of two soil types) along
an elevation gradient from desert to mountain forest ecosystems, this facility
provides the basis of a new generation of climate change research. For example,
using reciprocal transplants of the same plant genotypes, researchers from
multiple disciplines will quantify the ecological and evolutionary impacts of
climate change on 1) foundation plant species that drive their respective
ecosystems, 2) their associated arthropod, microbial, and understory communities
that depend upon these plants for their survival, 3) native-exotic species
interactions, and 4) the ecosystem processes that emerge from these
interactions. This facility will enable identification of physiological
mechanisms that underlie differential species and genotype performance under
current and future climatic conditions. Plant performance results from the array
will allow modelers to incorporate a genetic algorithm to calibrate models and
to predict vegetation shifts and whole community responses to climate changes.
Because the southwestern USA is experiencing some of the highest levels of
climate-change impacts in North America, our garden array can serve a regional
as well as a global role in addressing the gene by environment interactions that
are likely to reshape biotic communities this century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
garden array will provide genetics information for scientists to make better
informed predictions of the impact of climate change on individual species,
communities, and ecosystems, which in turn will inform land management and
restoration projects. Our array will: 1) provide a scientific basis for the
concept of managed translocation, 2) identify drought tolerant genotypes and
source population(s) that perform best at a given location for current and
expected future climatic conditions, and 3) help develop techniques for managing
invasive species that have benefited from climate change. This facility will
enhance existing and new education programs and efforts to recruit and retain
students from underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Under-graduates and
graduate students will use these sites for their own research. Our sites at The
Arboretum at Flagstaff and Wupatki National Monument will provide public
outreach to 100,000 plus annual visitors. Stakeholders include 11 Research and
Education Centers at NAU, USFS, NPS, TNC, USGS, BLM, Babbitt Ranches, and
international collaborators. SEGA will serve as a model for proposed arrays
worldwide.