* 1126275
* MRI:  Development of Ultrafast Tracking Electronics for the ATLAS Trigger
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Gerald Blazey, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,967,108.00

This award provides support for a consortium of three universities to build a
custom electronics system called the Fast TracKer (FTK) for the ATLAS detector
at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) located at the European Organization for
Nuclear Research (CERN) laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The FTK will perform
global track recognition reconstruction using the innovative technique of
massive parallelism. A billion track patterns are pre-stored in custom content-
addressable memory (Associative Memory) chips that are being designed. As each
hit leaves the detector at full speed, it is simultaneously seen by all
patterns. Track fitting is replaced by a linear calculation of the track
parameters and the goodness of fit, with nearly offline resolution. With modern
electronics, one can fit tracks at a rate of one track per nanosecond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the next decade, experiments at the LHC will provide
unprecedented opportunities for answering the most important questions in
elementary particle physics. Data collected by ATLAS will be used for hundreds
of simultaneous analyses to search for the Higgs boson, supersymmetry, large
extra dimensions, dark matter, Hidden Valley particles, the carriers of new
forces, and other possible new phenomena as well as measure the detailed
properties of the top and bottom quarks and the W and Z bosons in an attempt to
understand what is beyond the Standard Model. Important discoveries are likely,
but determining what the new phenomena are will not be easy. Large numbers of
signal events are needed for such measurements, with as little background as
possible. Tracking is essential for selecting events containing heavy fermions.
At such luminosity, where large occupancy in the tracking detectors greatly
increases track reconstruction time, only a small fraction of the events
selected by the level-1 trigger could have track reconstruction done. The FTK,
on the other hand, does global tracking three orders of magnitude more quickly
than software reconstruction. As a result, it will enhance the physics reach for
a broad range of ATLAS studies increasing the number of events retained for
offline analysis by a factor of ten or more for broad classes of possible new
phenomena. This means that if the new physics is dominated by such processes,
ATLAS will be able to collect as many signal events in a year with much improved
signal-to-background as it would without the FTK in a decade at the same
luminosity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system is not only crucial for the ATLAS
experiment, advancing the physics program of over 3000 scientists world-wide
with 600 in the U.S., including over 200 graduate students from 40 institutions,
but will also promote innovations in detector technology. The university groups
in this proposal have a tradition for involving undergraduate and graduate
students in detector development projects and this project will bring unique
opportunities for training and teaching modern electronics and computing to a
variety of levels of young people. It will be one of the most sophisticated
systems built in high energy physics. Under the supervision of professors and
engineers, graduate students and undergraduate students, including students from
underrepresented groups, will collaborate in designing, building, and testing
electronic boards, writing the firmware and software, and comparing to
simulation - all marketable skills. Two of the five PIs are female thereby
promoting diversity. This extremely fast pattern recognition technology that
would be developed for the FTK could have a profound impact on all future
versions of collider and astrophysics experiments as well as applications to
other field such as medical imaging. As an example, in proton computed
tomography the pattern recognition technology has the potential to increase data
acquisition rates and thus reduce imaging time with improved resolution.