* 1126407
* MRI: Acquisition of Nikon A1R-MP Spectral Confocal/Multiphoton Microscope with Widefield HyperSpectral Imaging System for the Jordan Hall Imaging Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Christopher Kitchens, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 683,437.00

This funding will enable Clemson University to acquire a spectral confocal
/multiphoton&lt;br/&gt;microscope equipped with a widefield spectral imaging
system. The new system will be housed&lt;br/&gt;in the Jordan Hall Imaging
Facility (JHIF), which is the advanced light microscopy core
imaging&lt;br/&gt;facility at Clemson University. The primary goal of the JHIF
is to acquire and maintain advanced&lt;br/&gt;light imaging equipment necessary
for conducting leading edge research, thus, providing the&lt;br/&gt;Clemson
research community access to the tools necessary to compete with other top
research&lt;br/&gt;institutions. As a core facility, the JHIF is dedicated to
the training of investigators at all levels&lt;br/&gt;from undergraduate and
graduate students to postdoctoral researchers. In keeping with the
MRI&lt;br/&gt;NSF vision, this shared equipment would improve the quality and
expand the scope of research&lt;br/&gt;at Clemson. The multiphoton capabilities
will be utilized by Clemson researchers who work with&lt;br/&gt;live cells and
whole organisms, such as chick embryos, zebrafish, and Caenorhabditis
elegans,&lt;br/&gt;as this technique provides high resolution image acquisition
with less phototoxity and deeper&lt;br/&gt;resolution than conventional confocal
microscopy. The widefield hyperspectral capabilities of&lt;br/&gt;this
instrument will benefit Clemson researchers currently engaged in nanoparticle
studies,&lt;br/&gt;allowing them to not only visualize uptake of nanoparticles
by cells in real time, but to also&lt;br/&gt;identify chemical characteristics
of these nanoparticles. The addition of these capabilities
will&lt;br/&gt;significantly influence the quality of research in the fields of
biological science, bioengineering,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Clemson Jordan Hall
Imaging Facility is dedicated to the training of undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate researchers in advanced light microscopy techniques. In
addition, the JHIF manager&lt;br/&gt;introduces high school teachers to advanced
light microscopy through SCLife summer courses,&lt;br/&gt;giving them an
opportunity to work with these techniques. To attract and assist
underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;groups in the sciences, the JHIF offers a minigrant
program for up to 10 hours of beam time on&lt;br/&gt;the instruments. The
increased research scope that this microscope will bring to
Clemson&lt;br/&gt;researchers could result in enormous benefits to society,
including protecting the environment,&lt;br/&gt;food safety, new drug delivery
systems, and safety from bioterrorism threats.