* 1126022
* RAPID: Warming Holes--Can Climate Models Represent the Variability and Sources of Regional Temperature Trends in the Continental United States?
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Walter Robinson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2013
* USD 36,000.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.

This project addresses the region of zero or negative summertiime temperature
trends which occurs over the midwestern US and is commonly referred to as a
"warming hole". Work performed under the grant seeks to determine whether the
warming hole occurs as the result of the natural variability associated with
low-frequency modes, or whether it is caused by some anthropogenic climate
forcing (aerosols, for example). The project has three main tasks: 1) evaluating
the extent to which the 20th century climate simulations prepared for the AR5
are capable of reproducing the warming hole; 2) assessing whether warming holes,
defined as regions of reduced warming over multiple decades, are captured in the
internal variability of the models, and, if so, whether they occur in preferred
locations, such as the U.S. Midwest; 3) determining whether the model
simulations capture the observed local relationships between regional U.S.
temperatures and clouds and precipitation and the global teleconnections to sea-
surface temperatures.

The broader impact of the project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is
intended to provide information on climate change and its consequences to
decision makers worldwide. The ability of climate models to represent the
warming hole is important for assessing the reliability of future midwest
temperature projections from the models.