* 1126481
* Integrating the BioExtract Server with the iPlant Collaborative
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Carol Lushbough, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2015
* USD 725,789.00

PI: Carol Lushbough (University of South
Dakota)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Stephen Goff (University of
Arizona), Daniel Stanzione (University of Texas - Austin), Volker Brendel (Iowa
State University) and Molly Nepokroeff (University of South
Dakota)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BioExtract Server is an open, Web-based system
designed to aid researchers in the analysis of genomic data by providing a
platform to facilitate the creation of bioinformatic workflows. Scientific
workflows are created within the system by recording tasks performed by the
user. These tasks may include querying multiple, distributed data sources,
saving query results as searchable data extracts, and executing local and Web-
accessible analytic tools. The series of recorded tasks can then be saved as a
reproducible, sharable workflow available for subsequent execution with the
original or modified inputs and parameter settings. The iPlant Collaborative
(www.iplantcollaborative.org) is a project sponsored by the National Science
Foundation to build a computer infrastructure for research in the plant
sciences. By sponsoring distributed informatics projects, iPlant extends high
level computation to researchers through access to data, analytic tools, and
workflows. One of the primary goals of the iPlant Collaborative is the reuse and
integration of relevant technology that exists in the science community and to
collaborate with other researchers when building new infrastructure. The overall
goal of this project is to make data, analytic tools, and workflows accessible,
interoperable, easy to use, and applicable to research and education. In
collaboration with the iPlant Collaborative, this project will enable
researchers to execute iPlant analytic tools within the BioExtract Server,
create iPlant workflows through the BioExtract Server, and manage analysis and
provenance data across both platforms. Examples of such management include
executing BioExtract Server tools and workflows and creating data extracts with
input drawn from iPlant, storing BioExtract Sever tool results at iPlant, and
annotating iPlant data through the BioExtract Server. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary, overall objective of this project is to make data, analytic tools, and
workflows accessible, interoperable, easy to use, and applicable to research and
education. As the project's functionality becomes available through the
BioExtract Server (bioextract.org) / iPlant (www.iplantcollaborative.org)
platforms, it will be introduced to the research and educational communities
through workshops, presentations, publications, and education. BioExtract Server
integrated functionality will be added to the content of iPlant's free, 2-day
"iPlant Genomic Education Workshops" which instruct researchers and faculty in
the use of iPlant resources. The iPlant Collaborative holds more than 10 on-
campus training sessions per year, in addition to workshops at a number of major
conferences (including the ASPB Annual Meeting and the Plant &amp; Animal Genome
Meeting for the plant community, and the SC conference series for the computing
community). Through these workshops, project personnel will demonstrate how the
integrated iPlant/BioExtract Server functionality can be applied to general
research questions. Personnel will work with individual researchers to help
identify ways in which the integrated functionality could be leveraged to
perform specific analysis. In addition to creating and delivering workshop
content, the project will create videos demonstrating the iPlant/BioExtract
Server functionality. These videos will be made available through the iPlant
website as well as the BioExtract Server site. Finally, project functionality
will be incorporated into yearly BioExtract Server workshops for the
Undergraduate Research Fellows from the partner institutions of South Dakota NIH
NCRR's IDeA Networks of Biomedical Research Excellence (INBRE) for which the PI
serves as the Bioinformatics Core Director. Finally, the BioExtract Server will
be an independent system available through an open source license that can be
installed on individual servers. Individual installations will be configurable
and allow for the inclusion of resources that best fit individual project needs.