* 1126547
* MRI:   Acquisition of an Applied Biosystems 3500xL DNA Analyzer for Interdisciplinary Genomics Research and Training at the University of Houston-Clear Lake
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* William Mills, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 203,660.00

This grant will provide for the acquisition of an Applied Biosystems 3500xL
24-capillary DNA Analyzer to foster research and research training capabilities
at the University of Houston-Clear Lake (UHCL). The ABI 3500xL DNA Analyzer is a
fully automated capillary electrophoresis system with a capacity of sequencing
up to 400,000 base pairs per day. The requested equipment will be used by at
least eight faculty members in biology, biotechnology and environmental science
for their research activities as well as for research training of undergraduate
and graduate students. The DNA Analyzer will be utilized to detect pesticide
resistance-associated gene mutations in Rhipicephalus microplus, to study
essential amino acid biosynthesis in Medicago truncatula, to study molecular
mechanisms of environmental stress in soft corals, to study molecular mechanisms
involved in the maintenance of zinc homeostasis in plants, to study microbial
populations in Galveston Bay, and to study regulation of human inducible nitric
oxide synthase.

Acquisition of the high-throughput DNA Analyzer will enhance faculty research
and advance student learning by enriching courses in genomics and through
integration of hands-on exposure for independent research projects using modern
instrumentation. Faculty and student researchers will use the equipment to
address important problems in the areas of biology, biotechnology and
environmental science. For example, the DNA Analyzer will be used to determine
the genes responsible for pesticide resistance in the Texas cattle tick, which
has led to major loss to the cattle industry. The Analyzer will be used to
address problems related to human welfare, such as the role of nitric oxide in
the human body, and how to improve the nutritional quality of plant foods, such
as legumes, to address the worldwide problem of malnutrition from plant-based
diets. The Analyzer will also be used to determine the effects of environmental
stress on soft corals, to characterize the microbial community of Galveston Bay,
and in other projects important to the environment.

This equipment will greatly enhance the generation of research publications and
grant proposals from UHCL and enhance ongoing collaborations with regional and
national organizations such as the USDA Children?s Nutrition Research Center,
USDA-ARS-Livestock Insect Research Laboratory, Nalco Chemical company, and
Baylor College of Medicine. Acquisition of this equipment will address both
local and national needs for well-trained B.S. and M.S graduates with research
skills in biology, biotechnology and environmental science. At least 50 B.S. and
M.S. students per year will use the instrument in independent studies and thesis
research and another 30 students in formal training courses. A high percentage
of these students will be from groups underrepresented in science. Local 7th to
12th grade science students will also be given opportunities to access data from
this equipment to learn how to perform genetic and genomic analysis.