* 1127884
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Defining Environmental Exposure: A Social Scientific Study of Pollution, Masculinity, and Laboratory Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Corinne Hayden, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2012
* USD 14,660.00

Scientists across the globe are investigating the effects of toxic exposure on
human cells. This study poses the following research questions: How do
scientists define and measure environmental exposure? How do scientists
designate, test and collect evidence for laying claims about the effects of
environmental toxins on bodies and biologies? At exactly what point do
scientists feel they can identify when and how 'external' chemicals and
'internal' biologies affect each other? How are scientists both confronted with
and using environmental degradation as the means through which to advance
cutting-edge basic laboratory research in an internationalized research climate?
The researcher proposes to conduct 18 months of fieldwork in order to
investigate the social dimensions of research scientists' methods, practices,
research questions, and concerns. Fieldwork will be conducted in laboratories,
department and university meetings, and research publication and presentation
preparation meetings.

The proposed research will have broad impact by illuminating how scientists
define and study environmental exposures. It contributes to science and
technology studies, anthropology of science, and environmental science. By
studying the way cells interact with environment toxins, primarily chemical
pesticides, these scientists attempt to bring evidence to bare on many
countries' toughest social dilemma - how to improve citizens' quality of life
without quickly destroying the quality of the environment.