* 1127463
* SBIR Phase II:  Active Visible and Infrared Management for More Energy Efficient Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2013
* Kenneth Dean, Gamma Dynamics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2013
* USD 459,569.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II program will develop
electrofluidic smart window modules with unique capabilities for managing
infrared as well as visible light. As a result, these windows will better manage
solar heat gain by switching between infrared transmittance and reflectivity.
The ultimate objective is to develop skylights, windows, and roofs that adapt to
seasonal, regional, and diurnal changes in solar flux and heating and cooling
requirements. These window modules change the optical properties of surfaces by
moving pigment from a small area reservoir to full surface coverage in a similar
manner to the way squids change their skin color. The Phase I program developed
pigmented fluids with engineering infrared responses, and demonstrated proof-of-
concept functioning devices operating with these fluids. The Phase II project
will develop the designs, processing strategies, and materials for full smart
windows modules. Windows modules will then be built, measured, and directly
compared with status quo windows. The innovation in this work is the development
and realization of entirely new materials and devices for managing near-infrared
light over a large surface area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this smart window technology is empowering
buildings to actively manage solar heat gain to improve energy efficiency, which
is a truly green solution. U.S. building energy consumption (40% of total U.S.
Energy Consumption) can be reduced significantly with smart windows and smart
skylights that maximize sunlight for lighting, while effectively managing solar
heat gain, including near-infrared energy. Current passive technologies for
windows do not readily adapt to seasonal, regional, and diurnal changes in solar
flux and heating and cooling requirements. By empowering buildings to adapt
solar heat gain to daily local needs, U.S. energy consumption could be reduced
by as much as one quadrillion BTU per year, while adding minimal cost to
building infrastructure. The commercialization path for this technology is
through the Advanced Flat Glass segment of the Flat Glass market. In addition,
this program will enhance scientific innovation at the Ohio Center for
Microfluidic Innovation, a cluster for commercializing micro/electrofluidic
technology.