* 1127245
* SBIR Phase II:  De Novo Assays for Detection of the Proteolytic Activity in Botulinum Neurotoxin-Based Pharmaceuticals
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,02/28/2017
* Ward Tucker, BioSentinel, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,026,313.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
complete development of a universal, in vitro assay for determining the
enzymatic activity of botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT)-based pharmaceuticals. This
assay, called BoTest Matrix A Assay, will enable standardized comparisons of
different BoNT preparations, regardless of manufacturer. BoNTs are used in many
different cosmetic and pharmaceutical applications due to their exquisite
specificity for motor neurons and their long-lasting effects. Currently, the
strength and quality of BoNT-based pharmaceuticals is assessed using a mouse
bioassay where BoNT is injected into dozens of mice and a unit of activity
depends on the rate or proportion of mouse deaths. Beyond the obvious concerns
about animal testing, the variability of the mouse bioassay and the lack of
suitable standards and uniform protocols among manufacturers put patient safety
and clinical outcomes at risk. The proposed assay(s) will reduce the use of
animals and will provide a method to uniformly assess the activity of BoNT-based
pharmaceuticals, thus increasing patient safety and the likelihood of successful
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this research
are improved procedures and protocols that would greatly increase patient safety
while reducing animal testing. The BoTest Matrix Assay would be applicable to
all stages of BoNT-based drug manufacturing, including quality control,
quantification, stability testing, and decontamination testing at manufacturing
sites?all applications that are currently performed with animal assays. In
addition, the assay would be applicable for authenticity testing (against
counterfeit drugs) at border control points and inoffice testing for high-dose
procedures where toxin activity concentration is critical for clinical outcomes.
The proposed technology would be also the first of its kind on the commercial
market. Other commercially available assays for detecting BoNT activity are not
suitable for assessing BoNT-based pharmaceuticals, because the stabilizers added
to the pharmaceutical formulations interfere with those assays. The proposed
technology could be further adapted for testing BoNT activity in highly complex
matrices (e.g., blood, food, water). Thus, the assay's utility would extend into
food, biodefense, and environmental testing.