* 1127246
* The Political Culture of Wind Power Development in Southern Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Dominic Boyer, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 148,491.00

Drs. Cymene Howe and Dominic Boyer (Rice University) will study the political
culture of wind power development in Mexico. Although the transition from carbon
fuels to cleaner energy is widely regarded as one of the most pressing
environmental and social challenges facing humanity in the 21st century, it
remains unclear how energy transition goals can be achieved, especially when
dominant economic and social policies across the world often question the
legitimacy and effectiveness of government-led development.

This project's central research question is whether contemporary states,
especially those already struggling to meet their governmental obligations,
possess the political authority to implement important programs of national
development such as renewable energy. The research focuses on Mexico, a country
that has been deeply impacted by economic globalization and neoliberal policy
since the early 1980s, and that has experienced significant recent declines in
oil production. In response, the Mexican government has outlined an ambitious
plan to develop renewable energy resources over the next 15 years. Wind power is
a centerpiece of this plan owing to excellent wind resources in the southern
state of Oaxaca. Drs. Howe and Boyer will complete 16 months of field research
in Mexico in 2012 and 2013 using interviews, participant-observation, focus
groups, archival research and two community surveys. The project's research
hypotheses focus on the interactions between four major stakeholders in wind
power development - state and federal government officials, Oaxacan communities,
transnational energy corporations, and media organizations. The primary
objectives of the study are (1) to map the interactions between these
stakeholders, (2) to identify instances of contention, cooperation and brokerage
among them, and (3) to identify assertions and relations of political authority
in order to determine what set of interests and considerations are ultimately
driving the process of wind power development. The study will generate uniquely
rich ethnographic data on the political culture and processes of renewable
energy development in Mexico that will inform scientific research and policy
debates on attempts to transition to renewable energy internationally.