* 1127251
* SBIR Phase II:  Low Cost On-Chip Photonic Crystal Slot Waveguide Absorption Spectrometer for Highly Sensitive, Continuous,In-Situ,Remote Specific Detection of Multiple VOC in Water
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2011,09/30/2014
* Swapnajit Chakravarty, Omega Optics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 790,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a low cost packaged near-infrared on-chip silicon absorption
spectrometer for simultaneous and specific detection of multiple volatile
organic compounds in water (ground water, waste water and drinking water). In
phase I, the volatile organic compound xylene was successfully detected in water
at 100 parts per billion through near-infrared absorption signatures, on chip
with 300 micron long photonic crystal slot waveguides which represents the best
results in device sensitivity and in miniaturization. The device combines slow
light effect in photonic crystal waveguides with highly concentrated optical
field intensity in a low index slot at the center of the photonic crystal
waveguide. The photonic crystal slot waveguide proposed herein provides a factor
of 1000 reduction in interaction length compared to conventional waveguides
leading to enhanced optical absorption by analytes in the optical path.
Transmission is measured from multiple waveguides covering the entire near-
infrared wavelength range, and absorbance determined by measuring transmission
differences in the presence and the absence of any volatile organic compound
analytes of&lt;br/&gt;interest. The miniature spectrometer will enable massively
parallel identification and high throughput analysis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are the enabling of continuous, remote, in-situ
monitoring and unique identification of multiple volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) in groundwater, drinking water, and waste water, with high sensitivity
and specificity, a facility that is not available commercially at present. The
integrated silicon&lt;br/&gt;platform ensures low cost production in high
volume. From commercial standpoint, the United Nations Environment Program
estimates the global water market to expand to $660 billion from the current
$250 billion by 2020. The proposed photonic crystal slot waveguide device can be
expected to occupy a significant position in this market. The generalized design
of the proposed versatile technology implies possible implementation in multiple
areas of in-situ analyte sensing, detection, and spectroscopy such as control of
food, air, and water quality and health, in a lab-on-chip platform with low cost
of ownership. Through continuous, in-situ and remote monitoring, the prototype
developed from this research will eliminate the lag time that currently exists
in industrial water monitoring, sometimes extending to few months as in VOC
monitoring of rivers and lakes, thereby enabling early warning of spurious leaks
and spills instead of after-the-fact damage control and mediation and thus
enhance environmental and national security.