* 1127190
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative Tools to Visualize Digital Media in Digital Era
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Richard Hartman, Synoptos Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 04/30/2014
* USD 858,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will provide a
visual analytics platform that helps visualize how information spreads on the
Web through networks of news outlets and social media users. The supported
research will extend the interactive visual analytic platform by incorporating
better influence modeling, sophisticated propagation cascade models that
consider the semantics of the entities and their changing dynamics through time,
and new visual paradigms for clustered and grouped data. The interface will
allow the end user to manipulate visual representations of how a single press
release, news clip, Tweet, or marketing push triggers activity among
journalists, micro-bloggers, etc. Public sector policy makers, communications
professionals and researchers can use this platform to uncover paradigms in data
dissemination, find new ways to influence information dissemination, better
inform their leadership, and root out sources of erroneous information online.
The Phase II research focuses on dynamic influence monitoring, development of
robust propagation cascading models for different social media sites, and the
use of visual analytics to understand multi-granularity information propagators.
The three areas of research for Phase II are all complementary methods that
attempt to characterize, measure, and understand the ubiquitous process of
information spread and the influence of individuals in this process as well as
allow the user to interact with the underlying data to enhance public outreach.

This grant will continue development of an interactive platform within which
users can see and uncover patterns describing how messages are distributed
across networks. The tool will locate key influencers, allowing communicators to
see exactly how a message was distributed and ways to expedite message delivery
during emergencies. Equally important is the ability of the tool to quickly
uncover the source(s) and major purveyors of harmful misinformation on the Web.
Data and filters further allow users to assess the size and demographic makeup
of the audiences being reached enhancing governments interface with the public
providing objective measures of the organization's effectiveness in penetrating
traditional, new, and social media outlets. This insight will be used to better
inform the organization and enhance public awareness of local, state and federal
initiatives. Paired with the broader media analysis platform constructed
earlier, the supported research will provide a comprehensive means of monitoring
and measuring federal, state, and local municipality organizational performance.