* 1127563
* SBIR Phase II:  Low Cost, High Bandwidth RF Switch
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Youngsoh Park, Nano Liquid Devices, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2013
* USD 590,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase-II project is aimed at developing
Micro Metal Sphere (MMS) fabrication technology for Radio-Frequency (RF) Micro-
Electro-Mechanical-System (MEMS) switch. The target applications are high-
bandwidth RF switches and digitally-tunable RF modules that can be used in
wireless communication systems including cell phone. The MMS technology is
distinguished from conventional cantilever or bridge type MEMS switches in that
it does not have suspended element and no restoring force is involved in the
switch actuation. In conventional MEMS switches, the restoring force is often
not able to overcome interfacial forces over time and causes the infamous
stiction that leads to permanent failure. Since the MMS switch is designed to
switch with free body, it does not suffer from mechanical wear and possibly free
from stiction. In addition, the MMS technology can provide an extremely cost
effective packaging solution replacing commonly used labor intensive and costly
wafer level packaging technology. Since the MMS technology is integration-
friendly with conventional silicon CMOS technology, it can be placed on top of
any CMOS IC. Therefore, anticipated benefit with the MMS technology extends to
size reduction. Also the MMS technology is expected to lower the activation
voltage below 10V.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano Liquid Devices (NLD) is the first
U.S. company invented and developed RF-MMS process and cost effective packaging
technologies that will enable mobile phone makers to design smaller, lower-cost
smart phones, entry-level handsets and other mobile devices, which will
accelerate the convergence of cell phones and computing for the next wave of
mobile innovations. NLD's technology will enable lower-cost smart phones, which
will complement and replace notebook PCs among mobile business people and
students who access data and communications anywhere for work, study, social
networking, and entertainment. About 1.5 billion cell phones will be produced in
2011, of which 67% will be multiband handsets, so the global impact will be
enormous. NLD's RF-MMS technology will enable faster, better cell phone
communications integrating voice, text and video for the average user worldwide.