* 1127570
* Cross-level feedback between individual absence behavior and absence culture in the construction industry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* SangHyun Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 327,680.00

In this project, the research team will study how members of a meaningful social
unit in construction develop an informal and shared understanding of the extent
to which absence is acceptable, tolerable, and legitimate (i.e., absence
culture), and consequently, how this affects workers' absence behavior. Studies
attempting to understand and solve the issues of absence behavior in the
workplace traditionally have focused on individual causes of absence. However,
these attempts to identify and remove individual causes have received only
modest empirical support. Instead, the view that absence emerges from an
individual's social or cultural environment (the absence culture) has become
increasingly popular. We aim to study how such relationships can be seen in
situations like construction where workers move from jobsite to jobsite. In
addition, we will study how absence culture rooted in primary workgroups affect
individual decisions related to absence in these situations. The specific
objectives of this research are: 1) to identify the feedback processes between
individual absence behavior and absence culture, focusing on how the social
context affects individual behavior and how a culture forms on construction
jobsites; 2) to apply computer simulation techniques to study complex and multi-
determined job behaviors like absenteeism; and 3) to incorporate the impact
absenteeism-related policies have on both absenteeism levels and construction
performance into the boundary of the modeling scope, so that diverse policies
can be simulated and tested prior to execution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In terms
of broader impacts, the study will provide practical insights into absence-
control policies thatcan foster positive work cultures and promote employee
attendance. Employee absenteeism is a costly problem in the U.S. construction
industry, so it is hoped the results can matter to competitiveness. Positive
work cultures can also lead to the achievement of a significant increase in the
productivity, quality, and safety of construction work. The findings of this
research can also be applied to the study of other work outcomes, such as
performance, citizenship, lateness, and turnover.