* 1127361
* SDCI Sec: New Software Platforms for Supporting Network-wide Detection of Code Injection Attacks
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2017
* Scott Coull, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 01/31/2017
* USD 1,148,611.00

In recent years, code-injection attacks have become one of the
most&lt;br/&gt;common forms of attack on modern computer systems. At a high
level,&lt;br/&gt;code-injection attacks on network services (e.g. file sharing
and&lt;br/&gt;webservers) and client-based programs (e.g., browsers and
document&lt;br/&gt;viewers) enable redirection of the flow of execution in the
vulnerable&lt;br/&gt;program to arbitrary code, called shellcode, which is
provided as part&lt;br/&gt;of the attack. The injected code often enables
unauthorized control of&lt;br/&gt;system resources, applications, and data. The
key to detecting these&lt;br/&gt;attacks lies in accurately discovering the
presence of the shellcode&lt;br/&gt;being injected into the vulnerable
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intent of this research is to design,
implement, and deploy a new&lt;br/&gt;framework, called ShellOS, that
continuously analyzes network streams&lt;br/&gt;or program buffers to detect the
presence of executable code that may&lt;br/&gt;be harmful. The proposed approach
addresses the shortcomings of&lt;br/&gt;current dynamic analysis techniques that
use software-based CPU&lt;br/&gt;emulation for detecting shellcode. Unlike
previous approaches, this approach takes&lt;br/&gt;advantage of hardware
virtualization to allow for more efficient and&lt;br/&gt;accurate inspection of
buffers by directly executing instruction&lt;br/&gt;sequences on the CPU. In
doing so, this project enables more scalable&lt;br/&gt;techniques for protecting
cyberinfrastructure against code injection&lt;br/&gt;attacks. Where possible,
the project also plans to release anonymized forms of&lt;br/&gt;detected
attacks. The availability of such data can play a significant&lt;br/&gt;role in
fostering collaboration and ensuring U.S. technical leadership&lt;br/&gt;in
network security research. The tools created as part of this&lt;br/&gt;project
will be made available to the broader research community under&lt;br/&gt;an open
source license.