* 1127398
* SBIR Phase II:  A Collective Programming Environment for the Social Exploration of Computational Thinking Through Games
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Alexander Repenning, AGENTSHEETS INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 497,765.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project seeks to build a system
called CyberCollage as a Social Cyberlearning tool to support computational
thinking in STEM education. CyberCollage will enable collective programming of
educational games and STEM simulations through a unique combination of networked
real-time collaboration mechanisms and Web-based social end-user programming.
For example, multiple students can work together on a Frogger game. While one
student may be programming the frog, a different student might be working on the
turtles. Similarly, students can collaborate on science simulations that explore
STEM related questions such as "can your frog live in my pond"? Phase I
established technical feasibility, and showed that complex science simulations
with tens of thousands of agents can both run efficiently and be created
collaboratively by students working together, locally, in the same classroom, or
separated by hundreds of miles. Phase II will establish CyberCollage as a
scalable cloud-based implementation of a Social Cyberlearning tool, and will
integrate embedded assessment mechanisms that make learning outcomes in
computational thinking both measurable and predictable. These assessment
mechanisms enable the investigation and study of computational thinking transfer
evidence between game and STEM applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2010
PCAST report asserts that computational thinking is one of the fundamental
concepts of networking and information technology. Fluency in computational
thinking is needed to prepare today?s students to be the next generation of
innovators and professionals. The proposed combination of high accessibility
through Web interfaces, increased motivational prospective through social
interfaces, and tested curriculum integrated into required computer education
middle school courses is likely to reach a vast audience and attract both women
and underrepresented communities to information technology courses and fields.
This reach is enhanced by the participation of the National Center of Women in
Technology (NCWIT) and Google in the Phase II advisory board. Both organizations
are already disseminating AgentSheets Inc. computational thinking resources,
which is an extremely positive indicator of a high probability of broad impact
and commercial success. The CyberCollage project has established access to
disadvantaged communities that include inner city, remote rural, and Native
American schools in Alaska, Colorado, South Dakota, Texas and Wyoming. These and
other schools will serve as testbeds. A pledged investment by a third-party
organization should establish a consumer-oriented extension of CyberCollage,
making Social Cyberlearning of computational thinking relevant beyond its
original scope of educational applications.