* 1127260
* Identical Particles and Statistics in Superselection Theory
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* David Baker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 125,000.00

Identical quantum particles (such as Fermions and Bosons) have intriguing
statistical properties (Bose statistics and Fermi statistics) that raise serious
issues for naive philosophical accounts of identity. The predominant context for
interpretive studies of identical particles has been basic quantum mechanics.
The PIs propose to develop an interpretive study in the context of quantum field
theory, which is more fundamental. The study involves a theory of superselection
developed in the algebraic formulation of quantum field theory by Doplicher,
Haag, and Roberts. The theory provides a mathematical explaination of
superselection, which would otherwise be a postulated set of rules that forbid
the preparation of a superposition of states associated with different types of
identical particles. They plan to focus attention on two research questions. The
first concerns whether superselection theory (in the algebraic formulation of
quantum field theory) provides a more fundamental explanation for why systems
obey Bose rather than Fermi statistics (for example). The second addresses how
scientific results involving identical particles are to be understood in quantum
field theory, in light of powerful arguments against the existence of
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
bring the philosophy of quantum field theory into contact with long-standing
problems in the philosophy of quantum mechanics. Quantum field theory has been
the source of many novel conceptual problems, particularly (though not solely)
having to do with the existence of unitarily inequivalent representations of the
theory. This has led to much fruitful research, but also to a lack of engagement
between philosophy of quantum field theory and work on quantum mechanics, even
in areas where the study of quantum field theory should bear on the older
debates. The metaphysics of statistics is one such largely-neglected
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This is a deeply
interdisciplinary project that brings together aspects of philosophy, modern
physics, and mathematics. It proceeds in a spirit of cooperative (rather than
critical) exchange between these fields, and it will contribute to enhancing
constructive developments at some crucial points of contact between science and
philosophy of science. The results of this project will prove to be of interest
to mathematicians, physicists, and philosophers of science. The project also
integrates teaching and research; the senior researcher plans to teach a
graduate seminar on the subject matter of the project; the junior researcher
will participate in teaching the course.