* 1127521
* SBIR Phase II:  Clean, Inexpensive, and Carbon-free Energy from a Toxic Waste
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2017
* Jacques Bingue, Innovative Energy Solution
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 665,594.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
commercialize a new process to recycle petroleum toxic wastes to clean and
inexpensive energy. This Phase II project will scale the improved process by
modifying the company?s pilot unit to incorporate the enhancements realized with
the bench scale unit in Phase I. The basic SuperATR is a non&#8208;catalytic
process that employs a cyclic flow reactor filled with an inert packed bed. In
the cyclic flow reactor, the direction of oxidizer/fuel mixture is periodically
reversed producing a high temperature volume. The modifications in the Phase I
project effectively raised the temperature even higher to make the reactor even
more efficient.

The broader impacts of this research are that deteriorating qualities of oils
and gases is forcing the petroleum sector to incur very high cost for energy and
waste disposal. For example, the benign disposal of hydrogen sulfide costs oil
refineries and natural gas processing plants $5 billion a year. Present
technologies only permit extracting the sulfur content while wasting the much
more valuable hydrogen portion. In commercializing this technology, the value
propositions are but not limited to: &#61623; Obtain 9 billion kilowatt hours of
carbon&#8208;free electricity and steam inexpensively. &#61623; Lowering
gasoline and diesel prices, even by 1 cent per gallon, would leave $2 billion in
the hands of Americans. &#61623; Eliminate 5 million tons of greenhouse gas
along with 1.5 million tons of acid rain pollutants by helping refineries and
natural gas plants exceed environmental standards.