* 1127710
* Data Assimilation, Reanalysis and the Construction of Weather and Climate
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Wendy Parker, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 124,595.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric science uses data assimilation, a process by
which information from disparate sources is combined to produce a representation
of the state of the atmosphere at a particular time. These sources include
traditional meteorological instruments and computer simulation models, which use
observational data collected near the specified time. The data are synthesized
in complex ways with one or more simulations of conditions near that time. The
resulting representation is known as an analysis. Analyses are produced in this
way on a daily basis, and they serve as initial conditions for weather
forecasting models. Data assimilation is also performed retrospectively using
archives of observational data to produce reanalysis datasets that span several
decades. These reanalysis datasets have become a staple of weather and climate
research; they are used to investigate atmospheric dynamics, to evaluate climate
models, and to make quantitative estimates of recent climate change. Since the
products of data assimilation are often used in the roles of traditional
observational data, some concerns seem pertinent. Are some of these uses
problematic? Or are the differences between traditional observational data and
the products of data assimilation not very deep? What place should data
assimilation have within contemporary philosophical research on scientific
method? These are the overarching questions that motivate this project. The
first part of the project will explore the extent to which data assimilation and
its products can be reconciled with core concepts in the philosophy of science.
Specific questions that are to be addressed in the project include the
following. Can data assimilation systems (or perhaps the simulation models they
incorporate) be considered observing instruments in their own right, as some
scientists have suggested? Are analyses and reanalyses really so different from
other data models, which are theory-laden in various ways? If highly accurate
and reliable data assimilation systems could be produced, would they deliver
measurements of atmospheric conditions in regions where no traditional
observational data were collected? The second part of the project will evaluate
current uses of data assimilation products (in the roles of traditional
observational data) from a methodological point of view. Key questions to be
addressed are the following. Does the use of reanalyses to evaluate climate
models involve an unacceptable circularity, given that climate models share many
assumptions with the simulation models used in reanalysis? More generally, on
what grounds can inferences from data assimilation products to conclusions about
the real atmosphere (such as those having to do with the causes of atmospheric
phenomena or the rates of atmospheric warming) be justified, given that data
assimilation products are produced in response to a lack of traditional
observational data?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to contribute to both philosophy of science and atmospheric
science. In philosophy of science, it will advance understanding of the ways in
which computer simulation is changing scientific practice and complicating the
theory of knowledge associated with it, currently a major area of interest. In
doing so, it will also re-examine some core concepts of the discipline, such as
measurement. For atmospheric science, the project will address fundamental
methodological questions about data assimilation that have not received the
attention they deserve, despite their direct relevance for
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;Results of the project
will be disseminated widely in journal articles and in talks, targeting both
philosophers and atmospheric scientists. More accessible presentations will also
be developed for undergraduate students in meteorology and philosophy. In
addition, some of the research has the potential to benefit society, by
improving evaluation of the climate models whose climate change projections are
an important input to current environmental policy
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Special Note: This project is jointly funded
by STS and CLD (the Climate and Large-Scale Dynamics Program).