* 1127280
* SBIR Phase II:  Heterogeneous Catalyst Technology for the Economical Production of Biodiesel from High FFA Feedstocks
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2013
* Shuli Yan, NextCAT Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 514,830.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes a
potentially viable solution for many financially stressed biodiesel producers.
Industry estimates that 75% of the installed base of 173 U.S. producers is
currently idle. In order become economically viable, they must be able to use
less costly, and therefore, less refined agricultural source oils as their
feedstock. The R&amp;D presented here builds on a successful NSF Phase I SBIR
grant focused on discovering new acidified heterogeneous catalyst formulations
capable of refining lower cost feedstocks without adding substantial process
costs. Phase II will use these catalysts along with reaction kinetics developed
in the subsequent SBIR Phase IB to assemble and demonstrate a pilot-scale
biodiesel reactor that will continuously produce FAME from high FFA feedstock
(&gt;15% FFA) with a yield greater than 90% for a minimum of six
months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are the
ability to simultaneously use low cost feedstock and to greatly simplify the
biodiesel production process to achieve total cost saving of ~$1.00/gal. With
these savings,&lt;br/&gt;retrofitted, currently idled facilities will be able to
produce biodiesel fuel that will be cost competitive with petroleum diesel and
help meet anticipated global market demand of ~8 billion gallons of biodiesel by
2015. These markets would add employment to economically depressed areas of the
United States and bring the nation closer to energy independence.