* 1127516
* SBIR Phase II:  Improving the Adhesion of Nanocarystalline Diamond Films to Tungsten Carbide Micro End Mills
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Patrick Heaney, NCD Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2014
* USD 676,670.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a novel, commercially-viable, hybrid system that improves the adhesion of
nanocrsytalline diamond (NCD) coatings to tungsten carbide (WC) cutting tools. A
new hybrid system will be assembled, tested, and optimized. Research will be
conducted to scale up the process to reach the capability of coating more than
3,000 cutting tools at one time. Further research will be conducted through
laboratory and industrial machinability testing on these diamond-coated micro
end mills. Testing variables include tool size, tool geometry, machining
parameters (cutting speed, axial depth of cut, feedrate), workpiece material and
environmental conditions. Industrial feedback will be used to ensure coating
optimization to meet the needs of real users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impacts of this project will be the potential to
significantly improve the performance of micro tools. An important area of this
industry is currently limited by poor micro end mill performance. Improved
tooling performance will not only reduce the capital machine cost in this field,
but also help realize the miniaturization of existing cutting-edge technology
limited by current manufacturing capabilities. The most promising societal
benefits of NCD tool coating will be realized in healthcare industry as diamond
coatings are essential for the development of next generation biosensors and
biomedical devices. This will significantly improve the quality and
substantially reduce costs associated with biological sample testing, reducing
the financial burden of healthcare expenses on individuals and the country.