* 1127223
* Industry Self-Regulation: Effectiveness, Third Party Certification and Regulatory Holiday
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Shanti Gamper-Rabindran, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2015
* USD 228,000.00

Industry self-regulation has been adopted as a complement to traditional
government-directed regulation even in high-risk industries, such as the
chemical and nuclear sectors. This research asks: can self-regulation programs
reduce risks and if so, how should these programs be designed? The researach
team approaches this question by examining Responsible Care (RC), the self-
regulation program in the chemical sector, and its impact on reducing
occupational hazards. RC, which exemplifies key features of industry self-
regulation programs, has been broadly adopted worldwide and emulated by other
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the impact of RC on
workplace safety, a main focus of the program. Poor management of production
processes caused the devastating Bhopal accident, an event that contributed to
the creation of RC. Therefore, RC has stipulated codes of conduct on Process
Safety and Employee Health and Safety, aimed at reducing risks in the production
processes including occupational hazards. This empirical project builds upon the
authors? constructed dataset of the US chemical manufacturing sector (2,735
plants owned by 1,523 firms), incorporating economic, environmental, and
demographic variables. This research expands this database by linking it to
OSHA?s Inspection and Accident databases, and extends the period studied to the
years 2002-2007. The expanded data set allows the research team to study the
introduction of third party certification into RC in 2002 in order to isolate
its effects. If third party certification improves the effectiveness of self-
regulatory programs in reducing risks, managers may seek to include credible
certification into such programs. The research also examines the effect of
participation in RC on regulatory scrutiny.