* 1127833
* AIR:  Rapid Label-Free Single Virus Detection Platform for Multi-Pathogen Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,06/30/2015
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 06/30/2015
* USD 215,910.00

Rapid detection and surveillance of infectious agents is an unsolved challenge
in the medical and biodefense communities. The lack of rapid and accurate
diagnostics at the point of care (POC) has led to mismanagement of the newly
developed drugs rendering them ineffective through the emergence of drug
resistant pathogens. The PI proposes the development of a prototype instrument
that does not require highly skilled technicians for POC settings. Issues which
will be addressed in the development of the functioning field-deployable
prototype include: (1) optimization of the illumination uniformity, (2) auto-
focusing onto the sample, and (3) mechanical stability of the setup. The
proposed instrument will be integrated with proven sample preparation techniques
and evaluated against the bench top platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
development and launch of the proposed prototype will drastically improve the
speed of disease diagnosis, expedite treatment options and ultimately produce
better patient outcomes at a lower cost to the healthcare system. The simplicity
and ease-of-use of the proposed system augurs well for the use of the technology
in point-of-care settings and in providing improved healthcare in developing
countries. In the proposed work, the industry participation and mentorship
utilizing experienced entrepreneurs and executives will enhance the
undergraduate and graduate educational experience by providing an environment
for fostering entrepreneurialism and a parallel pipeline for talented engineers
and scientist to industry. The strong ties of the executive mentorship program
to the Boston business community also contributes to the economic development of
the region by launching new businesses and job creation.