* 1127551
* SBIR Phase II:  In Vitro 3D Tissue Model for Toxicity Screening and Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2011,03/31/2016
* Glauco Souza, Nano3D Biosciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2016
* USD 1,271,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will use in
vitro three-dimensional (3D) cell culturing enabled by the magnetic levitation
method (MLM) as an improved tool for toxicity testing. This work will probe the
effects of common agents on the lung, liver and kidney, three organs that play a
central role in drug metabolism and are predisposed to toxic injury. 2D cell
culture, commonly utilized for testing the cytotoxic effects of drugs, displays
limited accuracy in predicting toxicity in vivo due to fundamental differences
in the cellular microenvironment. While better representations of the 3D
architecture of in vivo tissue are provided by animal models, they fail to
accurately reflect whether or not drugs will cause cellular damage in humans as
a result of biological differences between species. Our preliminary data shows
that magnetic levitation maintains cells in culture in an arrangement that
allows the cells to develop and communicate in a manner that is much closer to
the in vivo environment than other in vitro systems.

The broader impacts of this research are to improve assessment of drug toxicity
and chemical hazards, reduce the use of animals, and advance the fields of in
vitro toxicology testing and drug discovery. Commercial potential includes
expansion of the device into high-throughput screening, generation of a
prototype of a gas delivery system with capabilities to perform live cell
microscopy, and development of a label-free viability assay for drug discovery
and toxicity testing.