* 1127017
* A Systems Approach to the Development and Function of C4 Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Timothy Nelson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2018
* USD 8,586,368.00

PI: Timothy Nelson (Yale University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Thomas
Brutnell and Todd Mockler (Danforth Plant Science Center); Peng Liu (Iowa State
University); Chris Myers, Robert Turgeon, Qi Sun, and Klaas van Wijk (Cornell
University); and Joyce van Eck (Boyce Thompson
Institute)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C4-type plants such as maize and several
promising biofuel feedstocks have more efficient carbon-fixation, water and
nitrogen use, and performance in high temperatures and light intensities, in
comparison to C3-type plants such as rice and wheat. The traits conferring these
C4 advantages are (1) cooperation of two distinct photosynthetic cell types
(mesophyll and bundle sheath) for carbon fixation and photosynthesis, (2)
enhanced movement of metabolites between cooperating cells, and (3) high density
of leaf venation. These C4 traits are produced from genetic resources already
present in less-efficient C3 plants, but regulated in more efficient patterns.
Although C4 plants have evolved at least 50 times independently in various
taxonomic groups, the molecular basis of the more efficient C4 regulatory system
is insufficiently understood to extend its advantages to other crops and biofuel
feedstocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systems-level analysis of RNAs, proteins,
metabolites, anatomy and physiology of corresponding developmental stages of
maize (C4) and rice (C3) leaves has identified many of the molecular resources
that produce the C4 traits. It has also revealed that additional corresponding
data about small regulatory RNAs, epigenetic differences among cell types,
protein modifications and several other "data channels" are needed to understand
the production and regulation of these traits. In addition, more sophisticated
computational approaches are needed to integrate the many "channels" of RNA,
protein, anatomical and small molecule information that produce complex traits.
This project will (1) obtain the missing data channels for C4 leaf developmental
stages (2) utilize novel computational approaches for the integration of data
channels and the modeling of regulatory networks that can be tested
experimentally, and (3) test the regulatory basis for several C4 biochemical
cellular traits by genetic and transgenic manipulation. This analysis will
identify the regulatory points that are potential targets for the introduction
of C4 traits in C3 species. Beyond producing a practical and profound
understanding of C4 photosynthesis, the computational tools and systems
resources developed by this project can be applied to other studies of plant
development, biochemistry, physiology and productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
impact of this project will be broadened through the novel BrachyBio! Outreach
Program (http://bti.cornell.edu/brachybio), which introduces high school
students to authentic plant genetics research, while providing the plant
research community with a web-accessible collection of indexed mutant stocks of
Brachypodium distachyon (C3) and Setaria viridis (C4). Project outcomes will be
available through a project-specific public website (C3-C4DB,
http://c3c4.tc.cornell.edu), and curated into the Gramene public database
(http://www.gramene.org). Data will also be deposited at the NIH NCBI and the
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI; www.ebi.ac.uk).