* 1127537
* SBIR Phase II:  Massively Dense 3D Integrated Memory
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Burt Fowler, Privatran
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2014
* USD 468,971.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
develop a two-terminal, electronically-programmable, nonvolatile memory array
using materials commonly found in integrated circuit (IC) manufacturing. Each
element is smaller than a single transistor and is formed using standard IC
layers. This results in a three-dimensional (3D) integrated memory (3DIM)
architecture achieved using a single substrate without need to assemble multiple
die or wafers together with advanced bonding techniques. The ON/OFF conductance
ratio and switching speed of these devices exceed the performance of competing
technologies. Current flows through nanometer-sized regions of the device, and,
as a result, the memory elements will scale to smaller dimensions without
reducing the current through the device, thereby resulting in a dense memory
array architecture with improved signal-to-noise ratio for each subsequent IC
technology. The proposed overall program will include integrating a passivation
layer, connecting each element with an isolation diode, optimizing device
architecture to minimize footprint, and implementing 3DIM control and drive
interface electronics. The program proposed herein addresses the topic by
providing material innovations for improved performance in electronics where
nano-scale semiconducting filaments are fabricated within a dielectric material
for commercial data storage applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project are in the areas of microelectronics
chip manufacturing for wireless, mobile internet and other portable devices
using nonvolatile memory. Memristive device arrays impact numerous commercial
markets including flash and embedded memory, and offer orders of magnitude more
density as compared to conventional memory. By implementing massively dense 3D
memory array architecture on a single substrate, there is no need to fabricate
multiple substrates and bond them together, thereby simplifying the fabrication
process, reducing manufacturing cost and increasing yield. In addition to
portable devices, the proposed device may find applications in space-based earth
sciences and astronomy since it is tolerant to x-ray and heavy ion radiation.
Some recent approaches to achieve 3D memory on a single substrate have not been
successful due to problems with external fields causing bit errors and low
signal-to-noise ratio, or because device operation is based on thermal, ionic
transport, or phase-change mechanisms that are inherently slow. The proposed
memory elements are controlled using electrical signals rather than thermal or
chemical energy, making them highly efficient and faster than competing
technologies. Memory arrays will be fabricated in a commercial foundry and
scaled to smaller dimensions throughout the Phase II project.