* 1127014
* Legitimacy and Restorative Justice: A Multilevel, Multimethod Analysis  of Economic Sanctions and Recidivism
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Richard Ruback, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

This project examines how procedural justice and restorative justice relate both
to the payment of economic sanctions imposed on convicted offenders and to the
offenders' subsequent criminal activity. The proposal also tests two conflicting
predictions about how payment relates to recidivism. On the one hand, having to
pay fines, fees, and restitution in addition to living expenses is difficult and
may lead to increased criminal activity. On the other hand, making regular
payments may make offenders cognizant of the harm they caused and could teach
responsibility, two internal motivations that should lead to less criminal
activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses three methods to investigate
these issues. First, an experiment addresses two reasons why some offenders do
not pay their court-ordered economic sanctions: (a) lack of understanding of how
much they owe and where their payments are directed and (b) a belief that the
sanctions are unfair. The experiment assesses the impact of manipulations of
information and rationale for payment on the amount and proportion of money paid
toward the court-ordered economic sanctions and on measures of criminal activity
(e.g., arrest). Second, a survey questionnaire focuses on how payment interferes
with offenders? other financial responsibilities and tests whether lack of
understanding, a belief that the sanctions are unfair, and a belief that
nonpayment is unlikely to result in punishment are related to offenders' actual
payments and criminal activity. Third, the project uses four years of statewide
data to examine how the payment/nonpayment of the roughly 2.8 million economic
sanctions imposed annually is related to offenders? subsequent criminal
activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By encompassing multiple levels (individuals,
counties, regions of the state) and multiple indicators (payment, crime,
attitudes, beliefs), the research can improve our understanding of how economic
sanctions work and whether they can serve as an effective substitute for
incarceration.