* 1127937
* Logistics of Biomass Based Energy: Positioning CELDi as the Leading Enabler of Biomass Logistics
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Harold Garrett, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2014
* USD 196,336.00

Center for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution (CELDi) &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#1127937 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for the Center for
Excellence in Logistics and Distribution (CELDi) located at the University of
Missouri-Columbia.Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an
NSF approved solicitation, NSF 10-601. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to
submit proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental research.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Sustainable energy sources are a critical component of
our nations future and security. One critical aspect of realizing the potential
of biomass energy is the logistics component. To date biomass energy is not
being realized due to the high costs of biomass logistics systems. This proposal
will address this problem and allow for the development of a multi-stage biomass
supply chain and logistics model that addresses uncertainties, such as those in
the biomass availability, process performance, and final product demand / price
to name a few. The model will also support dynamic decision making and address a
broad mix of inherent problems in biomass logistics. Using the results of the
research, alternative scenarios will be evaluated and decision support tools
will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If this project is successful then
biomass based sources would become viable and biomass based energy sources would
reduce carbon emissions, lead to rural economic development, reduce dependence
on foreign sources of energy, increase energy security, increase the likelihood
for cost effective energy, and influence policy. Participation by students,
including continued recruitment of students from underrepresented groups, will
be emphasized by the PI. The project provides benefits for CELDi by positioning
both the university members and industry partners in a leadership position for
biomass based energy. In addition, the industry partners stand to benefit from
an early view of the results that will allow them to develop and implement
biomass based energy sources and develop possible market strategies and
products.