* 1127587
* AIR:  The Separation of Hydrocarbons from Sand Using Ionic Liquids - Technology Translation Plan - Option 1
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Bruce Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2013
* USD 208,000.00

The technology being developed involves a novel method to separate oil, bitumen
or tar from sand or other types of mineral matter using ionic liquids (ILs). The
processes presently used to separate or extract hydrocarbons from sand are
expensive and result in environmental problems associated with the disposal of
waste products and contaminated water. The intellectual merit of the proposed
work lies in the ability of this class of solvents to obtain a very clean
separation at ambient temperatures without the generation of waste process
water, thus achieving large energy savings and alleviating major environmental
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science and engineering involved in applying
Ionic liquids to the separation of oil from sand or other minerals is not only a
novel and potentially extremely effective way of cleaning sand and olis after an
environmental disaster, but also applies to other areas, such as extracting
bitumen and asphalt from tar sands, separating oil from drilling muds and
cleaning sand from oil well operations. Thus, there are numerous potential
benefits of the proposed activity to society, mostly related to energy and the
environment. The interaction between science and engineering students and
business interns should also instruct both in the art of innovation and the
development of new companies.