* 1127552
* STTR Phase II:  Advanced Poly(lactide) (PLA) Materials for Extruded and Molding Applications
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,08/31/2014
* RAMANI NARAYAN, Northern Technologies International Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project
proposes to&lt;br/&gt;formulate and engineer chemically modified bio-based and
biodegradable Poly(Lactide) based&lt;br/&gt;compounds, to generate a new class
of materials that are, high strength, lightweight,&lt;br/&gt;multifunctional,
environmentally friendly &amp; cost-effective as an alternative to petroleum
based&lt;br/&gt;polymers. NTIC has successfully commercialized a portfolio of
reactive blended bio-based&lt;br/&gt;and/or biodegradable resins for extrusion,
molding, and coating applications. However, it faces a&lt;br/&gt;major hurdle
due to poor mechanical properties, high prices, and higher densities of current
PLA&lt;br/&gt;materials. NTIC successfully developed novel chemistries of
compatibilization to create&lt;br/&gt;advanced PLA bio-resins that offer
improved toughness in Phase I of this work. The newly&lt;br/&gt;synthesized
materials were applied in four different processing platforms to provide
extruded&lt;br/&gt;films, injection molded cutlery, extrusion coated paper, and
extrusion blow molded bottles.&lt;br/&gt;Phase II funding will allow NTIC to
build on the success of the initial trials and build an&lt;br/&gt;improved,
broader portfolio of high strength and economically viable PLA based
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are
technical, environmental, and&lt;br/&gt;economical. This work will (1) widen the
window of performance of PLA based applications; (2)&lt;br/&gt;further
fundamental understanding of PLA and its chemistries (3) greatly increase the
use of&lt;br/&gt;biobased products in larger industrial and packaging markets
implying environmental&lt;br/&gt;preservation of fossil fuel resources; and (4)
create new jobs for sales, manufacturing, technical&lt;br/&gt;support of newly
developed Natur-TecÂ® products.