* 1127155
* Genetic and Cellular Dissection of Mutualistic Plant-Microbe Symbioses in Medicago truncatula
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2019
* Rebecca Dickstein, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2019
* USD 6,699,511.00

PI: Michael Udvardi (The Samuel Roberts Noble
Foundation)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Rujin Chen and Kiran Mysore (The Samuel
Roberts Noble Foundation), Rebecca Dickstein (University of North Texas), Maria
Harrison (The Boyce Thompson Institute), and Janine Sherrier (University of
Delaware)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legumes have been an integral part of
agricultural systems for thousands of years and are second only to grasses in
importance for modern agriculture. Legume crops capacitate sustainable
agriculture and global food security today because these plants establish two
beneficial symbioses that minimize the requirement for energy-expensive and
polluting N- and P-fertilizers. Specifically, symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing
bacteria called rhizobia supplies legumes with reduced nitrogen while symbiosis
with arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi supplies legumes with phosphate and other
growth limiting mineral nutrients. Development and differentiation of nitrogen-
fixing (NF) and AM symbioses require coordinated changes in the expression of
thousands of plant and bacterial or fungal genes. While tremendous advances have
been made recently in our understanding of plant-microbe signaling during the
early stages of the legume-rhizobia and legume-AM fungal interactions,
relatively little is known about the genetic basis of later stages of symbiosis
development which have a great impact on the efficacy of these symbioses for
agriculture. This project establishes a Virtual Center for Symbiosis Research
consisting of six groups at four organizations that are at the cutting-edge of
NF and AM research and genomic, genetic, molecular and cell biology resource
development for legumes. The major objectives of the project include: the
systematic discovery of new genes required for NF and AM symbiosis using
established resources for forward- and reverse-genetics; the development of
advanced genetic resources and databases for high-throughput gene function
discovery in legumes; and the development of facile resources for cell and
molecular biology in Medicago. It is the hope that this project will accelerate
basic discovery and contribute to knowledge and the resource base for delivering
system-level models and comprehensive understanding of NF and AM symbioses in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is trans-disciplinary and requires
the application of genomics, functional genomics, and bioinformatics with the
classical disciplines of genetics, molecular and cell biology, and plant
physiology. Strong and novel training opportunities integral to the research
plan will be provided to postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate
students and technical staff at the Noble Foundation, the Boyce Thompson
Institute and the Universities of Delaware and North Texas. All participating
institutions have student outreach components that will be harnessed to maximize
teaching and learning outcomes. In addition, this project will deliver genetic
and molecular- and cell biology tools and databases to the legume research
community. It will also strengthen collaborative links, not only among the
project collaborators, but also to the legume community generally. The work will
benefit society by helping to train the next generation of scientists and by
helping to make agriculture more sustainable and environmentally-friendly.
Vectors and transgenic and mutant seed will be maintained and distributed over
the long term by the Noble Foundation's Molecular and Biological Materials Core
Facility. Transcriptome data will be deposited and accessible through public
repositories that include ArrayExpress Database
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/miamexpress), and the Medicago Gene Expression Atlas
(http://mtgea.noble.org/v2/). All sequence data related to flanking sequence
tags (FSTs) associated with Tnt1 insertions can be accessed through the project
website at http://bioinfo4.noble.org/mutant/index.php.