* 1127271
* Workshop:  Synthetic Biology Workshops for Interdisciplinary Teams of Undergraduate Faculty to be held Summers of 2012-2014 at Janelia Farm Conference Center (Ashburn, VA)
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Todd Eckdahl, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 269,700.00

This award to the Genomic Consortium for Active Teaching (GCAT) at Davidson
College will provide training to faculty on synthetic biology. This project is
supported by the Divisions of Biological Infrastructure (DBI), Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB) and Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS) within the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Divisions of Undergraduate Education
(DUE) and Human Resource Development (HRD) within the Directorate for Education
and Human Resources at the National Science Foundation. Three workshops on
synthetic biology will be held during the summers of 2012-14, potentially
impacting approximately 90 faculty members from 45 institutions. Biology and
math/computer science faculty interested in integrating synthetic biology in
their teaching, especially those at Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs), Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs), Hispanic-serving institutions
(HSIs), minority-serving institutions and other predominantly undergraduate
colleges and universities, will be invited. Inclusion of synthetic biology in
undergraduate biology curricula meets many of the objectives described in the
Vision and Change report. Synthetic biology is an area of research which can
attract students of diverse talents. It is also an area that can potentially
spur new economic activity based on these new technologies. Of equal importance
are the changes in biology curricula that would enable students to integrate
more quantitative and analytical skills in their education and training.
Workshop organizers have experience in conducting synthetic biology research
with undergraduates and are members of the Genome Consortium for Active Teaching
(GCAT; www.davidson.edu/GCAT). GCAT will collaborate with the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute's (HHMI) Science Education Alliance (SEA). HHMI, which will
provide substantial support for the workshop, will host the three workshops and
provide lab space, housing, and food and registration logistics. The HHMI SEA
staff will also develop pedagogical modules that the PIs will incorporate into
the GCAT synthetic biology workshops. Assessment of these pilot modules will
provide valuable feedback that will help SEA develop and refine synthetic
biology teaching and research materials. GCAT provides an established
communication network between many institutions of higher education and has a
strong record of collaboration with minority serving institutions.