* 1127187
* SBIR Phase II:  NIFUT Technology for Recycling Fluorides from Uranium Tetrafluoride
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2014
* Bamidele Omotowa, Pearlhill Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2014
* USD 529,859.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
significantly expand the number of marketable compounds that can be converted
from depleted uranium tetrafluoride (DUF4). DUF4 is produced by the reduction of
depleted hexafluoride (DUF6), the largest and one of the most toxic waste
components of the entire nuclear fuel cycle. Current technology can convert DUF4
into metallic fluorides. Pearlhill Technologies has developed new,
environmentally and economically sound processes for the production of
nonmetallic inorganic fluorides from uranium tetrafluoride (NIFUT). In Phase I,
Pearlhill proved the feasibility of three NIFUT processes to produce
commercially viable fluoride products; sulfur tetrafluoride (SF4) gas, sulfur
hexafluoride (SF6) gas, and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) gas. In Phase II, the
company will design and develop prototype reactors and conduct field tests for
three processes: (1) a scalable batch process to produce SF4; (2) a continuous
process to produce SF6 gas by direct fluorination of SF4 in a stationary bed of
cobalt trifluoride (CoF3); and (3) a continuous process for the direct
fluorination of trimethylsilylamines at a low temperature liquid phase
continuous process, in order to produce NF3 gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are that, for the first time, a company has
created nonmetallic inorganic fluoride products from DUF6. The Department of
Energy (DOE) currently has as much as 700,000 tons of DUF6 in its inventory.
Meanwhile, four companies are planning to build new uranium enrichment plants.
When these facilities are operational, an additional 27,000 tons of DUF6 waste
will be added annually to the inventory. DOE's 1999 roadmap for decommissioning
DUF6 discussed the need to create new processes for the commercial production of
high-value fluorine products from DUF6/DUF4 including a variety of metallic and
non-metallic inorganic fluoride compounds, which can be absorbed into current
markets. A mix of high-value fluoride products is needed to minimize flooding
any single fluoride market. Market research suggests that the market demand for
metallic fluoride products can absorb only about ten percent of the potential
metallic fluoride gas products that could be created from the annual ongoing
enrichment process; hence there is a pressing need to increase the number of
markets for fluoride products created from DUF6. The innovative NIFUT process
will address this need. The Phase I research has proven that three fluoride
products - SF4, SF6, and NF3 - can be produced at a significant cost advantage
in the current marketplace.