* 1127751
* Spin information propagation in metallic and insulating ferromagnet based devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Shufeng Zhang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 307,692.00

Since the discovery of the giant magnetoresistive effect in 1988, tremendous
advances in spintronics theory and experiment have been made. In particular,
numerous novel physics concepts related to the generation and detection of spin
accumulation and spin current have been proposed and confirmed. A wide range of
plausible spin-based devices have subsequently been proposed. However, aside
from the colossal success of hard disk drives and random access memories which
are based on spin valves and magnetic tunnel junctions, other proposed spin
devices have not been even remotely promising. From the view point of current
theory and simulation, the inability to transfer new spin phenomena such as spin
Hall conductance, spin pumping and spin electromotive force to promising device
application is attributed to too small signals inherent in these phenomena and
too difficulty in practical device
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The present
proposal aims to advance the spintronics field by investigating non-equilibrium
spin-wave propagation in various externally controllable conditions. In the
traditional approach of describing magnetization dynamics, the magnetization
vector has been treated classically via generalized Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert
equations in the presence of the current and the magnetic field. The new
concepts and equations proposed here involve quantum nature of the conduction
electrons and magnetization: the excitations of electrons and of magnetization
are quantum objects which obey the equation of the non-equilibrium quantum
distributions. Specifically, both conduction electrons and spin waves enable to
propagate spin information in magnetic media although they satisfy different
quantum statistics. The generalized spin current, including the spin current of
electrons and of spin waves, will be investigated in various materials and
devices. The central goal is to find possible spin devices based on the quantum
spin propagation beyond classical magnetization
propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: &lt;br/&gt;The spintronics
research has fundamentally advanced our knowledge at the boundary between
classical magnetization and quantum electron transport. The proposed research
would take the traditional classical modeling for the magnetization to a
fundamentally new region. The quantum non-equilibrium distribution for spin
waves can generate unprecedented interesting phenomena. The possible device
concepts and proposed prototype device structures are high risks but a potential
breakthrough in superior spin-based devices is a possibility. The educational
components of the proposal include strong graduate student participation in
research, training, and visiting industrial research laboratories for the
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as for PI to develop a spintronics
course and textbook related to this research project.