* 1127357
* SBIR Phase II:  Matching Algorithms and Talent Acquisition System to Improve Start-Up Staffing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2014
* Stephen Roberson, StartUpHire LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to create
core algorithms for a Talent Acquisition System to pragmatically match
candidates to startup job opportunities. Startup hiring needs are unique, and
the market lacks an effective platform to accelerate and improve this core
competency for company building. Generic search of a resume database does not
sufficiently capture the unique fit requirements of startup employment nor
return acceptable results. This research aims to incorporate (a) limited
employer input of search criteria using a simple interface with (b) a broad
range of normalized inputs, each individually scored for startup fit, to create
a self-tuning algorithm for the search, discovery, and pairing of candidates to
the unique needs of startups. The innovation in this approach is to create a
system inherently weighted to both the hard and soft attributes of startup
work/life. If successful, this effort will remove much of the guesswork by
pointing employers to those most likely to excel in these opportunities. Data
extraction, scoring techniques, and full text search will be applied to resumes,
questionnaires, job search histories, social networking maps and search terms to
feed the algorithm.

The broader impact of this project will be to improve the success rate for young
companies by accelerating and improving the staffing of strong teams at every
level in the organization. StartUpHire believes there is significant commercial
potential for a startup centric career resource in the $6 billion annual U.S.
online recruitment industry. Competitive approaches treat startup recruiting as
identical to large company recruiting, yet experience indicates there is
tremendous demand for an approach built around the unique needs of this
community. Companies benefit by (a) focusing on talent which self-selects into
this ecosystem and (b) algorithmically filtering these candidates using startup-
specific success criteria. This research will create the first platform of its
kind specific to startups, something employers have repeatedly requested. The
proposed system will deliver both quality and speed biased to the needs of
emerging growth companies.