* 1127329
* The Global Shift in R&D Alliances: Multinational Enterprises (MNEs) and the Quest for the Base-of-the-Pyramid (BOP) Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,11/30/2016
* Yuko Aoyama, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2016
* USD 273,299.00

This project will examine how multinational enterprises (MNEs) are devising new
ways to access market intelligence by forging alliances with non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), and it will conduct case studies of organizational
innovation in emerging economies. In particular, the project will focus on the
emerging phenomenon of research and development (R&D) alliances between MNEs and
NGOs , and it will analyze the significance of global corporate R&D activities
in five metropolitan areas in India. In understanding the process and
organizational dynamics of innovative activities that target "base-of-the-
pyramid" (BOP) markets, the investigators will develop a new conceptual
framework that explicitly recognizes innovation as interactions between
technological knowledge and market intelligence. Furthermore, the new role of
NGOs as partners in innovation demands a broader understanding of their role in
shaping the behavior of MNEs. How MNEs and NGOs co-innovate, co-develop, and
nurture knowledge assets in spite of competing incentive structures,
institutional objectives, and organizational cultures requires new solutions to
multi-dimensional coordination problems and different conceptual frameworks for
new forms of market governance. The investigators will adopt a multi-stakeholder
approach to analyze the newly emerging governance form of innovation. Primary
tasks will include a questionnaire survey of foreign MNEs with R&D activities in
India, interviews of foreign MNEs in India with a BOP-orientation, interviews of
NGOs in India collaborating with MNEs, and interviews with executives based in
the United States with knowledge of MNEs' global R&D operations. The project
will combine the multi-stakeholder approach with institutional-evolutionary
framework as well as comparative analysis to triangulate the qualitative
evidence.

Through scholarly publications, case books developed for both MNEs and NGOs, and
a two day symposium at International Institute of Information Technology in
Bangalore, India (IITB), the project will provide basic new knowledge regarding
the roles and expectations of the various stakeholders involved in base-of-the-
pyramid initiatives. Through this international collaborative effort between
institutions in the U.S. and India, the project will foster an intellectual
dialog among academics in the two countries on the involvement of global forces
in shaping the future of the Indian economy as well as the economies of other
developing nations.