* 1127718
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Perceptual Learning in Second Language Learners
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Marie Huffman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 9,607.00

This dissertation research will test whether second language learners have
shared or separate mental representations of speech sounds that occur in both of
their languages. The researchers will recruit English-German and German-English
second language learners from the U.S. and Germany. The participants will listen
to English speech in which all instances of one particular sound ("f" or "s")
have unusual pronunciations. Listeners are predicted to adjust their mental
representations of the relevant English speech sound categories, as has been
demonstrated for monolingual listeners. Modified sound categories can be
revealed through a categorization task in which listeners categorize ambiguous
sounds that range on a continuum from "s-" to "f-like". The listeners will
categorize sounds on a continuum in English as well as in German. The
researchers predict that English-German and German-English second language
learners will show adjusted sound categories not only in English, but also in
German. This prediction is based on the hypothesis that speech sounds common to
two languages, such as "f" or "s" in English and German, have shared or closely
interconnected representations in second language
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants will be grouped into two
proficiency levels in their second language (high/near-native vs.
low/intermediate) depending on how they perform in a second language perception
test. Listeners are predicted to differ in their adjustments of the speech sound
categories depending on their proficiency level in their second language, and
depending on whether English or German is their native
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most language users are not monolingual, but are
familiar with more than one language. This project will contribute to the
understanding of the malleability and connectedness of linguistic
representations of speech sounds in listeners who know more than one language.
The knowledge gained from this study will advance the scientific understanding
of second language learning, speech perception and bilingualism.