* 1127934
* Mechanisms of Wood-Generated Formaldehyde Emission
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Bruce Broline, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,450.00

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Wood Based Composites (WBC)
located at the Virginia Tech Institute. Funding Requests for Fundamental
Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 10-601. The
solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-defined
fundamental research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The U.S. government will soon
restrict formaldehyde emissions from select wood composite materials, but at
levels very near the native emission of solid wood. These native emissions are
poorly documented and not understood. WBC industry members suggest that the
chemistry of native emissions must be determined, and that this knowledge will
shape efforts to improve adhesive technologies and ultimately control total
emissions. This Fundamental Research project complements an existing WBC
project, and provides a scientific foundation not possible with current Center
resources. In the proposed work, lignin chemistry of pine and aspen woods will
be defined using thioacidolysis/desulphurization (T/D). Freshly harvested wood
will be analyzed as a function of drying variables, and known chemical markers
for lignin-formaldehyde formation will be quantified by T/D. The occurrence of
these chemical markers will be correlated to water extractable endogenous wood
formaldehyde. These findings will be correlated to gaseous native emissions as
determined in the current WBC formaldehyde project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
proposed work, central to the plan is the development of advanced and durable
wood-based composite materials. With knowledge of the molecular basis of native
emissions, the industry can best devise technologies that will reduce total
formaldehyde emissions, from adhesive binder and wood. Consequently, home owners
will be motivated to maintain preferences for inexpensive and sustainable forest
products, while having the added assurance of reduced formaldehyde emission.
This effort will also contribute to the fundamental knowledge of lignin
chemistry and to the development of new analytical procedures.