* 1127493
* Prices in Space and Time
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* David Weinstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 349,480.00

Abstract This proposal aims to use price data for the universe of goods that
have barcodes or are available online to answer three main questions: How do
goods prices and product variety vary across space? What are the problems with
using online prices as a substitute for offline prices to measure inflation? How
do prices and quantities respond to high frequency macroeconomic shocks? In
order to answer these questions, this project seeks to measure exact price
indexes for goods across cities. This project is the first endeavor to
investigate the sources of differences between online, offline, and BLS price
indexes and to explore how daily price and consumption data respond to
macroeconomic shocks. The project will make use of several datasets. The first
is ACNielsen Homescan data for the US. The second is Nikkei-POS data and
ACNielsen Scantrak data covering retail sales at the barcode level for Japan and
a number of foreign countries. The third database that the project will use has
price and click-through information for large number retail products. Jointly,
this is vastly more data than has ever been used by any economist or statistical
agency. This will enable to construct daily price and demand information for
millions of products in each country and compare it to data on offline sales of
the same products. The project aims to make breakthroughs in a number of
dimensions. First, for academic economists, the proposed research provides the
first test of whether Paul R. Krugman?s proposed mechanism that underlies his
Nobel Prize winning theory of New Economic Geography is correct. Krugman argues
that larger markets have greater product variety and should have lower price
indexes for tradable goods. A major problem with existing cross-city measures of
prices is that they do not compare identical goods. Hence, it is not possible to
know whether, whether observed higher goods prices in cities are due to
wealthier urban residents consuming higher quality items or due to prices of
identical items. More generally, the project aims to demonstrate how barcode and
online real estate data can be used to measure cost of living across locations.
Second, the project seeks us to understand the extent to which price indexes
based on internet data are good substitutes for conventional price indexes, such
as the Consumer Price Index. A major question for economists and statistical
agencies is how well online prices track offline prices. Statistical agencies
such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics calculate price indexes using data
manually collected at offline locations that cannot reflect the high frequency
online price changes that are relevant to consumers who are increasingly
shopping at online stores. While the increasing availability of internet data
has the potential to render this type of data collection obsolete, questions
remain regarding the accuracy of price indexes based on internet data. As
economists start using online data in place of offline data to investigate many
important economic questions, it is important to know how closely online prices
track offline prices in general. As a starting point, the project seeks to
examine price differences across markets. While this has been done for certain
narrowly defined markets -- e.g., books and contact lenses ? this project will
be the first to examine whether Internet prices are lower than offline prices in
general. The project intends to do this by comparing GPI data with AC Nielsen
data that contains price information on 750,000 different UPC's available in
mass-merchandising stores like Wal-Mart for a variety of different countries.
One of the added benefits of this comparison is that the research will be able
to verify the validity of click-through data as a measure of market share. Next
goal of the project is to examine how rapidly price differences dissipate across
different classes of merchants by examining price movements across online
merchants (controlling for their relevance using click-through data). This will
be useful for determining how much market power online merchants have. The
project seeks to conduct a similar analysis comparing price dynamics of goods
available online with those available in brick-and-mortar establishments that
sell goods available in AC Nielsen data. The generated information will be
useful to answer the question of whether online pricing behavior differs
systematically from retail prices. This is a very important question for
understanding not only market interactions but also for understanding how
closely online prices are linked to offline prices. To the extent that these
prices are closely linked, it will provide further validation that one can use
online prices as a substitute for offline prices. The information will also
enable to obtain estimates for how the development of online stores affects
offline marketing. The project?s goal is also to make use of data to understand
international market segmentation. In particular, by comparing prices of online
goods in different countries, this research will be able to estimate precisely
how international cost shocks are transmitted across countries (what economists
term ?pass-through?). These types of estimates are extremely important for
understanding how exchange rate movements affect prices and propagate
international macroeconomic shocks. Finally, the ability to produce daily price
indexes and observe daily demand creates a number of exciting possibilities for
evaluating pricing and consumption decisions. For example, if one constructs
price indexes carefully, it is theoretically possible to produce daily measures
of inflation in real time. This potentially could be useful for examining how
fast macroeconomic shocks appear in consumer prices. One of the difficulties of
evaluating consumption behavior is that consumption and pricing data tend to
come out at a quarterly or monthly frequency. As a result, it is often very
difficult to determine which event was critical in determining pricing and
consumption behavior. The ability to work with price and click-through data at a
daily frequency will help to understand how macroeconomic shocks are transmitted
to demand as well as real estate and goods prices.