* 1127059
* Deciphering Mechanisms of Prezygotic Reproductive Isolation in Solanum
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2018
* Patricia Bedinger, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 11/30/2018
* USD 5,868,401.00

Intellectual Merit: Both plants and animals have evolved ways to prevent
interbreeding between species. In other words, each species is reproductively
isolated from other species because of reproductive barriers that prevent
hybridization. The focus of this research is to understand the nature of
reproductive barriers between species within the genus Solanum, which includes
two important crop species, potato and tomato. In the previous funding period,
the timing of reproductive barrier formation and site of barrier action in
inter-species crosses was determined, and male and female genes involved in
forming reproductive barriers were identified. In the current project, this
information will be used to pursue the detailed molecular mechanisms that
constitute inter-species recognition and rejection during mating attempts. Prior
research has identified a population of S. habrochaites (a wild tomato species)
with incipient reproductive barriers that isolate it from other populations.
This system will now be developed as a powerful model for answering fundamental
questions about how new species evolve. In the previous funding period, studies
were conducted using tomato because it is an excellent model system for genetic
and genomic studies. In the current project, research on reproductive barriers
will be expanded into potato, an increasingly important crop worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows in the research laboratories will participate in the
teaching of undergraduate 'Many Minds' laboratories in an Introductory Biology
course; this will ensure that integration of research and teaching becomes
second nature as their careers advance. Public outreach will also be a key
component of the project. During this project three 90-second radio spots will
be produced to air on the public radio Earth &amp; Sky series, which reaches
about 15 million listeners. In addition, three podcasts will be produced for the
EarthSky (www.earthsky.org) and the project (www.irbtomato.org) web sites. One
topic of these media efforts will be the importance of preserving wild
germplasm, using tomato as an example, which should truly resonate with lay
audiences. The project will also impact society by advancing crop improvement.
The wild relatives of tomato and potato possess genes for resistance to
pathogens, drought, cold and salinity--traits that are particularly important in
a time of global climate change. Unfortunately, accessing these important
agronomic traits is often prevented or impeded by reproductive barriers. This
project will lead to understanding that will facilitate inter-species crosses
between domesticated and wild species by altering reproductive barriers; this
advance will greatly expand the genetic base for crop improvement to include
resistance to disease and environmental stresses.