* 1127055
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Dynamic Modeling of Exurban Land Markets and Land Use Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Yong Chen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 99,927.00

Despite recent advances in geosimulation, empirical land-use change modeling,
and regional spatial dynamic theories, basic knowledge regarding how regional
economic growth and decline impact the spatial and temporal dynamics of exurban
land-use patterns remains rudimentary. This is due in large part to a continued
reliance on assumptions of instantaneous price adjustments to a long-run spatial
equilibrium in conventional urban economic models that omit consideration of
short-run dynamics and local spatial interactions. To address these theoretical
limitations, this research project will develop a dynamic spatial model of
exurban land markets that explicitly accounts for key features of exurban areas
to explain observed exurban land-price and development pattern dynamics
(Objective 1). The model will incorporate local land use feedbacks, such as open
space and congestion spillovers, to investigate how incorporation of these
endogenous local spillovers influences land-price and land-use dynamics
(Objective 2). The model will also be used to explore the potential impacts of
income shocks on exurban land demand, supply, and land-use patterns and the time
scales over which these changes occur (Objective 3). The project will accomplish
these research objectives by developing a new theoretical model of exurban land
markets that accounts for the relative demand and supply of spatially
differentiated land. The investigators will use an auction model to derive
optimal household bids and an optimal timing model to derive landowner
reservation rents. Spatial agent-based computational modeling will be used to
simulate market interactions and derive spatially varying market land prices and
land development patterns over time. Extensive spatial data on parcel-level land
development and residential location decisions will be used to empirically
specify the key model parameters and MatLab and C++ codes will be used for
implementation. The expectation is that the model will generate new hypotheses
regarding the role of spatial arbitrage in exurban land markets and will provide
a new theoretical and simulation-based framework for studying spatial land-use
dynamics.

Rapid exurban growth and the characteristic low density and scattered
urbanization patterns that accompany it have greatly extended America's urban
footprint and transformed many rural areas. Since the onset of the housing bust
in 2006, a new set of challenges has emerged for many exurban areas that appear
to have declined more rapidly than their urban and suburban counterparts. Both
trends raise essential questions about the sustainability of exurban regions. By
developing a dynamic spatial model of exurban land markets, this project will
address these fundamental questions of exurban growth, decline, and
sustainability. Despite the economic and ecological importance of the exurbs, no
one has fully conceptualized or developed a spatial dynamic model of exurban
land markets. By doing so, this project will make a fundamental theoretical
contribution to land-change science and provide new insights into urban spatial
patterns. The empirical applications proposed in this project will generate new
knowledge that will have tangible benefits to policy makers confronted with
urban sustainability management challenges. By furthering collaboration among
scientists from regional science and physics, this project will advance the
involvement of spatial scientists in interdisciplinary research and provide new
interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate students in complex
systems and spatial economic modeling.