* 1127557
* SBIR Phase II:  Microwave Surface-Wave Plasma Source for Large-Area, High-Throughput, High-Quality Thin-Film Manufacturing for Solar Panels and Semiconductors
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Brian Jurczyk, Starfire Industries LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2013
* USD 560,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a Plasma-Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD) system for the deposition of
silicon layers for a solar cell to absorb sunlight and convert to electricity.
Current PECVD processes face challenges that limit the quality and speed at
which the silicon thin film can be deposited. This translates into higher
capital cost and less efficient photovoltaic modules, thus higher cost. In this
project, a novel microwave surface-wave plasma source for the PECVD processing
step will be developed. This source has the potential to increase deposition
rates by 10 times over the current state of the art, while maintaining excellent
film quality needed for high energy conversion efficiency and long lifetime. The
expected outcome of this project is to offer a technology with high processing
speed that is suitable to manufacture advanced tandem and triple-junction solar
cells with high energy conversion efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impacts of this project will be the potential to enable the
manufacturing of high-efficiency thin-film silicon solar cells at costs meeting
or exceeding the 2020 grid-parity goal of $1/Watt installed cost. Thin-film
silicon uses earth-abundant, sustainable materials with inexhaustible supply of
raw materials and no toxicity concerns. The solution provided by Starfire
addresses a critical manufacturing challenge that has the potential to break the
thin-film silicon bottleneck and enable its wide adoption. This technology can
also be used in areas such as semiconductors and advanced lighting.