* 1127698
* Accurate and Efficient Reliability Analysis of Complex Structural Engineering Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Christopher Eamon, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 02/28/2015
* USD 249,899.00

This research aims to develop an accurate and efficient method for reliability
analysis of computationally and probabilistically complex structural engineering
problems that cannot be accurately solved with current reliability methods
without high-cost simulation approaches. This will be accomplished by
formulating a simulation-based approach based on the method of conditional
expectation and estimation of the probability density of the simulated results
in the critical region of interest. The project will develop an optimal
algorithm for probability density construction, a method to estimate error in
the calculated reliability, and a new and accurate approach for efficient
simulation utilizing variance reduction techniques. The methods developed in the
project will be validated on a database of benchmark reliability problems as
well as selected complex structural reliability problems representative of
engineering practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to advance
structural safety analysis for a variety of complex, high-fidelity engineering
problems such as crash, impact, and blast analysis; metal forming; and complex
structural system evaluation in various engineering disciplines. The work will
provide advanced training to undergraduate and graduate students with their
possible recruitment from underrepresented groups through existing university
outreach programs. Selected research results will be incorporated in the
structural engineering curriculum to expose students to state-of-the-art safety
analysis methods.