* 1127606
* AIR:  Development and Evaluation of Self-Powered Piezo-Floating-Gate Sensor Chipsets for Embedded and Implantable Structural Health Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2014
* USD 258,000.00

This proposal leverages prior NSF funded work that resulted in the patent of a
self-powered piezo-floating-gate (PFG) wireless sensor. The sensor is ultra low
power and capable of storing strain data, making it highly suitable for
embedding in safety-critical physical structures and infrastructure for
structural health monitoring via wireless RFID readers over the lifetime of the
structure. The proposed effort will address the technological gaps necessary to
lead to a robust prototype and subsequent manufacture and commercialization,
namely development of all supporting sensing circuitry and wireless interface
circuitry and software, demonstrating remote configuration and interrogation of
the PFG wireless sensor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PFG wireless sensor when
incorporated into a prototype system via the proposed work, has the potential to
have significant impact in the health monitoring and fault diagnosis of large
classes of systems for which such monitoring systems must be autonomous, self-
contained, generate their own power and be zero-maintenance. As a result such
sectors as civil infrastructure, biomedical devices and systems, individual and
civil transportation, and energy represent potential markets. Adoption of such
embedded sensor elements in the safety critical systems used in these sectors
can ultimately result in fewer injuries and fatalities arising from unexpected
system failures.