* 1127747
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Networked Knowledge: Socially Embedded Science in Early Modern Siam"
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Tamara Loos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 0.00

Summary and significance

This dissertation is a study of the social relations that authorized knowledge
in nineteenth century Siam (Thailand), which played host to the interaction of
two cosmopolitan knowledge regimes: western science and indigenous knowledge.
Previous studies of 'the arrival of western science' in Siam have ignored the
role of religious thought in both knowledge regimes, and the vitality of
indigenous knowledge. This historical study will focus on three seminal figures
and their interactions with western forms of scientific knowledge. It will
situate these actors within the western and Buddhist knowledge networks that
coincided in early modern Siam. The study will then trace the social life of
western scientific knowledge in Siamese institutions, implying a radical
redefinition of the notion of secularization in Siamese history.

Technical description

The proposer will undertake five months of archival research in Bangkok,
Thailand in order to forge connections between global narratives of the spread
of modern science and the socially and culturally contingent processes of its
localization. Archival sources to be explored include the personal library
holdings of elite Siamese figures, Siamese and Pali language treatises
pertaining to science and medicine, and records of Buddhist monastic
correspondence and exchange across South and Southeast Asia.

By integrating theoretical perspectives from science studies with the historical
and cultural purview of area studies scholarship, this research project will
bring under-utilized Southeast Asian historical materials to the attention of
science studies scholars and likewise expose area studies scholars to the
central concerns of science studies scholarship. It will also make important
contributions to post-colonial studies scholarship on topics ranging from
secularization to issues of local knowledge, including proprietary knowledge in
indigenous medical traditions