* 1127464
* SBIR Phase II:  Building a Flexible, Technology Adaptive Architecture to Support Processing of Content by Knowledge Workers
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Eric Koefoot, PublicRelay, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 1,100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II Project addresses the
gap between the capabilities of today's semantic analysis systems and the
accuracy requirements of knowledge workers (analysts and researchers) in
language-sensitive fields such as public relations, foreign affairs, and crisis
management. Knowledge workers in many organizations monitor and analyze print
and web coverage for content of interest. When the volume of search results is
large, some filter, classify and score the results using products or systems
based on semantic analysis technology utilizing extensive libraries of words,
patterns, and context-specific algorithms. However, users complain that these
systems fall short of desired accuracy, missing rhetorical devices such as
irony, sarcasm, metaphors, double entendre, and improperly interpreting
connections between sentiment and topics. Users with high thresholds for
accuracy thus turn to manual processes to either supplement or substitute for
technology. Building upon Phase I work, the company will create and integrate a
larger set of content processing modules and enhance a pluggable architecture to
support quick insertion and testing of new modules in the content processing
"pipeline." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once commercialized, the system will enable
more rapid adoption of technology by knowledge workers. In fields with high
accuracy requirements, the need for human judgment has constrained technology
use to discrete areas like search, while in subsequent processing steps,
analysts must manually capture, classify, score, analyze, and report on the
output. Feedback to date suggests the product can substantially enhance the
productivity and effectiveness of professionals in these fields and that it
addresses a number of frustrating gaps in the marketplace.