* 1127901
* Student Travel for Magnetism Summer School to attend the 2011 INternational IEEE Nagentics Society Summer School being held in New Orleans on May 22-28, 2011.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Albrecht Jander, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Funds are requested to provide travel and subsistence support for 12 U.S.
graduates&lt;br/&gt;students to attend the 2011 International IEEE Magnetics
Society Summer School in New&lt;br/&gt;Orleans. The International Magnetism
Summer School is the IEEE Magnetics Society?s main&lt;br/&gt;outreach effort to
promote education in the field of magnetism and attract more young
scientists&lt;br/&gt;to choose a research career in magnetism and related areas.
The one-week Magnetism Summer&lt;br/&gt;School is designed for graduate students
studying magnetism and related areas. It will consist of&lt;br/&gt;lectures by
international experts and will include poster presentations by participating
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students. The program will cover fundamentals and advanced
topics in magnetism. The summer&lt;br/&gt;school is a unique opportunity for
young scientists to meet leaders in their field in a relaxed
and&lt;br/&gt;collegial atmosphere and to begin establishing a network of
colleagues in the research&lt;br/&gt;community.&lt;br/&gt;The Magnetics Society
has allocated $106,000 which will be used primarily to provide&lt;br/&gt;with
free room and board and reimburse for most of the travel expenses for 65
students from all&lt;br/&gt;over the world including the United States. The
funds requested from NSF will allow additional&lt;br/&gt;U.S. graduate students
to attend the Summer School and interact with peers
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Summer School
provides a forum for exchange of information in the field of&lt;br/&gt;magnetics
research. In addition to formal lectures, each participating student is required
to&lt;br/&gt;present a poster about their current research. These topics are
discussed amongst the students and&lt;br/&gt;lecturers during poster
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the Summer
School lies in the education of young scientists and&lt;br/&gt;researchers in a
fast-moving and economically important field. Participants will learn
both&lt;br/&gt;fundamental as well as advanced topics through lectures delivered
by internationally-renowned&lt;br/&gt;experts. In addition, there is a degree of
cultural education, teaching young scientists to interact&lt;br/&gt;with and
respect their colleagues from other countries. The students will be co-housed
with peers&lt;br/&gt;from different nationalities fostering interaction and
cultural exchange.&lt;br/&gt;The organizers of the Summer School particularly
encourage women and&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities to apply. The program
committee also strives for diversity in the&lt;br/&gt;lecturers selected for the
summer school to provide role models for female and minority students.