* 1127853
* A Wireless Sensor Microsystem for Monitoring the Effects of Vitamins on Aging
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Gabor Temes, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Center for Design of Analog-Digital Integrated Circuits (CDADIC) Proposal
#1127853

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Design of Analog-Digital
Integrated Circuits (CDADIC) at Washington State University (lead) for work
executed at its Oregon State University site. Funding Requests for Fundamental
Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 10-601. The
solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-defined
fundamental research. Development of wearable electronics to effectively monitor
human activity and physiological signals is emerging as an important area for
integrated circuit and system design. Wearable electronics pose distinct
challenges to the designer unlike those of traditional electronics environments
including light weight, low power, and mixed-signal design often requiring
electrical and/or chemical contact with the human subject?s skin and unteathered
wireless connection to remote monitoring infrastructure. The proposed research
effort will design and demonstrate a wearable sensor for elderly subjects
capable of monitoring daily activity patterns and vital signs. The research aims
to improve the energy efficiency of specialized analog-digital conversion,
wireless transmitters, and digital computing for wearable computing as well as
explore data mining approaches for the extraction of diagnostically relevant
signatures.

With the aging of the US population, the proposed work has the potential for
wide impact in the care of the elderly and their ability to stay longer in their
own home environment, thus increasing their positive outcomes and reducing their
cost of care. The proposed project has strong support from Analog Devices and
Intel, both members of the Center. More broadly, the work has the potential to
expand the research portfolio of the center as a whole into the area of wearable
electronics, thus impacting the center?s entire industry sector. The PIs have
also founded a company to help commercialize work in this area. The proposal
lays out concrete plans for involving undergraduates in the work via senior
projects.