* 1127253
* Collaborative Research: Linking the chemical structure of black carbon to its biological degradation and transport dynamics in a northern temperate forest soil
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Jeffrey Bird, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2017
* USD 523,607.00

Fire is a major controller of carbon (C) cycling in terrestrial ecosystems, by
converting plant biomass to atmospheric CO2 and by contributing incompletely
combusted biomass or "black carbon" (BC) to soils. The scientific understanding
of the short- and long-term fates of BC in terrestrial ecosystems is incomplete,
and a critical knowledge gap exists in our understanding of the fate of BC in
the environment. BC, may significantly affect soil C stocks and rates of CO2
exchange of forests with the atmosphere. Through integrated field and laboratory
studies, this research will improve understanding of fundamental biological,
chemical and physical controls on BC degradation and transport processes in a
northern forest soil. This research will link the charring temperature of BC
materials to their chemical and physical structures and their resulting decay
rates, activity of the main decomposers, enzyme activities, transport dynamics,
and stabilization mechanisms in soil. The proposed experimental approach will
use stable isotope-enriched (13C and 15N) BC materials produced over a range of
temperatures (200 to 600ÂºC) and its precursor wood of jack pine, a fire-prone
and abundant tree species in eastern North America, to elucidate the structures
of BC materials and track the multiple fates of these materials when added to
soil. This approach will permit a direct assessment of the biological turnover
in soil using advanced molecular and spectroscopic techniques. This work will
provide the first look at the roles of specific groups of microorganisms and
soil fauna involved in the decomposition and movement of BC and wood in soils.
To test the effects of plant species on BC chemical and physical structures,
highly 13C- and 15N-enriched BC from red maple will be compared with the jack
pine. Resulting data and knowledge will contribute to ongoing efforts to predict
terrestrial C cycling, and will inform ecosystem and climate modelers and also
land use managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most existing climate models predict
that temperate and boreal forests will experience greater fire frequency under a
warmer future climate, thereby increasing BC (black carbon) contributions to
soils. In addition, substantial BC (or "biochar") production is expected from
the energy industry. This research will characterize the key biological,
chemical and physical controls on BC and wood degradation processes in soils,
thereby substantially increasing our understanding of the mechanisms involved in
C stabilization and sequestration in fire-prone forests. This will provide
information needed to improve ecosystem and global C cycling models and their
uses in characterizing forest soil C sinks in present and future climates. This
research will inform a broad scientific, educational, land manager and agency
community interested in ecosystem function, productivity and sustainability. In
addition, the project will include involvement of a science teacher from a New
York City minority-serving high school and the NY GLOBE Metro program to
integrate applied environmental ecosystem science and geosciences into the high
school biology and earth science curricula. Purdue University, in collaboration
with Leech Lake Tribal College (LLTC), will integrate this research into an
ethnobiology curriculum focusing on both modern principles of chemistry and
Native American utilization of BC. The University of Michigan Biological Station
and City University of New York will each train a postdoctoral researcher within
the scope of this project and will use the field study as a resource for on-site
university courses, its site-based undergraduate and graduate student research
programs, and its science outreach.