* 1127380
* SBIR Phase II:  Scale-up Manufacturing of Nitric Oxide Nanotechnology for Healthcare Infections
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Nathan Stasko, Novan, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 990,032.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
the process and engineering controls necessary to scale up the manufacturing of
a nitric-oxide-releasing active pharmaceutical ingredient (API). One of the
applications is a wound-healing product for diabetic foot ulcers. This project
will focus on 1) optimizing the process parameters required to scale production
of a nitric-oxide-releasing API to reproducible 1 kg batches, and 2)
implementing the analytical methodologies to meet the requirements of the
Chemistry, Manufacturing and Control (CMC) sections of an Investigational New
Drug (IND) application. The expected outcome is a manufacturing process capable
of producing large batches of the API that are suitable for an IND submission of
a wound-healing product for diabetic foot ulcers or other nitric-oxide-releasing
drug. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this project will
be the potential to provide a new standard of care for the treatment of diabetic
foot ulcers. Currently, there are no products that address both wound healing
and infection in diabetic foot ulcers. Infection is particularly problematic in
diabetic foot ulcers due to the lack of normal skin barrier function, long
duration of wound exposure to the external environment (months to years), poor
blood circulation to the extremities that limits the migration of inflammatory
cells to the site of infection, and the recent understanding of biofilm
formation which protects bacteria from topically applied antimicrobials and
systemically administered antibiotics. Nitric-oxide-releasing wound-healing
therapeutics have the potential of addressing both infection and healing in
diabetic foot ulcers.