* 1127219
* SBIR Phase II:  Long Fiber Thermoplastic Composites from Recycled Carbon Fiber
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2011,02/28/2015
* Mark Janney, Materials Innovation Technologies, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2015
* USD 888,905.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop long fiber
thermoplastic (LFT) compositions based on recycled carbon fiber. In Phase I, we
demonstrated the ability to make high quality LFT formulations based on (1)
waste carbon fiber and (2) composites scrap and end-of-life thermoplastic and
thermoset carbon fiber composites. Mechanical properties of these composites
were similar to, and in some cases superior to, those for virgin carbon fiber.
In this project, we will continue to develop manufacturing capabilities to make
both thermoset and thermoplastic composites. In this Phase II project, we will
look at the following technical issues: (1) examining the use of new recycled
fiber forms and comparing the results to prior data; (2) investigating the
molding parameters associated with the "forging" of flat blanks of LFT; (3)
optimizing the LFT compositions; (4) demonstrating consistent moldability and
mechanical properties; and (5) demonstrating the conversion of molded LFT parts
back into LFT compound to "close the loop" on recycling. This effort will
feature partnerships with a not-for-profit composites laboratory and another
small business, both of whom have extensive experience in developing LFTs using
virgin carbon fiber.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes a reduction in
the amount of carbon fiber going into landfills and lower greenhouse gas
emissions. Worldwide carbon fiber production is ~80 million pounds per year,
with demand growing at ~15% annually. Conservatively, 20% of this fiber ends up
as waste during composite manufacture (~16 million pounds/year) and is
landfilled. The aerospace industry is a main consumer of this material (military
aircraft, Boeing 787 and Airbus A380), but industrial, automotive, and
recreational markets are also growing. However, few composite manufacturing
processes are designed to work with chopped fibers, which is the primary form of
recycled carbon fiber. Developing LFTs based on recycled carbon fiber will allow
us to achieve "Three Shades of Green" by eliminating landfilling, reducing
energy costs relative to virgin fiber, and improving sustainability. A
significant business opportunity exists if manufacturing methods can be
developed that use recycled fiber in the forms that are typical of reclaimed
material. The potential market for composites made from recycled/reclaimed
carbon fiber is more than $200 million. Finally, the amount of energy needed to
recycle carbon fiber is only about 4% of that needed to make virgin fiber,
reducing associated greenhouse gas emissions.