* 1127611
* Standard Research: Establishing an STS Informatics Infrastructure and Training Program
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* James Collins, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 98,000.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for the first part
of an ambitious collaborative informatics project between researchers at Arizona
State University and the informatics team at the Marine Biological Laboratory in
Woods Hole, Massachusetts (MBL). The full project involves three parts and will
lead to informatics infrastructure and training that will be available to the
entire STS (Science, Technology, and Society) community. This award provides
seed money that will serve to support the first part of the project, which is
described in the next section. In the second part, the team will build a
centralized repository and adapt and develop informatics tools to allow the
History Project to develop new kinds of scholarly data and knowledge. The
repository will integrate the MBL History Project into a single, shared resource
growing from the repository containing other projects that already reside at the
MBL. In the third part, the team will develop a research system to allow any STS
researchers to add their materials into the repository (with ownership and
intellectual property carefully labeled and protected), then take advantage of
participating in a shared system for which each researcher has access to all,
and be able to ask new research questions and develop new knowledge as a result.
To foster these approaches the team will also develop an education
infrastructure for STS informatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars will develop new research approaches and
findings within the MBL History Project, which brings together existing
materials related to biology at the MBL and provides scholarly interpretations
of the science, the institution, and its place in society. The MBL has been one
of the world's leading biological research and education institutions for over
120 years, and it has had tremendous impact on the life sciences and on society.
The team will assemble working groups around four topics: Embryology, Model
Organisms, Physiology, and Ecosystems. A team leader has been identified for
each working group, and each of them will bring together a small group to help
identify materials that will be collected and ingested into the database. These
will be combined with materials gathered through MyMBL, an online tool that the
team is developing for collecting digital video narratives from living subjects
on specific topics; the development of MyMBL is to be supported by this award.
Additional (more technical) infrastructure elements are also to be supported,
such as the development of a d-space repository for maintaining information in
triples that are to be imported from some Fedora databases. All of these
elements will serve to provide a "proof of principle" for the full project
outlined in the first section above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impacts of the first part of the project
include the scholarly results of the MBL History Project, centered on the
repository and Web interface plus more traditional scholarly interpretive
publications and presentations. Some steps will be taken to develop the
repository and tools that will eventually make research results available
through several different Web interfaces to multiple user groups, from scholars
to the wider public, including educators and students; undergraduate and
graduate students will be able to contribute articles, building on successful
existing models. Finally, the informatics team will continue developing plans
for offering Informatics Training courses and materials in order to make the
shared repository as useful as possible for the STS community and more broadly.