* 1127449
* SDCI Net: A Wireless AdHoc and Sensor Network Cyberinfrastructure for Emergency Response
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Radu Stoleru, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 322,000.00

Given the complexity and seriousness of the disaster response environment, there
is an urgent need for a wireless adhoc and sensor network cyberinfrastructure
that integrates responders and supporting networks. The cyberinfrastructure must
enhance robustness and efficiency of the integrated networks and provide
mechanisms to dynamically modify network behavior in response to changing
conditions. Similar efforts have made contributions in surveillance, tracking,
and healthcare but fail to address the scale, complexity and robustness required
by disaster response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project
develops a cyberinfrastructure consisting of a set of new protocols, software
components and analysis to support disaster response. The cyberinfrastructure is
designed for the alternately congested and sparse environments typical of
disasters where conventional infrastructure is unavailable. A spectrum-aware,
multi-channel MAC protocol improves energy efficiency of compressed sensing
applications, by minimizing congestion through intelligent use of multiple
channels. On-demand routing provides end-to-end delay guarantees at optimal data
rates. Adaptive tuning improves performance and minimizes negative interactions.
The architecture provides a robust, energy-efficient framework tailored to
disaster response operations.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The project will provide
the first cyberinfrastructure for emergency response, integrating wireless
sensor networks, adhoc networks deployed in a realistic environment. The
research results will augment current course offerings at the graduate and
undergraduate levels. The project will create a high school-level show-and-tell
lecture on wireless adhoc and sensor networks in disaster response to be
delivered at a local high school. Finally, the project will integrate the
proposed cyberinfrastructure with Texas Task Force 1, the main state agency
responsible for coordinating urban search and rescue and one of six teams
selected by FEMA to provide response to Chemical, Biological,
Radiological/Nuclear, and Explosive incidents.