* 1127821
* EAGER:  The Origins of Successful NGOs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* James Rauch, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 13,841.00

This EAGER award funds data collection from existing published sources. The
research team hopes to investigate whether or not employee "spinoff"
organizations in the nonprofit sector are similar to spinoff firms in the
private sector. Spinoffs are new organizations or firms established by a former
employee who is able to use skills from his/her previous job in establishing the
new firm or organization. The research team wants to determine whether or not
spinoffs are more successful in the non-profit sector than comparable
organizations that are started by non-employees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
step of the exploratory research is to collect and tabulate the characteristics
of the founders of employee spinoffs. Were their parent firms mainly in the
public, for-profit, or nonprofit sector? Were they mainly performing the same
activities or services? Do these answers differ significantly between membership
organizations and service organizations? We will gain insight into how these
NGOs originate in addition to from where they originate. Are the founding
workers exceptionally skilled? Did they occupy managerial positions? Do they
tend to be older or more experienced? The second step of our proposed research
is to correlate the origins and characteristics of the founding workers with NGO
success. Does spinoff from the public sector promote success,possibly due to the
establishment of a complementary relationship with a large or stable public
entity? Does spinoff from other NGOs make success less likely, perhaps because
of diminishing returns to exploitation of a donor base? We can expect higher
skill levels of the founding workers to be associated with a higher probability
of new NGO survival, but how strong is the connection?