* 1127093
* MRI: Acquisition of Electron Beam Evaporation System for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Dimitrios Ioannou, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2014
* USD 279,800.00

The objective of this research is to materially strengthen the fabrication of
micro/nanoscale functional devices for the multidisciplinary research and
education within the areas of micro/nanoelectronics, bioengineering and physics.
The approach is to acquire an electron beam evaporation system within the
Shared-Access Facility at George Mason University (GMU) to deposit thin films
and multilayers of metal, semiconductor and oxide materials with thickness at
nanometer precision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The requested
system will enhance the capability of depositing thin film materials to form
electrodes, insulator, semiconductor channels and nanostructures, allowing
collaboration among university and local industry researchers for a wide variety
of applications including nanoelectronics, energy and biomedical devices. The
requested instrument will enable research into high-performance nanowire
MOSFETs, biosensors, symbiotic surfaces, organic solar cells, topological
insulator materials and nanoscale field effect diodes. The enabled research will
deal with fundamental questions and issues in a wide range of disciplines in
physics, electronics, biology and chemistry, and will ultimately facilitate
cross pollination between these groups leading to new veins of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The research enabled by the
requested system will have significant impact in the development of future
health technology, nanoelectronics and solar energy conversion devices. The
requested instrument will be available to a large number of students, post-docs
and faculty in GMU, other universities, national labs and industrial partners
that involve a large proportion of underrepresented minorities and women. Hands-
on experience with state-of-the-art equipment makes students and post-docs well-
prepared to enter the workforce ready to engage in research, development and
manufacturing.