* 1127831
* AIR:  Novel High Power Terahertz Source for Imaging and Sensing  (AIR TTPC-Option 1)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Patrick Kung, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2014
* USD 158,000.00

This proposal is aimed at: (i) demonstrating a novel THz emitter/source device
consisting of orientation patterned (OP) Quasi Phase-matching (QPM) optically
nonlinear GaN structures that would be optically pumped by a commercially
available high power ultrafast fiber laser, and (ii) establishing a strong
foundation at the University of Alabama to enable translation of this THz
technology to the marketplace. The proposed approach and device structure
consists of designing and implementing a prototype device that yields THz
radiation at room temperature when excited by short optical pulses and/or high
power CW lasers, with the added benefit of being easily tunable at THz
frequencies and able produce coherent THz radiation with narrow
bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of the proposed activity
stems from the potential of the developed THz source to generate useful non-
ionizing Terahertz radiation for medical imaging and, thus, provide an
alternative to dangerous x-rays. With the support of the University's Alabama
Innovation and Mentoring of Entrepreneur Center, this project will also train
and engage students and a postdoctoral researcher in both entrepreneurial
thinking and practice. This project will provide a platform for students and the
postdoctoral fellow to establish a start-up company to translate the developed
THz source technology to the marketplace.