* 1127397
* SBIR Phase II:  Integrated Hydraulic Suspension Energy Recovery System for Heavy Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2011,04/30/2016
* Zackary Anderson, Levant Power Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a fully functional turnkey regenerative semi-active shock absorber for
heavy-duty transit buses and other commercial vehicles. An appreciable amount of
energy is lost in a typical suspension as heat, especially in heavy vehicles.
Existing technologies have been unable to efficiently capture this energy in a
cost-effective manner. This project entails hydraulic and electronic model
optimization, design of vehicle-ready prototypes, fabrication, lab testing,
installation, and operational testing of a hydraulic adaptive damping energy
harvesting system. The objective of the project is to demonstrate real-world
benefits of an efficient, adjustable damping regenerative shock absorber on a
transit bus in operation with a municipal transit agency. Emphasis will be on
efficiency improvements, semi-active ride control, and application specific
integration requirements to ensure seamless installation and operation. Work
will culminate in a fully fielded pilot demonstration and quantification of
regenerated energy (improved fuel efficiency) and ride improvement benefits
using the regenerative semi-active shock absorber.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is significant if the challenges of inexpensively, reliably, and
efficiently capturing suspension energy are overcome. The technology has the
potential to save millions of dollars per year in fuel for large fleets, and
significantly reduce carbon emissions in the United States and abroad.
Effectively incorporating an aftermarket or OEM retrofit-able regenerative
energy capture system may open doors to many new regenerative technologies in
the transportation and automotive sector, facilitating significant reductions in
waste energy. In addition, the research may lead to enabling technology for
compact, sealed, and efficient hydraulic actuators and energy harvesters across
several industrial applications. This may have applications in other fields such
as off grid marine (hydrokinetic) energy, aerospace actuators, heavy machinery
dampers, orthotics/prosthetics, and robotics.