* 1127079
* Analysis of Genetic and Environmental Inputs into Accurate and Inaccurate Double Strand Break Repair in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Jeffrey Bennetzen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2015
* USD 898,783.00

PI: J. L. Bennetzen (University of Georgia)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants
containing engineered chromosome breakage constructs will be used as a study
system to investigate the nature of inaccurate repair of double strand DNA
breaks (DSB), and the genetic or environmental factors that affect the nature of
inaccurate repair. DSB repair, in all organisms from bacteria to plants and
animals, is highly accurate. This accuracy is necessary to allow chromosomes to
be replicated and passed on to subsequent generations of progeny because these
breaks are so frequent and are lethal if unrepaired. However, inaccurate repair
of DSB does occur, leading to small deletions, insertions or other outcomes at
the break site. Some previous studies have suggested that the relative sizes and
frequencies of the inaccurate DSB repair events may vary from species to
species, and that this variance might be responsible for differences in the rate
at which genomes change size and for differences in their rate of sequence
change. This project will use a regulated DSB system, involving the enzyme
I-SceI expressed off a transgenic construct in plants that are then crossed to
other plants that have a cutting site for I-SceI. The progeny of this cross have
been shown, in preliminary experiments, to undergo DSB at the I-SceI site, and
to sometimes have inaccurate repair at that site. The I-SceI site in many of
these progeny plants will be DNA sequenced by the investigators to see what kind
of deletions, insertions, et cetera, are found at the cleavage site. This work
is being done in four grass species (maize, pearl millet, rice, and sorghum),
with very different genomic sizes and genomic stability, to see if this
influences the nature or frequency of inaccurate DSB repair. The I-SceI sites
are also integrated at various different chromosomal locations in different
plants, so one can investigate chromosome position effects on repair outcomes.
Finally, the investigators will determine the nature of inaccurate DSB repair at
different times in development, under different environmental stresses (e.g.,
high UV light intensity or high ozone levels) and in genetic backgrounds that
have known mutations in DNA repair processes or chromatin structure. Taken
together, these studies will provide insights into how plant genomes evolve, and
particularly how DSB repair participates in this process, to generate the
natural diversity on which natural selection acts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will provide a powerful approach, and numerous novel insights, for
understanding how genomes change. This will lead to a better understanding of
how genetic diversity can be interpreted and influenced by biologists. The many
direct participants in the project, especially the postdoctoral fellow, graduate
student and undergraduate students, will receive direct training in a multi-
disciplinary approach to a core question in modern genetics: how do genomes
change, and what effect does that change have on current and future function of
genes in that genome. The description of the project and of the results will be
available at a web site that will be created for this project, with a
presentation style that makes the information digestible for all levels of
interested parties, from K-12 students, to the general public, to active
research scientists. Raw data and the most advanced results will also be
provided in public-accessible databases (e.g., GenBank for sequence information
and peer-reviewed publications for detailed analysis), including the project web
site. Biological materials (seeds of transgenic plants, constructs for the
I-SceI approach, etc.) will be available from the PI's lab until the time that
some more permanent maintenance resource can be identified. Understanding DNA
variation, particularly the mechanisms and rates/outcomes, is vital for any
mature understanding of genetics or genomes, and is shared by animal, human,
plant, fungal, viral and microbial researchers, so it is expected that the
training, outreach and data enrichment components of this project will benefit
the broadest scientific community and general public.