* 1127225
* SBIR Phase II:  Produced Water Treatment Using Animated Organosilicas that Rapidly and Reversibly Swell
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Stephen Jolly, Absorbent Materials Company LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,030,642.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
commercial systems to economically purify produced water streams. Produced water
is the water that is co-extracted from oil and gas production and is often ten
times as voluminous as the extracted hydrocarbon. Phase II efforts will be
focused on scale-up to fabricate a 200 gallon-per-minute produced water
treatment system to effectively mine hydrocarbons from the fluid. The process
uses a newly developed nano-engineered organosilica that rapidly and reversibly
swells when exposed to organics, yet is hydrophobic and does not absorb water.
The organosilica material is unique that it acts as a nanomechanical sponge
extracting dispersed and dissolved hydrocarbons. The captured hydrocarbons can
be recovered from the silica and the sorbent material re-used. Successful
development of these water purification systems will allow for an entire new
mechanism for produced water management.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project development is tied to
the ability to treat numerous produced water streams which are currently
difficult or expensive to treat, and to obtain a higher yield in the recovery of
valuable products. Approximately 800 billion gallons of produced water must be
managed annually in petroleum operations around the world. This treatment
process will allow existing oil and gas production fields to meet existing or
higher environmental discharge standards at a lower overall cost. The system
will also reduce the impact or potential impact of the discharge of produced
water in emerging markets with sensitive environmental concerns. From an
economic impact the system will result in a higher yield for many oil and gas
fields, by capturing for refinement valuable hydrocarbons which would otherwise
have been disposed of as waste. Phase I results showed that 0.4-3.5% of a
typical "waste" stream is composed of potentially valuable hydrocarbons which
are not recoverable with existing technology. The recovery of these
hydrocarbons, which are often the lightest and most energy-valuable compounds,
such as toluene and octane, will increase the value of every producing well
using this system.