* 1127340
* RUI: A Comparative Study of Structural Influences on User-Engaged Ecology Research
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Mark Neff, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 01/31/2015
* USD 164,111.00

An emerging literature suggests that when scientists interact with potential
users of their knowledge throughout the research process, from problem
formulation to result dissemination, they are best able to contribute solutions
to real-world policy problems. Conducting "user-engaged" research, as these
authors term it, ensures that the resulting knowledge is relevant to the
problems at hand and produced on an appropriate timeline. Additionally,
knowledge users are more likely to see the resulting information as credible,
legitimate, and salient to their purposes. The level of interaction with
knowledge users required by this approach would represent a substantial shift in
the way most academic ecologists conduct their research, and it is not
immediately clear the extent to which scientific institutions would permit these
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the impacts on
scientists' ability to conduct user-engaged research of two important but
relatively poorly-understood types of science policies: university publication
requirements that score authors based on publication in particular journals, and
the editorial preferences of those journals. When researchers are strongly
incentivized to publish in particular journals, the editorial boards of those
journals may have significant influence over the types of research conducted by
those researchers. This research uses a comparative ethnographic approach to
understand the impacts of these policies across five national settings and will
yield best practices in publication requirement policies for institutions that
wish to encourage user-engaged ecology research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The knowledge generated by this project helps federal and state
science-funding organizations, universities, journal editorial boards, and other
institutions and individuals create incentives such that researchers are able to
conduct user-engaged science, when appropriate. This work contributes to the
effective use of public research money toward the goals for which it is
allocated. Additionally, this project trains undergraduate researchers in
document analysis, translation, semi-structured interviewing, and related
research methods, thus preparing them for advanced science policy scholarship.