* 1127813
* Synthesis and Modeling of Harmful Algal Blooms and Coastal Microbes Along the Gulf of Mexico U.S. States
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Larry Brand, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,339.00

The ability to predict and mitigate the ecological and health impacts of global
climate change depends upon the availability of integrated models. In this
project, researchers at the Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences
of the University of Miami will compile and begin synthesis of archived Gulf of
Mexico environmental datasets related to harmful algal blooms (HAB) and
microbial pathogens. The research team is capitalizing on six years of
interdisciplinary HAB and pollution-associated pathogen research. The primary
research focus will be the role of low-mixing areas combined with anthropogenic
influences from nutrient-rich freshwater runoff. The goal is to build the
database necessary to assess the tole of global climatic change upon the
occurrence and spread of HABs and human pathogen in the zone extending from
beaches to the open waters of the Gulf of Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The study has high societal relevance and importance because of the
well-known and increasing occurrences disease attributable to HABs and human
pathogens in coastal Florida and the Gulf of Mexico region. It will also serve
as an important resource for further research and public education in the
ecology of HABs and human enteropathogens in tropical and subtropical marine
waters and their impacts on human health at a time of global climatic change.