* 1127343
* A Comparative Study of Ethnic Entrepreneurship in U.S. Immigration Gateways
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Qingfang Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2016
* USD 160,000.00

This project investigates the spatial dimensions of entrepreneurial success of
immigrants and ethnic minorities in several US cities. Entrepreneurship plays an
important role in stimulating economic development and growth, and research to-
date indicates that entrepreneurship could provide ethnic minorities with a
springboard for economic progress as well as further social and political
advancement in the cities they inhabit. The proliferation of small businesses
can also help neighborhood revitalization in some low income, ethnic
communities. However, the rate of business start-up and survival differs by
race/ethnicity, gender, foreign-born status, and place. Through a comparative
framework this project seeks to analyze the spatial patterns of ethnic minority-
owned-enterprises (EMEs) at multiple scales and examines how spatial
embeddedness influences their formation and performance. Using a geographic
perspective that links place, ethnicity, gender, and entrepreneurship, two
research questions will be addressed in this project: (1) How are EMEs socially
and spatially embedded in different places? (2) What is the role of place in the
performance and development of EMEs? Facilitated by the use of a micro-level
census dataset, the spatial pattern and performances of EMEs will be analyzed
using advanced spatial analytical techniques and multilevel regression across
all metropolitan areas in the U.S. Detailed analyses at the local scale will be
conducted in a selection of different immigration gateways. "Vertical" (one
ethnic group across multiple places) and "horizontal" (multiple groups within
one place) comparisons will be made to permit a high degree of flexibility when
comparing and representing different types of US metropolitan areas by
simultaneously considering socioeconomic forces at both local and macro levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote an understanding of the
opportunities and challenges facing ethnic minorities and women in their
economic integration through entrepreneurship. This is important, especially
given the current national push for economic recovery, to the ethnic minority
labor force, economic development practitioners, the immigrant support
community, and urban policy makers. The project will promote education of the
public, students, and the next generation of entrepreneurs through developing
entrepreneurship-centered curricula, directly mentoring and supporting students,
launching an interdisciplinary research group on ethnic entrepreneurship and
immigration, and reaching out to ethnic minority entrepreneurs, local
communities, and government agencies.