* 1127947
* I/UCRC Collaborative Research:  A Testing Methodology and Testbed for Miniature Robots
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Matthew Rutherford, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Shashank Priya
* 07/31/2014
* USD 119,910.00

Safety, Security and Rescue Research Center Proposal #1127947 Proposal #1127938

This proposal seeks funding for the Safety, Security and Rescue Research Center
sites at the University of Denver and the University of Minnesota. Funding
Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved
solicitation, NSF 10-601. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals
for support of industry-defined fundamental research.

Use of robots teams in extreme environments for wilderness search and rescue,
urban search and rescue and surveillance are anticipated to require operation on
land, water and under water. The proposed effort will explore means to maintain
coordination of such multiple robot teams through environmental disturbances,
communication lapses, and hardware and software failures. Moreover the work to
establish resilient robot teams will enable the exploration of emergent behavior
of the team that has the potential to arise due to these various faults. The
effort will establish a real-time test bed based on the Aquapod robot and
include development of test methodologies for single and multiple robots in
various aqueous environments.

The outcomes of the proposed work have the potential for significant impact in
the areas of public safety and search and rescue across civilian and military
application spaces. The work is supported by the Industry Advisory Board as well
as individual industry members of the center and has the potential to extend the
center?s portfolio through expansion into the areas of robot teams, their
behavior and fault tolerant control. The impact of the work has the potential to
extend beyond the center by virtue of the testing methodology to be developed
for robot teams. The center will involve graduate students and undergraduates in
the work and incorporate the results in existing coursework in robotics and
software systems engineering.