* 1127542
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-time Camera Analysis and Process Tracking (ReCAPT)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2015
* Kenny Kubala, FiveFocal LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,019,548.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
test real-time process monitoring systems to support manufacturing of miniature
digital cameras. Rapid growth in unit volume of digital cameras for cellphones
and consumer goods has outpaced the industry?s manufacturing process monitoring
technology. Except for simple pass/fail outgoing quality tests, high volume
camera manufacturers lack any system for in-line, real-time monitoring of
production errors that cause low yields, high production costs, and delay new
product introduction. The Real-time Camera Analysis and Process Tracking
algorithm, ReCAPT, integrates with existing production equipment to identify
manufacturing errors and trends before product quality is compromised. ReCAPT
leverages outgoing QC data, along with novel design-aware algorithms to identify
assembly and fabrication errors and improve the manufacturing process. The Phase
II objectives include optimizing the data collection hardware and pre-processing
software, automating and generalizing the algorithm initialization, and
integrating ReCAPT into the production environment through improvements to the
algorithm?s robustness. With a key commercialization partner, ReCAPT will be
tested multiple times in actual production environments with potential customers
reviewing the results. The results will determine the achievable improvement in
production efficiency, and quantify ReCAPT?s economic value to manufacturers of
digital cameras.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project involves improving
yields in the production of miniature camera lenses. Over one billion miniature
digital cameras produced annually supply the explosive growth in cell phones and
other mobile consumer electronics. The pursuit of cost reduction has led to
development of wafer-level manufacturing where thousands of camera lenses are
simultaneously fabricated, affixed to a wafer of image sensors and then diced ?
potentially eliminating the need for individual component assembly. By improving
yields and lowering costs, ReCAPT will enable the rapid adoption of wafer-level
and other automated, capital intensive camera manufacturing technologies. The
broader impact is the development of manufacturing technologies that rely on
automation and precision engineering instead of manual labor, enabling US
companies to gain traction in the growing $15 Billion annual digital camera
market. The statistical manufacturing process data supplied by ReCAPT enables
real-time control of manufacturing, reduces new product risk, and allows more
aggressive development of innovative camera technology. Sold as an enhancement
to existing automated manufacturing equipment, the ReCAPT software product will
increase profit for component manufacturers, improve product performance and
performance consistency for consumer goods manufacturers.