* 1127527
* Topics in Econometrics and Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Kenneth West, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 267,246.00

The investigator studies four distinct topics, with the first somewhat larger in
scope than the second and third, which in turn are somewhat larger in scope than
the fourth. The first topic is methodological, concerning statistical bias in
certain commonly studied economic relations. "Bias" is a precise statistical
term that refers to a tendency to systematically estimate a value that is wrong,
on average. In economic data, biased estimation leads to forecasts and economic
advice that are misleading, and possibly very misleading if the bias is large.
Examples of the relevant economic relations include those between stock returns
and dividend yields, exchange rate changes and forward premiums, and interest
rates and inflation. Estimates of these important relations are used in
forecasting economic activity, making financial decisions and deciding economic
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Disparate pieces of previous evidence have
suggested bias in estimates of these relations produced using a technique called
regression. The investigator develops a general, unifying framework that allows
systematic study, interpretation and, if necessary, correction for bias in such
regressions. The advantage of the general framework is that it lets researchers
understand whether biases are likely to be large or small under a given
scenario. The results can be used to interpret estimation and inference in the
relevant regressions, to improve estimation and inference, and to understand
simulation results from economic models. Importantly, the approach allows for
complications that are common in economic data; econometric terms for these
complications are serial correlation and conditional heteroskedasticity. The
investigator applies the results to regressions of exchange rate returns on the
forward premium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The second topic that the investigator
studies, is related to how monetary policy affects floating exchange rates
between countries with roughly similar inflation rates. This research is
empirical, and relies on a technique called vector autoregressions. Standard
macroeconomic models focus on a direct link from monetary policy, measured as
the difference between U.S. and foreign interest rates, to the value of the U.S.
dollar. These models treat any other factors that influence exchange rates as
evolving exogenously to monetary policy. The investigator proposes and develops
an approach that allows the researcher to evaluate whether surprise movements in
monetary policy in fact affect exchange rates solely through interest rates or
also via an impact on excess returns or risk premia. This research improves our
understanding of monetary policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The third topic that
this project investigates is how to compare the accuracy of forecasts when there
are complicated relationships among the forecasting models being evaluated. This
research is methodological. In economic research, some forecast competitions
compare a simple model and complicated models, with the simple model a special
case of the more complicated models (called "nested" model comparisons). Other
forecast competitions evaluate complicated models where no model is a special
case of other models ("nonnested"). Finally, there are some forecast
competitions that simultaneously involve both types of comparisons (nested and
nonnested). That part of the project develops and evaluates a technique that can
be used to evaluate accuracy when the comparison simultaneously involves nested
and nonnested models. This research helps economists and policy makers better
identify models that lead to lasting improvements in prediction. The
methodological technique is applied to U.S. inflation and output
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The fourth topic of this study concerns the
production of forecasts of a set of commodity prices. This research is
empirical. Most forecasts of prices of commodities such as oil, tin or rubber
focus on a single commodity. The investigator considers how movements in the
price of one commodity help forecast movements in the price of another
commodity.