* 1127526
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-Profile, Multi-Polar Energy Generator (MEG) for Small Scale Power Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Eri Takahashi, EcoHarvester, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2014
* USD 602,434.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
create high performance energy harvesting products using EcoHarvester?s Multi-
Pole Energy Generator (MEG) technology. The novel platform technology will
answer the need for power in the mili-watt to several watt ranges and will be
possible to serve multiple markets. Phase II will focus on miniaturization of
the MEG technology, system level integration of wireless light switches, and
modification of the MEG technology for application to a user-actuated portable
electronic device charger. The self-generated light switches will eliminated the
cost and time spent on wiring or changing batteries. The user-actuated chargers
will eliminate the need to buy disposable batteries for smart phone power back-
up.

The broader impacts of this research are further investment in energy harvesting
and accelerate the adoption of energy harvesting technologies to
replace/supplement batteries. In addition to the great economic and performance
advantages of our technology for end users, there are compelling motivations to
promote this technology for reasons of sustainability and waste reduction.
Locally generated power is highly desirable due to the inherent inefficiencies
of transmission and storage. As our world becomes increasingly wired, the demand
for environmentally burdensome batteries and copper wires has skyrocketed,
creating problems related to material extraction, processing, and disposal. The
limitations of batteries also constrict the useful life of many devices and
limit some applications due to the need to be able to service and replace
components.