* 1127957
* Collaborative Research:  Hybrid Integration of Plasmonic Interferometer Sensors and Active Optoelectronic Devices on a Single Microfluidic Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Lin Zhu, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 09/30/2015
* USD 184,000.00

The objective of this program is to create a highly integrated sensor system
through hybrid integration of passive plasmonic interferometers and Si waveguide
array coupled active optoelectronic devices on a single microfluidic chip for
low cost, real-time, label-free, lens-free, and multiplexed sensing
applications. The proposed device provides a compact and portable sensing
solution for point-of-care diagnostics that does not currently exist but is
critical for overcoming size and cost barriers of conventional angular-tunable,
prism-based surface plasmon resonance systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit is to integrate chip-scale semiconductor light sources and
detectors with plasmonic sensors on a single chip so that light does not need to
be coupled into/out of the sensors for analysis. Vertical plasmonic
interferometers will perform the sensing function through intensity
interrogation at a single wavelength. Curved silicon waveguides are proposed to
interconnect active optoelectronic devices and plasmonic interferometers and
enhance the sensor performance by preventing uncoupled light from entering the
detector. Novel methods to obtain on-chip cancellation of temperature-induced
signal drift will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
are to investigate chip-scale all-in-one sensor platforms and integrate research
and education. The outcome of the proposed research will have enormous long-term
impacts on biosensing, health care and the national needs. The main goals of the
education and outreach program are to enhance the PIs? undergraduate laboratory
courses, improve the participation of graduate and undergraduate students in
cutting-edge research in nanophotonics and biophotonics, and provide
opportunities for under-represented groups in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics disciplines.