* 1127696
* EaGER:  Into the Vent: Probing the basaltic lava lake at Villarrica
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Jeffrey Johnson, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2012
* USD 14,892.00

This Early Grant for Exploratory Research (EaGER) takes advantage of the unique
geometry of the volcano Villarica (i.e., a small symmetric 150-m diameter crater
and active localized vent ~65 m below the crater rim) to make direct sampling
observations of gas and thermal flux and pressure fluctuations, while recording
time-synchronized high definition video of lava lake surface activity. This
exploratory phase of the project builds on an earlier expedition supported by
National Geographic that helped address some initial engineering challenges to
suspend and lower a payload of sensors down toward the active vent. This EaGER
endeavors to capture lava lake surface activity and transient emissions of gas
and pyroclasts to help us better understand this volcano's seismic and acoustic
radiation, which is complex and remains poorly understood. It is expected that
this experiment will lead to a better set of tools and observational techniques
that can be applied to other volcanic systems in future
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ultimate goal of this project is to understand
the nature and source of seismic and infrasonic tremors, which are common at
Villarrica and other open vent volcanic systems. The research plan takes
advantage of a concurrent seismic array that will be deployed by another team
from Michigan Tech University (MTU), and it will enable the investigator and
students to share in the logistics at the Villarica site and focus on vent
observations from the summit following installation of the dense array by the
MTU group. Students and faculty from both institutions will perform joint
analysis of the datasets collaboratively. Worldwide, there are about a dozen
currently active, persistently degassing, open vent volcanic systems.
Villarrica's chemistry and eruption style is relatively common such that
observations made in this study should help facilitate development and allow
differentiation of models for eruption dynamics at similar volcanoes elsewhere.
Direct observations of the vent will help differentiate the origin of various
types of elastic energy, which originate both internally and at the surface.