* 1127914
* Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Ezra Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2018
* USD 17,707,030.00

The Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute (SAMSI) is a
national institute that merges statistical and mathematical thinking to create
high impact theory and methodology for fundamental scientific and societal
problems. It does so by catalyzing and nurturing collaborations both among its
core disciplines -- statistics, probability, and applied mathematics -- and
between those disciplines and the physical, social, and engineering sciences, as
well as other quantitative disciplines such as computer science and operations
research. SAMSI engages researchers at all career stages, from graduate students
to postdoctoral fellows to senior international leaders, who take away from
SAMSI expanded modes of thought, new vision and energy, and momentum enabling
collaborations initiated there to persist. The spectrum of SAMSI's programs over
the period 2012-17 responds to national needs, impetus from the statistics and
mathematics community, and scientific opportunities with potential high impact.
Programs address massive datasets in contexts such as astrophysics and the
environment, data-driven decisions in healthcare, identification of structure in
high-dimensional data, and computational modeling in the social sciences, as
well as other topics to be identified. A broad range of education and outreach
activities, focused especially on undergraduates, faculty in teaching
institutions, and under-represented minorities, builds greater public awareness
of the importance and achievements of the mathematical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAMSI is a national institute that exists to advance
science and society by catalyzing and supporting collaborations among
statisticians, applied mathematicians, and researchers in the natural and social
sciences. Its goal is to tackle the most challenging and far-reaching data-
driven problems, as exemplified by its forthcoming programs on such topics as
massive datasets in astrophysics and the environment, data-driven decisions in
healthcare, identifying structure in high-dimensional data, and computational
modeling in the social sciences. SAMSI operates by bringing together researchers
at all levels -- students, postdoctoral fellows, and senior leaders -- into
teams that both make substantial progress within SAMSI programs and form the
basis of future collaborations. It stimulates people at all stages of their
careers to think differently about the roles and power of applied mathematics
and statistics in concert with one another. A vibrant education and outreach
program uses SAMSI research to present the importance and achievements of the
mathematical sciences to undergraduates, professors at teaching colleges, and
the general public. SAMSI activities are permeated by efforts to increase the
participation of under-represented minorities in mathematics, statistics, and
the sciences.