* 1127195
* SDCI Sec: Passive and Active DNS Monitoring Tools for Detecting and Tracking the Evolution of Malicious Domain Names
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2019
* Roberto Perdisci, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2019
* USD 725,175.00

Recently cyber-criminals have been leveraging the domain name system (DNS) to
build agile malicious network infrastructures in support of their criminal
activities. For example, botnets and other types of malware typically use DNS to
locate their command-and-control (C&amp;C) servers. Another example of such
malicious use of DNS is represented by flux networks, which make use of fast-
flux domains, i.e., domains whose set of resolved IPs changes abnormally
frequently, to support spam campaigns, phishing websites, browser exploits,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs will develop a suite of open-
source tools that use passive and active DNS traffic monitoring to detect and
track the evolution in time of malicious domains. In particular, the PIs will
develop and publicly release FluxBuster, a system that is able to detect flux
networks "in the wild" by passively monitoring DNS traffic collected from many
different networks through the ISC Security Information Exchange (ISC/SIE)
framework. Along with FluxBuster, the PIs will develop and release DNS
monitoring tools that leverage passive and active approaches to detect and track
the evolution in time of malware-related (e.g., C&amp;C) domain
names.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to deploy the proposed tools and make
their results available to the security community. This project can therefore
broadly benefit society, in that it produces results that are readily usable by
security researchers, network operators, and law enforcement agencies to
identify and block malicious domains and combat cyber-criminal activities, thus
contributing to making the Internet more secure.