* 1127584
* CAREER: Creation of a Predictive and Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment Tool
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Shelie Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 247,609.00

0845728 (Miller)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this research is to create a
framework for a predictive and dynamic Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) tool. This
research is anticipated to result in transformational advances in LCA, including
the ability to forecast the stochastic nature of developing systems and
incorporating spatial and temporal considerations currently lacking in LCA. A
developing switchgrass-to-energy system in the southeastern United States will
be used as a case study to show how a sophisticated mathematical approach can
ultimately lead to a more robust and effective LCA tool. The project will
transfer the latest knowledge from decision theory and stochastic modeling to
forecast changing land use patterns and the effect on environmental impacts of
bioenergy. Bayesian modeling techniques will be used to predict the decision
making behavior of individuals within a developing system. Once a system
forecast is determined, life cycle inventory data coupled with a Geographic
Information System will be used to determine the change in environmental profile
over time. Since the uncertainties of developing systems are inherently large,
Monte Carlo Analysis will be used to determine the range of possible values and
identify system sensitivity. This research has the potential for the creation of
a systematic and rational basis for decision-making regarding bioenergy in the
southeastern United States. The Southeastern Bioenergy Research Collaborative,
an interdisciplinary group of over twenty researchers, economists, and policy
makers will use the results of this study in their ongoing investigations of
bioenergy opportunities for fuel production. A major aspect of this project will
be the creation of a public educational video regarding economic, environmental,
and social aspects of bioenergy development. &lt;br/&gt;