* 1127765
* AIR:  Towards a CO2-free, Sustainable, Ethylene Oxide Technology
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Daryle Busch, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 01/31/2014
* USD 259,997.00

Conventional ethylene oxide (EO) processes emit CO2 as byproduct (roughly 3.4 MM
tons/yr) from the combustion of both the ethylene and EO, the elimination of
which has been a major grand challenge in industrial chemistry for decades. In a
NSF-funded project, an alternate technology concept that is &gt;99% selective
toward EO was recently demonstrated at the University of Kansas with no
detectable CO2 formation. This alternate process is based on homogeneous
ethylene oxidation with H2O2 at 25-40C and ~50 bars using methyltrioxorhenium
(MTO) as catalyst. This proposal addresses the key barrier to commercialization,
viz., the design and demonstration of a recyclable MTO catalyst. Both
heterogeneous supports and bulky soluble polymers (capable of retention in
solution by nanofiltration membranes) are being considered. Quantitative
catalyst performance metrics (activity, selectivity and durability) for
practical viability have been established through preliminary economic analysis
and will guide catalyst design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of
the project objectives will result in novel, recyclable catalyst formulations
for epoxidation reactions in general. The demonstration of a continuous
ethylene-expanded liquid phase catalytic reactor will be the first of its kind.
The project guidance from ADM (interested in epoxidation of vegetable oils),
Evonik (a major H2O2 producer) and P&amp;G (a major EO consumer) personnel
increases the probability of project success and eventual commercialization. The
proposed concept has the potential to result in significant conservation of oil
and gas reserves (~13 million barrels crude oil/year) and reduction of carbon
emissions as byproduct (3.4 million metric tons of CO2 each year). The
application of this technology to mixed feeds containing ethylene and ethane
will also result in significant energy savings associated with their separation
required in conventional processing. The technical outcomes from this proposed
work will be integrated into an ongoing course titled Development of Sustainable
Chemical Processes, impacting both the undergraduate and graduate curricula.