* 1127705
* AIR:  Large-Scale Manufacturing of Metal Fibers by Modulation-Assisted Machining
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Kevin Trumble, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2013
* USD 157,853.00

This AIR project will bring to commercial prototype stage a new machining-based
process, Modulation-Assisted Machining (MAM), for large-volume production of
metal fibers. By super imposing low-frequency modulation onto a sharp tool,
individual fibers having highly uniform size and shape are created by cutting in
a single-stage deformation process. The key research objectives that will be
addressed in the proposed work are: 1) scalability of the production rate for
creating fibers, 2) repeatability of fiber size and shape under commercial
production rates; and 3) and life-cycle analysis related to the modulation
device at rates typical of production. The MAM platform offers a unique ability
to produce metal fibers with controlled size at high production rates compared
to traditional multi-step drawing processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A prototype
method for large-scale production of fiber materials will be demonstrated, while
transforming machining technology across business sectors and opening a new
applications domain for machining production of advanced materials. MAM offers a
low cost production route and a process breakthrough for producing fibers that
are difficult to create using current technology. The unique particle geometries
and structure created by MAM will enable new commercial opportunities for
production of fiber-based products, and composite material systems.
Complementing the research is an education and training program involving
company internships for graduate and undergraduate students. The collaborative
research will expose the students to advanced materials processing and related
commercialization, and the dynamic environment of a recent manufacturing start-
up company