* 1127479
* SBIR Phase II:  Inhibition-Resistant DNA Polymerases and Other Improvements for Detection of Food-borne Pathogens.
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Katherine Rowlyk, DNA Polymerase Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes the
development of novel enzymes (DNA polymerases) and other improvements for rapid
detection of food-borne pathogens by DNA detection and amplification (PCR). PCR
is a very fast and accurate method of pathogen detection, typically giving
results in about a day, instead of several days required to grow and identify
pathogens by cultural methods. But some foods, such as chocolate, dairy
products, meat, and spices, contain components that inhibit the PCR assay.
Current strategies for rapid pathogen testing in these foods include long
cultural enrichment steps followed by dilution of inhibitors and/or labor
intensive sample preparation (DNA extraction) to remove inhibitors. Inhibition-
resistant DNA polymerases and food-specific PCR enhancers represent elegant,
high-tech alternatives to dilution or DNA extraction. They could be integrated
into existing rapid-detection systems to facilitate rapid accurate testing in
inhibitory foods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are
reducing the number and severity of outbreaks of food-borne illnesses in the
United States due to early detection of food-borne pathogens. Faster, more
accurate detection of pathogens will save time and money for food manufacturers,
and reduce the need for costly product recalls. Technology developed here could
also extend the disciplines of forensics, where recovery of small amounts of DNA
in the presence of a variety of inhibitors is critical, and national defense,
where rapid detection of biological agents used as weapons could save lives.