* 1127154
* SBIR Phase II:  A new drug discovery method to transform peptides to small molecules:  proof of principle with p53-hdm2
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2017
* Daniel Erlanson, Carmot Therapeutics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2017
* USD 1,122,390.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project creates a
powerful drug discovery technology that uses an innovative fragment-based
approach to identify small molecule inhibitors of difficult targets. Though many
peptides can disrupt protein-protein interactions, conventional screening
technologies are rarely successful at identifying small molecules that do so. In
this project peptides are transformed into smallmolecule drugs through an
iterative, systematic, empirical screening approach, whereby a small molecule
can be evolved to harness key binding properties of peptide-based inhibitors.
This proprietary technology, Chemotype Evolution, will be applied to the
anticancer target p53-HDM2. The Phase I/IB grant demonstrated that peptides can
be deconstructed into baits suitable for performing Chemotype Evolution. In
Phase II, Chemotype Evolution will be used to convert these peptide-based baits
into novel, potent, completely non-peptidic inhibitors of the p53-HDM2
interaction. Moreover, the flexibility of the technology will be increased by
adding additional chemistries.

The broader impacts of this research are two-fold. First, the inhibitors
discovered could lead to new drugs for treating cancer. Second, their
identification will validate a drug discovery technology that can be applied
generally to difficult targets. Routine transformation of peptides into small-
molecule drugs would create a wealth of profitable opportunities.
Scientifically, this technology will advance the field of molecular recognition
and provide a rapid and cost effective method for creating chemical probes to
investigate biological pathways. The societal impact will be substantial, as the
technology will facilitate the discovery of drugs for unmet medical needs,
particularly where conventional technologies have failed.