* 1127851
* Sequencing and Targeting Climate Change Policy for Architecture: An Interdisciplinary and International Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,01/31/2013
* David Adelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 23,023.00

National Science Foundation Workshop Proposal 1127851&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;Sequencing and Targeting Climate Change Policy for Architecture:
&lt;br/&gt;An Interdisciplinary and International
Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary workshop on climate change
policy for architecture will involve a collaboration of the University of Texas
Center for Sustainable Development (UTCSD), the Arizona State University Center
for Nanotechnology and Society (CNS), and the University of Manchester
Architectural Research Center (MARC). The Workshop will examine three related
barriers and opportunities to the adoption of beneficial technologies that are
essential to sustainable architectural production and use in an era of climate
change: information failures, demand stimulation, and knowledge systems. With
regard to information we will focus on two types of failures: (1) those that
stem from differences in the types of information that are salient to industry
and consumers, and (2) those that stem from the sensitivities of groups
regarding how information is conveyed and who conveys it. With regard to demand,
we will focus on two types of stimuli: (1) how to stimulate resources for
research and development that ties technological change to social behavior, and
(2) how to stimulate market demand for things that might help solve the problem,
rather than, or in addition to, research and development for things that
architects, scientists and engineers want to do. And with regard to knowledge
systems, we will focus on identifying the sets of institutions required to
generate, assess, disseminate, and apply new knowledge about sustainable
architecture. The focus on technology and behavior requires both
interdisciplinary and international perspectives to avoid the myopic proposals
premised on discrete technological fixes that have dominated research in the
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the U.S. Department of Energy, the
construction and operation of architecture accounts for almost half of all
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and almost half of North America's annual energy
consumption. This amount is twice that contributed by the transportation sector.
These statistics are put in a critical context by a Brookings Institution study
which projects that by 2030 about half of the buildings in which Americans live,
work, and shop will have been built after 2000, suggesting that the construction
and operation of architecture could ironically become the nation's single
largest source of greenhouse gas emissions. The workshop will be action-
oriented, meaning that the goal is not simply to identify opportunities and
barriers to interdisciplinary research, but also to forge concrete research
initiatives across disciplines that will benefit the construction industry,
building managers and public health. Staff of the University of Texas Center for
Sustainable Development will follow-up for a period of six-months after the
Workshop to disseminate findings and initiate new collaborative research.