* 1127175
* SBIR Phase II:  High Efficiency BioMass Power Generation Using Liquid Tin Anode Fuel Cell
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Jeffrey Bentley, CellTech Power LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2013
* USD 499,993.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will continue the
commercial development of the Liquid Tin Anode Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (LTA-SOFC)
for direct conversion of biomass to electrical power. The LTA-SOFC is a
transformational energy technology that dramatically increases the efficiency
and simplicity of power generation from conventional fuels. In biopower, the
LTA-SOFC provides a pathway to improve efficiency and capital cost and also
enables smaller scale applications. Phase I successfully demonstrated the
feasibility of direct biomass conversion to power, using biomass feed stocks
which can have significant societal, environmental and economic impacts.
Specifically in Phase I several different types of biomass including poplar and
switchgrass were used to generate power in an actual LTA-SOFC cell. Post-test
analysis indicated no ash fusion and near 100% fuel utilization (little residual
carbon left). The Phase II effort will continue development of biopower
applications for LTA-SOFC by demonstrating biomass fuel efficiency in a small
stack assembly with continuous feeding. Also, evaluation of the fate of biomass-
specific volatile components such as potassium will contribute to the
understanding of LTA-SOFC longevity. Phase II will demonstrate additional LTA-
SOFC biopower technical performance to reduce risk and increase the potential
for commercialization of LTA-SOFC biopower.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be increased use of
renewable power. Currently biomass contributes only 1% of U.S. electric power
despite available resources to provide over 20%. Increased use of biomass for
electric power will reduce carbon emissions, increase energy security and create
domestic jobs. Efficiencies lower than 20% and high capital cost of today?s
technology make conventional biomass power about twice as expensive as coal
limiting market penetration to about 1%. LTA-SOFC Direct Biomass generators will
reduce the cost of power and lower capital cost while reducing emissions and
feedstock consumption by 2-3 times. The EIA predicts that by 2030, biomass will
generate 4.5% of U.S electricity, representing an available market for LTA-SOFC
of about $30 billion. The LTA-SOFC commercialization strategy starts with small
devices. Growth into commercial markets will provide the maturity required for
more demanding biomass power markets. In the biopower area military users have
powerful adoption incentive that will encourage them to become early adopters.
The US defense establishment has a goal to use renewable energy for 25% of the
facility electrical consumption by 2025. This SBIR will reduce technical risk,
providing confidence for integrator partners to co-invest in commercialization
of LTA-SOFC biomass generators.