* 1127786
* AIR:  Water Technology Innovation Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Richard Thompson, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2015
* USD 1,210,000.00

The NSF I/UCRC Water and Environmental Technology (WET) Center, in partnership
with the Ben Franklin Technology Partners (BFTP), propose to establish a Water
Technology Innovation Ecosystem to advance the commercialization of new water
treatment technologies. The goal for this Partnership is to assure long term
growth and sustainability as a regional innovation ecosystem. This partnership
will assist manufacturing industries, municipal wastewater and drinking water
treatment plants, equipment vendors and engineering design firms in providing
solutions to water and wastewater issues. Center engineers and scientists
utilizing microbial, chemical, hydrologic, and mathematic approaches will work
collaboratively to perform the translational research. Faculty and students will
work with industry representatives and build upon their research dealing with
water quality and emerging contaminants, and learn about entrepreneurship. The
overriding intellectual merit of the resulting Innovation Ecosystem will be the
impact of industrial need-focused translational research and commercialization
programs, which will enhance scientific and business understanding to address a
major health and environmental problem.

The Innovation Ecosystem will involve faculty researchers, graduate and
undergraduate students working creatively with industrial representatives. The
Ecosystem will further enhance the ongoing efforts of integrating research in
classroom teaching. Many member companies have international operations, and
students will be exposed to regulatory, technological, social and cultural
aspects of different countries, enhancing their global experience. The
Innovation Ecosystem will involve the Temple University Science and Mathematics
Assessment and Research for Teachers (TU-SMART), whose mission is to improve the
infrastructure for K-12 STEM teaching and learning and student performance in
the Philadelphia region; and the NSF-funded Science of Learning Center at Temple
with focus on educating children. Results from research projects will be
presented at Conferences and published in scientific journals and business
magazines. The Innovation Ecosystem will result in significant revenue growth
and creation of high technology jobs in impacted companies across the US.