* 1127395
* SBIR Phase II:  Carbon-Ceramic Composite Membranes for Olefin-Paraffin Separations
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Xiaotong Wei, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2014
* USD 503,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to continue
the development of carbon-ceramic membranes with excellent propylene/propane
separation performance. The membranes serve as the enabling technology to be
used in an environmentally benign and economically viable membrane process to
separate propylene from propane for a variety of important petrochemical and
refining processes. These composite membranes contain thin selective layers of a
newly-developed microporous carbon material. The rigid structure of the material
confers the membranes with exceptional resistance to plasticization. This allows
the membranes to retain high mixed-gas selectivities at challenging industrial
conditions. The mixed-gas propylene/propane selectivities and stability of the
membranes achieved in Phase I work are far superior to those of previously
examined polymer and facilitated transport membranes under industrially relevant
conditions. In Phase II work, membranes developed in Phase I will be further
optimized, and then used to produce prototype commercial-size modules for
propylene/propane separations. In addition, this research is expected to
increase general understanding of carbon-ceramic membranes and their potential
for use in an array of other chemically and thermally challenging gas
separations that are not possible with conventional polymeric
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be the use of the new carbon membranes for propylene recovery from
polypropylene and propylene derivative reactor purge streams. This technology
has important economic potential, considering the large volumes of propylene,
polypropylene and other propylene derivatives produced annually in the
petrochemical industry. With successful development and demonstration of the
membrane-based processes, their potentially much larger applications include
propylene/propane separations for monomer production at steam crackers and
recovery of propylene from fluid catalytic cracker off-gases in refineries. The
cost of making ceramic membranes is higher than that of polymeric membranes, but
the savings from lower process energy requirements will easily outweigh the
increased membrane costs. If successful, the new membranes will make membrane-
based olefin/paraffin separations technically and economically attractive for
use in conjunction with, or in place of, distillation.