* 1127158
* AIR:  Engineering the Evaluation of Online Health and Wellness Promotion Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Flaura Winston, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,198,163.00

The proposed AIR project will commercialize a new technological breakthrough,
the Interactive Web-Enabled Research System (IWERS-TDP), for the delivery and
evaluation of a new online prevention application, TeenDrivingPlan, and will
determine and implement adaptations of IWERS-TDP for its use as a general-
purpose platform (IWERS-GENERAL) for large scale evaluation of diverse
applications. The IWERS concept applies methodologies that bring rigor and
required privacy and security of FDA-monitored clinical research trials to the
evaluation of online applications. Year 1 will involve developing the Ecosystem,
commercializing TeenDrivingPlan and the IWERS-TDP evaluation system, and
designing market-driven modifications of IWERS-TDP. Year 2 will focus on growing
the Ecosystem and implementing required software adaptations to evolve IWERS-TDP
into the IWERS-GENERAL platform, in partnership with industry collaborators and
new investors.

The proposed Ecosystem will support two national goals: (1) to strengthen the US
innovation ecosystem (for technology to promote health and wellness) and (2) to
create a society in which all people live long, healthy lives. Through
accelerated commercialization of evaluated, commercially viable online
applications in injury prevention, health promotion and disease management that
are broadly available through the Web, the Ecosystem will reduce disparities in
access to high quality health resources. Experiential training in
entrepreneurship will prepare diverse students for careers in e-Health through
work on IWERS development, research and commercialization. Jobs will be created
as the Ecosystem is established and evolves into a regional hub-and-spoke
technology cluster in Health and Wellness in the Greater Philadelphia Region.
The woman-led Ecosystem will promote diverse faculty participation.