* 1127913
* Survivability Envelopes for Lead-Free Interconnects in Fine-Pitch Electronics under Combined Extreme Environments of Shock, Vibration and Temperature
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Pradeep Lall, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Shashank Priya
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Advanced Vehicle and Extreme
Environment Electronics (CAVE) located at Auburn University. Funding Requests
for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF
10-601. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of
industry-defined fundamental research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of
proposed research is to develop fundamental understanding of failure mechanics
of extreme environment electronics under overlapping stresses of high
temperature, cyclic thermal stresses, shock and vibration. The proposed research
will target the development of methodologies for prediction of damage initiation
and progression for multi-mode competing failure locations in and the vicinity
of board-level interconnects. Fundamental understanding of the high-strain rate
material and interface behavior will be developed under sequential and
simultaneous exposure of stresses. Damage equivalence relationships and
survivability envelopes will be developed using pre-cursors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is envisioned that the proposed research will result in
development of key enabling methodologies which are scalable to a wide array of
extreme environment applications. Examples include automotive and avionic
systems which are subjected to simultaneous temperature and transient dynamic
loads. &lt;br/&gt;Increased use of sensors and controls in automotive
applications has resulted in significant emphasis on the deployment of
electronics directly mounted on the engine and transmission. The broader impact
and outreach activities will include, (a) Initiation of undergraduate students,
women and under-represented minorities in research. (b) Partner with the Womens
Leadership Institute at Auburn University (c) Organization of topical-session at
the ASME Congress (IMECE) (d) Incorporation of research results in extreme
environment applications in cooperation with leading manufacturers which are
industrial members of the NSF Center for Advanced Vehicle Electronics (CAVE3).
(f) Introduction of K-12 school children to electronics through lab tours and
in-class presentations.