* 1127593
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rational Choice and Moral Intent in the Responsible Conduct of Research
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Anita Gordon, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 9,968.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for a doctoral dissertation
research into academic misconduct of science researchers. Academic misconduct
among students has been the focus of a tremendous amount of literature for a
number of decades, unlike academic misconduct among faculty, which has received
much less empirical attention. A few studies have examined organizational
effects on misconduct, including education and mentoring in graduate school.
This research will contribute to the literature by empirically examining the
possible effects of rational and moral judgments on faculty research misconduct,
with a focus on the social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the proposed study is to explore the
application of a particular theory of human behavior, Rational Choice Theory, to
the phenomenon of misconduct in research. This will be done in the context of a
moral decision-making framework. In one influential model for moral decision-
making, four factors are involved: Moral awareness/sensitivity, moral
judgment/reasoning, moral intent (the balancing of moral with other pertinent
issues to form an intent to act in one fashion or another), and moral behavior.
The relationship between these factors and rational choice measures of the
perceived likelihood of detection and sanctions will be explored using scenarios
of common research situations involving clear or ambiguous misconduct.
Participants will rate the likelihood they themselves would take the action
described in the scenario while also rating the moral and rational choice
features of the situation. Statistical methods will be used to predict the
intent to engage in misconduct in light of these moral and rational choice
assessments, and other explanatory factors such as past exposure to misconduct
and perceived procedural justice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has significant implications for
academic training, scientific and scholarship practices, and public policy. In
particular, it may influence the way that research misconduct is perceived and
addressed in public and private academic institutions. To the extent that moral
and/or rational choice factors are at work, new policies may be developed in
institutions that address the system of rewards for faculty in addition to
advancing greater attention to moral sensitivity and intent. Broad dissemination
of the results in scholarly venues likely will stimulate further discussion of
these important issues as well as additional empirical work in this area, and
thereby eventually contribute to a reduction in the problem.