* 1127413
* SDCI NET: Development of an Ultra-high Speed End-to-end Transport Stack based on the Packet Scale Paradigm.
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jasleen Kaur Sahni, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 830,000.00

End-to-end data transfer rate requirements in the computational science
communities&lt;br/&gt;---including computational biology, physics, astronomy,
medicine, and environmental&lt;br/&gt;modeling--- are soon to approach the
terabit-per-second regime. Unfortunately, the&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art in end-
to-end transport protocol implementations scales to at most a&lt;br/&gt;few
gigabit-per-seconds of single-stream steady-state throughput. This project
will&lt;br/&gt;develop a 10Gbps+ Linux transport-layer stack of the novel
paradigm of "packet-scale&lt;br/&gt;congestion-control", which can potentially
improve scalability by several orders of&lt;br/&gt;magnitude. For this, the
project will: (i) develop a non ACK-clocked state machine&lt;br/&gt;that
replaces the TCP state machine, and (ii) develop both software-based as well
as&lt;br/&gt;hardware-assisted high-speed implementations of precise inter-
packet gap control and&lt;br/&gt;packet timestamping. The implementation will be
extensively tested on a 10Gbps&lt;br/&gt;in-laboratory test-bed as well as on
nationwide NLR paths. The project will then&lt;br/&gt;partner with up to three
projects from the scientific domain, for deploying and&lt;br/&gt;evaluating the
impact of the protocol stack on their infrastructure. The
resultant&lt;br/&gt;implementation is expected to be transformative in the
design and implementation of&lt;br/&gt;non ACK-clocked transport protocols. It
is expected to dramatically improve large&lt;br/&gt;high-speed bulk data
transfers, without requiring expensive dedicated networks,
thus&lt;br/&gt;revolutionizing how the computational science community relies on
the networking&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure.