* 1127135
* SBIR Phase II:  Structural Multifunctional Composites with Energy Storage Properties
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Angelo Yializis, Sigma Technologies Int'l Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2015
* USD 771,864.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
development of a multifunctional solid-state nanolaminate composite, which may
function as a structural material while storing energy in the form of a
rechargeable super-capacitor. A unique production process is used, where liquid
monomer and aluminum wire are introduced into a process chamber that converts
them into a multilayer composite with thousands of polymer and aluminum layers.
Applications include storage devices for battery back-up and inverter circuits
used in transportation and high energy density capacitors for extreme thermo-
mechanical environments, such as aircraft, photovoltaics and aerospace. The
Phase I development work demonstrated the production of large area (10sq.ft.)
energy storage material. The nanolaminate material has mechanical properties
that are close to a hard polymer laminate and energy densities which are an
order of magnitude higher than conventional electrostatic capacitors and similar
to those of electrochemical super-capacitors, with superior performance at
temperatures below -20C and above +65C. The Phase II effort includes development
work to optimize certain manufacturing methods, optimization of the polymer
dielectric, packaging development, creation of specification sheets based on
short and long term life tests and sampling potential customers that represent
immediate and long term business opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in the utilization of a
new multifunctional material that can store energy. Such material may be
integrated into a structure and save space and weight. It is a green product
that requires no water or solvents to produce, it is recyclable and it does not
involve the use or disposal of hazardous materials. Nanolaminate energy storage
products will be based on mainly two materials, aluminum wire and acrylate
monomers, which are commonly used to produce protective coatings for flooring,
printing, furniture, window films, etc. Lightweight energy storage nanolaminates
can replace double layer electrochemical super-capacitors that have severe
temperature limitations and conventional electrostatic capacitors, in
applications where volume, weight and thermomechanical constraints such as
vibration and operating temperature are limiting factors. Capacitors produced
using nanolaminate composites, are solid-state components that can electrically
self-heal and have an open-circuit, or fuse-like safe failure mode, which is
desirable in applications such as electric vehicles and aircraft, where safety
of people in the proximity of a capacitor bank is of paramount importance.
Multifunctional materials are expected to play a key role in the future in
improving &lt;br/&gt;energy efficiencies and reducing dependency on fossil
fuels.