* 1127480
* QMHP: Multiscale Analysis of Coupled Electrical, Mechanical Systems at Nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* N Aluru, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 352,842.00

The objective of this research is exploit unique electrical and mechanical
properties of materials at the nanoscale to develop novel sensors, energy-
conversion devices and integrated systems with unprecedented sensitivity,
efficiency and functionality. The approach is to develop advanced computational
tools to seamlessly integrate electrical and mechanical physical phenomena
ranging from the quantum to the chip-scale, and to employ these computational
tools to not only understand fundamental aspects of coupled electrical and
mechanical phenomena but also to enable rapid computational prototyping of a
variety of devices and systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed research focuses on the development of
fundamentally new multiscale approaches where physical theories accounting for
quantum effects, nanoscopic electrical and mechanical behavior, and material in
homogeneities will be developed. The multiscale computational tools will provide
unique physical insights into electrical and mechanical properties and their
coupling and enable development of innovative electrically-actuated
nanoelectromechanical sensors, devices and systems. The proposed multiscale
approaches have the potential to be many orders of magnitude faster than
existing quantum and atomistic approaches for design of coupled
electromechanical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed research on the development of novel
nanoelectromechanical systems has the potential to revolutionize sensor,
computer, energy and health care sectors there by creating new industry, economy
and impacting the common person in the society. Proposed research will educate
graduate and undergraduate students in the interdisciplinary area of
computational nanotechnology. Educational modules focusing on fundamentals of
nanoelectromechanical systems and multiscale computational methods will be
developed and made available on the web.