* 1127817
* AIR:  PTTP: Topic 1: Materials Translation for Bindered Anthracite Briques in Foundry Cupolas
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Fred Cannon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2014
* USD 366,000.00

This proposal focuses on developing well-suited materials for use in bindered
anthracite briques that can replace conventional coke in foundry cupolas. The
objectives of this NSF AIR project will be to: (1) Carry forward the market
development of biomaterial-bindered anthracite briques as a replacement for coke
in foundry cupolas, (2) Translate research-based results into full-scale market
potential by conducting the research and development that resolves how industry
can supply ultra-fine anthracite grains, mitigate potential brique
biodegradation, and diminish air pollution, (3) Work with an anthracite
supplier, two pulp miller, two cupola foundries, and others in industry, to
demonstrate at full-scale this novel bindered anthracite opportunity. The needs
and potential impact of having this replacement material, ultra-fine anthracite,
for coke are clearly stated, where the environmental, financial, and industrial
impacts are large. As stated in the proposal, this work will help advance the
areas of sustainable manufacturing, high temperature bindering, ultrasonics,
microbiology, coal processing, and wood (i.e., lignin) products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal could help the US
coke industry in addressing the need for more manufacturing capability. The
proposal puts forth alternative materials that require less energy to
manufacture and release less CO2 and volatile organic carbon air emissions.
Successful completion of this project will increase American business
competitiveness by transforming otherwise wasted coal and biomaterials into
value-added products, while sustainably making manufactured goods for the US
population. The proposed research will also offer excellent opportunities for
teaching, training, learning, and discovery relative to sustainable
manufacturing. The PI also plans to bring a minority Ph.D candidate into this
program to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups and integrating
diversity into learning.