* 1127360
* SBIR Phase II:  Continuous Production of Lightweight and Energy Efficient Solid-State Microcellular Panels from Recycled PET
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Krishna Nadella, MicroGREEN Polymers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2015
* USD 499,941.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to
continuously produce multilayered microcellular from recycled polyethylene
terephthalate (RPET) for rigid printing substrate applications. There is an
increasing demand for sustainable substrates in the printing sector, which is
America's third largest manufacturing industry. PET is the most recycled plastic
in the United States. However, only 28% of the 5.15 billion pounds of water
bottles used annually are currently recycled. Products made from RPET could
utilize this untapped resource and in turn, could be recycled again, making them
environmentally sustainable. The proposed approach is to fusion bond thin
microcellular RPET sheets into thicker panels, thereby eliminating the need for
a bonding adhesive, which in turn eliminates volatile organic compound (VOC)
emissions that cause indoor air pollution. In Phase I of this project we
established lab-scale feasibility for continuous fusion bonding of microcellular
RPET sheets to produce such panels. In Phase II, we will build a production-
scale laminator that is capable of producing microcellular RPET panels with a
size of 4' x 8' at a speed of at least 8 feet/minute. The commercial feasibility
of manufacturing this product will be established by developing a detailed cost
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be to satisfy the printing industry's rapidly growing need for
sustainable products. The microcellular RPET panels to be developed are targeted
for use in rigid printing substrate applications. Compared to current materials,
the advantages of these panels include significantly higher post-consumer
recycled (PCR) content, zero VOCs, premium printability without the need for
surface treatment, enhanced barrier properties against mold/mildew/corrosion,
excellent conformability, and compatibility with end-of-life recycling. The
Phase II research will focus on using RPET as a raw material due to the
immediate positive environmental and economic impacts. The resulting increase in
the use of RPET in high-value applications will thereby provide an economic
stimulus to the recycling industry. The results of this research will also
expand the application frontiers for solid-state microcellular plastics
technology and enable collaborative research to develop further markets for
these lightweight materials in other industries such as construction,
transportation, and maritime. Finally, the new technology resulting from this
research will preserve resources for a sustainable environment, enhance the
competitiveness of the US plastics industry, and create new job opportunities
that will benefit society as a whole.