* 1127210
* SDCI Sec: Distributed Web Security for Science Gateways
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* James Basney, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2015
* USD 948,821.00

Science gateways broaden and simplify access to cyberinfrastructure (CI) by
providing Web-based interfaces to collaboration, analysis, data management, and
other tools for students and researchers. In a recent survey of 5,000 NSF PIs,
NSF's Campus Bridging Task Force found that "the most common method of accessing
CI across the entire dimension of providers is via Web browser/portal." As these
science gateway interfaces to cyberinfrastructure grow in popularity, Web portal
developers adopt ad hoc approaches to the security challenges of authentication,
authorization, and delegation. Science gateways integrate cyberinfrastructure
resources on the researcher's behalf, i.e., accessing data, compute cycles,
instruments, and other valuable resources. Resource access often requires use of
the researcher's security credentials, in some cases exposing the researcher's
long-lived password to potential compromise at the science gateway. There is no
standard approach for a researcher to control and limit a science gateway's
access to his or her resources. Thus, researchers are required to accept an
unnecessarily high risk when using science gateways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
"Distributed Web Security for Science Gateways" project will directly address
these risks by providing authorization and delegation software for science
gateways that complies with the Internet Engineering Task Force's standard OAuth
protocol, which has been widely adopted in the Web 2.0, cloud, and social
networking worlds. The project will deliver 1) a robust, well-documented OAuth
server implementation supporting science gateway use cases, 2) a set of client
libraries and authentication modules to enable current and future gateways to
interact with the server implementation out of the box with common Web
platforms, and 3) full integration with popular gateways and cyberinfrastructure
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance cyberinfrastructure for
research and education by providing common software building blocks for science
gateway security. These building blocks will facilitate secure connections
between gateways and other cyberinfrastructure, increasing the trust in Web-
based interfaces by scientists and resource providers. The ongoing migration
from command-line to Web-based interfaces promises to broaden the use of
cyberinfrastructure by researchers and students, enhancing educational impact
and researcher productivity. Too often security is a stumbling block for
cyberinfrastructure deployment and use. By addressing common security use cases,
the project will provide standard methods to facilitate secure
cyberinfrastructure access.