* 1127051
* Identifying Chromatin-level Mechanisms that Regulate Responses to Phosphorus- and Iron-deficiencies in Rice
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Niranjan Baisakh, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* carlos vallejos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 784,948.00

PI: Aaron P. Smith (Louisiana State University &amp; Agricultural and Mechanical
College)&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Niranjan Baisakh (Louisiana State University
Agricultural Center)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rice is a staple crop that
feeds more than two billion people worldwide. Agricultural lands used for
growing rice frequently contain sub-optimal nutrient levels. Low availability of
two important nutrients, phosphorus (P) and iron (Fe), commonly limits crop
productivity, whereas excess Fe can cause toxicity in rice grown under flooding
conditions. Because of these growth restraints, plants modulate complex
responses to fluctuating P and Fe levels via genome-wide transcriptional
regulatory networks that involve numerous genes. DNA is found in the nucleus
wrapped around histone proteins into structures known as nucleosomes.
Nucleosomes are the basic unit of chromatin, which is a fluid, higher-order
assembly that is modified by many remodeling complexes. Although chromatin
structure plays a substantial role in controlling gene expression, the
chromatin-level mechanisms involved in regulating nutrient homeostasis in plants
are not well understood. Previous work has shown that the interaction between P
and Fe influences the onset of deficiency-induced stress responses. The goal of
this project is to identify chromatin-level mechanisms that regulate the uptake,
assimilation, and utilization of P and Fe in rice. The four specific aims of the
project are to: 1) determine the physiological and transcriptional changes in
rice seedlings under P and/or Fe deficiency; 2) identify nutrient deficiency-
dependent changes in nucleosome positioning across the rice genome; 3) examine
the role of the H2A.Z histone variant in regulating gene expression in rice
genome-wide; and 4) characterize the histone post-translational modifications
present at rice P and Fe homeostasis genes during nutrient deficiency. By
correlating three key components of chromatin structure (i.e. nucleosome
positioning, histone variant localization, and histone modifications) with gene
expression profiles, the regulatory mechanisms that modulate P and Fe deficiency
responses will be revealed. Identifying these chromatin-level mechanisms will
provide opportunities for developing crops with improved nutrient use-
efficiency, significantly improving U.S. and global agriculture. All sequence
data generated during this project will be made available to the public through
the Gene Expression Omnibus database
(GEO:http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the education of graduate and undergraduate students. The
investigators have research groups diverse in ethnicity and gender, and will
continue to foster involvement of underrepresented groups in research by
mentoring students through programs available through LSU, including the Pre-
doctoral Scholars Institute and Noyce Tigers Research Internship. Other planned
activities include K-12 outreach through the annual Super Science Saturday
event, and training of student-teacher pairs from area high schools in hands-on
research for two weeks during the summer.