* 1127293
* SBIR Phase II:  Two-Phase Microchannel Heat Sink with Porous Layers Lining Channel Inner Walls
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Howard Pearlman, Advanced Cooling Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2014
* USD 584,137.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop an
advanced heat sink and a two-phase pumped loop for cooling high power laser
diodes and other high heat flux devices. An advanced coating will be applied to
the heat sink to enhance the boiling process, suppress flow instabilities and
improve overall heat sink performance. The objectives of this Phase II project
are to: (1) develop and validate a two-phase heat sink model, (2) develop a
system-level model for a two-phase pumped loop, (3) design and fabricate the
heat sink and pumped loop system and (4) test the prototype loop in the
laboratory and on an actual system. The key benefits of the technology include
high heat flux capability and isothermal cooling. The system will be compact and
designed such that it can be integrated with high heat flux
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/ commercial
potential of this project will be to provide a new cooling solution for
dissipating high heat fluxes in products used in the electronics and
optoelectronics industries including compact high-power lasers. The technology
developed will be capable of handling higher heat fluxes than those that can be
managed with state-of-the-art, commercially available single-phase coolers.
Moreover, the technology will not use refrigerants that have high Global Warming
Potential. This program will also be performed in close collaboration with
researchers at an academic institution and aide in the technical training of
students in basic and applied research and new product development. The results
of this study will be disseminated in the heat transfer community through
conference presentations and journal publications.