* 1127956
* Collaborative Research: Microwave Stethoscope: A Novel Non-Invasive Microwave Sensor for Monitoring Human Vital Signs
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Nuri Celik, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,780.00

Center for Telecommunication Circuits and Systems (C1) &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#1127956 &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #1127926 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding for the Center for Telecommunication Circuits and Systems (C1) located
at the University of Hawaii site and the Arizona State University site,
respectively. Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF
approved solicitation, NSF 10-601. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit
proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental research. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests NSF funding to develop a novel low-cost and
highly integrated microwave based vital signs monitoring device, namely a
"microwave stethoscope," that can continuously collect human vital sign data
with minimal discomfort to the patient. The vital signs to be measured include
the heart rate, breathing rate, stroke volume, and lung water content. The
estimation of water distribution in the lungs is also proposed through the use
of an array of such applicators with the proper development of array digital
signal processing (DSP) algorithms. The development of such a microwave sensor
together with the compact, low-cost, low power receiver circuitry and the
associated DSP algorithms will allow the mobile use of the device and open broad
areas of applications in healthcare patient monitoring, screening of school
students, as well as variety of military applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project will enable
improving healthcare in remote and under privileged communities, and in
supporting a variety of in-field and emergency military applications. The
developed hardware platform can be an investigative tool for further illness
diagnosis. This project will enable use of millimeter wave integrated circuits
for high accuracy monitoring of human health, and provides a new diagnosis tool
to a wide array of medical doctors including epidemiologists, pediatricians, and
family physicians.