* 1127406
* Collaborative Research: SDCI Sec: Metadata Management Software Tools to Support Research and Development of Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Minaxi Gupta, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2015
* USD 182,000.00

Collecting representative Internet measurement data has remained a challenging
and often elusive goal for the networking community. Obstacles include the
Internet's scale and scope, technical challenges in capturing, filtering and
sampling high data rates, difficulty obtaining measurements across a
decentralized network with radically distributed ownership, cost of building and
operating instrumentation, and political hurdles. Even (or especially) with all
these obstacles, the demand for and importance of representative Internet data
sets is increasing -- which is good news for rigorous scientific Internet
research. The primary driver of this demand is the growing awareness of
vulnerabilities to threats to various critical and increasingly interdependent
infrastructures, and that a primary limiting factor in the escalating arms race
is our surprisingly still primitive approach to sharing cyberinfrastructure
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAIDA has developed an Internet Measurement Data
Catalog -- IMDC -- an index of information (metadata) about data sets and their
availability under various usage policies. The catalog addresses a significant
challenge in network science: reducing the cost of searching for data by
organizing metadata about accessible Internet data sets into a single
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SDCI project will support integration of
lessons learned thus far from IMDC development, implementation, and usage to
better support the cybersecurity research and cyberinfrastructure development
communities. The project's three primary deployment goals are to: (1) reduce the
burden on those contributing data via a streamlined interface and tools for
easier indexing, annotation and navigation of relevant data; (2) convert from
use of a proprietary database backend (Oracle) to a completely open source
solution; and (3) expand the catalog's relevance to the cybersecurity and other
research communities via workshops, new emphasis on security-relevant data sets,
and creation of public web forums to discuss data-sharing
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the focus for this project
is&lt;br/&gt;utility for the cybersecurity and cyberinfrastructure research
community, our proposed design objectives and outreach plans explicitly target a
range of science and engineering communities.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, we
believe the proposed software development can support and promote NSF's newly
announced Data Sharing Policy, which as of January 2011 requires all proposals
to include a plan for how researchers intend to share their data with other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
software development activities is a range of measurable benefits to
cyberinfrastructure research: maximizing the re-use of existing Internet data;
decreasing the time spent collecting redundant data; reducing the effort needed
to start a new study; promoting validation and reproducibility of analyses and r
intellectual merit of cyberinfrastructure research methods: maximizing the re-
use of existing Internet data; decreasing the time spent collecting redundant
data; reducing the effort needed to start a new study; promoting validation and
reproducibility of analyses and results; enabling longitudinal and cross-
disciplinary studies of the Internet; and opening up new cross-domain areas of
transformative networking research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project are diverse. The success of the catalog and related workshops will
facilitate wide dissemination of Internet measurement data to researchers and
security experts across academic, commercial, and government
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;By including education-oriented data collections in the
catalog, this project creates an immediate link between research and education,
and improves access to Internet research for underrepresented groups in computer
science and engineering. Most importantly, the software created through this
project will help other disciplines and sectors to develop their own catalog
instances to support the type of data management plans now articulated as
essential to NSF.