* 1127191
* SBIR Phase II:  Assessing Private Company Health Using Advanced Language Computing Techniques
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2014
* Anand Sanwal, Corporate Portfolio Management LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop an
software system directed at financial institutions (lenders and investors) that
will provide them with actionable, realtime intelligence into the health of
private companies. The technology being developed will scan and parse millions
of structured, semi-structured and unstructured information sources searching
for signals of a private company's health. Then, based on context, it will
algorithmically process, categorize and assess the sentiment and strength of
these disparate signals to offer a comprehensive, coherent and real-time view of
a private company's health, its likely financing needs and best fit financing
solutions from a financial institution?s product portfolio. Using the company's
line of products, financial institutions will be able to look at private
companies in a fundamentally different, smarter, more scalable and data-driven
way that empowers them to efficiently and intelligently make critical financing
and capital allocation decisions. Specifically, they will have the potential to
able to identify the right private companies in real-time and will be armed with
intelligence they can use to offer them appropriate financing solutions.

The system's ability to process a diversity of structured, semi-structured and
unstructured information sources and programmatically derive measures of company
health would have profound positive effects on the precision, rigor and
scalability of institutional lending and investment into private companies.
Today, the private company financing market is built on highly imprecise and
imperfect heuristics that result in high business loan default rates, or at its
worst, bank failures as occurred in 2009. The downstream impact of this is that
small businesses do not get the financing they need as evidenced in 2009 when,
according to the Federal Reserve, only 40% of private small businesses that
sought bank financing actually received the funding they needed. Per the Small
Business Administration, businesses with fewer than 500 employees account for
more than half the nation's employment and nearly half of GDP. As a result, it
is critical that healthy private companies which are an economic catalyst have
access to financing. Unfortunately, without credible, actionable, scalable and
real-time information which distinguishes between healthy and unhealthy private
businesses, financial institutions remain at an informational disadvantage. This
increases their risk, which in turn hinders growing, healthy private companies
from receiving the financing they need. If successfully deployed, the technology
being supported by this proposal has the potential to make a significant impact
in the marketplace.