* 1127665
* A New Posterior Simulation Toolkit for Estimation of a Multitude of Economic Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Tao Zha, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 117,039.00

In this project, the investigator provides a new Bayesian simulation toolkit
that allows economists to study a variety of economic models which are difficult
to quantify due to their computational complexity. Major technical difficulties
include intractable likelihoods full of multiple peaks and thin winding ridges,
separated by wide zero-probability regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important
reason for providing a completely new set of simulation tools relates to the
estimation of the two regime-switching general equilibrium models proposed here.
In the process of estimating these models the investigator identifies several
puzzling results. It is tempting to infer that such undesirable results are a
reflection of some fundamental defects of the kind of macroeconomic models
studied in the literature. This inference turns out to be incorrect. The
investigator's discovery is that the likelihood functions and the posterior
distributions are far more complicated than what existing Monte Carlo Markov
Chain (MCMC) techniques can handle. The puzzling estimates are not a reflection
of the model's property itself, but rather are predominantly a consequence of
the inadequacy of the current computational techniques available to
macroeconomists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet this challenge the investigator
develops a more complete treatment of estimation techniques. The proposed
research is designed to avoid the aforementioned problems inherent in economic
models. In particular, it consists of three main components.&lt;br/&gt;(1) The
investigator develops two structural models that explicitly address the impact
of the recent turmoil in housing and financial markets on the macroeconomy and
the effect of subsequent policy interventions.&lt;br/&gt;(2) To obtain accurate
estimation techniques for these models the investigator develops a new set of
MCMC techniques, addressing a combination of multiple local peaks, thin winding
ridges, and a high-dimensional parameter pace which often makes it very
difficult and frequently infeasible to utilize existing MCMC
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;(3) To make the new methods accessible to the general
public the investigator develops a toolkit that comprises a dynamic scheduler
that allows exploitation of parallel computation required by many modern
quantitative economic applications. This general toolkit can be applied to a
wide range of economic problems beyond the new models discussed in this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macroeconomic models that can be utilized to
address the current economic problems and the relevant policy recipes are,
inevitably, complicated. It is well-known that the accurate estimation of such
models poses an extraordinarily challenging task since the standard methods used
in the macroeconomic literature can fail when the model becomes almost
intractable. To avoid distortion of the economic implications from the model
itself, the proposed new computational techniques are needed. This will permit
researchers to achieve a high level of inferential accuracy so that
computational inaccuracy does not contaminate or compromise the model's economic
meaning and subsequent policy recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate
goal of the proposal is to make the toolkit available to academic and government
researchers, as well as graduate students, and to allow researchers to estimate
various structural models to address pertinent and pressing policy questions
with relatively simple resources. Writing a parallelized computer program for
each economic application is a challenging and time-consuming task even to a
seasoned programmer; many economists simply do not have the time or the computer
skills to write the source code that takes advantage of parallel computing and
general grid usability. The proposed toolkit will eliminate the need to invest
time on writing a sophisticated program for each and every economic
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The architecture of the proposed toolkit is
designed to be general enough to have a significant broader impact. The final
product, once completed, allows researchers to estimate a multitude of
macroeconomic models beyond the two models studied in the proposal and beyond
current linear models whose breadth and depth are often comprised by
computational difficulties. Examples of more challenging economic models usable
for policy analysis in the current economic environment are nonlinear structural
economic models, large nonlinear econometric models, dynamic learning models,
and robustness analysis that allows for model misspecification.