* 1127388
* SDCI Sec: Traffic modeling and generation with custom fidelity for cyber security experimentation
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2015
* USD 971,095.00

Traffic generation plays an integral part of cyber-security defense testing in
&lt;br/&gt;network testbeds. Generating just any traffic is easy, but generating
realistic traffic &lt;br/&gt;is hard. The key reason for this is that
"realistic" means different things to different &lt;br/&gt;people. The
definition of realism depends on the use of the traffic in testing, but
&lt;br/&gt;all existing traffic generators have a fixed definition of realism
that users cannot &lt;br/&gt;change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
build a traffic generator whose definition of realism can be fully
&lt;br/&gt;specified by a user. The generator will consist of three modules: (1)
a module that mines values for &lt;br/&gt;user-specified dimensions from traffic
logs, (2) a module that generates random &lt;br/&gt;traffic that fits the model
mined in the previous step, (3) a module that replays &lt;br/&gt;traffic from a
log so that it exactly matches the logged traffic along the
user-&lt;br/&gt;specified dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The key novelty of this approach lies in the customizable &lt;br/&gt;definition
of realism that the generator will support. By allowing users to specify
&lt;br/&gt;their own reality dimensions this project's traffic generation tool
will be generic &lt;br/&gt;enough to meet the evaluation needs of any cyber
security researcher. Further, &lt;br/&gt;integration of the traffic generation
from models and traffic replay in a single &lt;br/&gt;tool is novel; existing
tools support only one of these generation approaches. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, the
tool will support traffic generation at application, transport or
&lt;br/&gt;network level while existing tools support it only at one select
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed work will advance
cyber-security defense &lt;br/&gt;research by supporting rigorous and realistic
evaluation of its products. It will do &lt;br/&gt;that by both fitting
researchers' needs and by being extremely portable and &lt;br/&gt;easy to deploy
and use. Because users will be able to customize the definition of
&lt;br/&gt;realism as they desire, the evaluation will properly stress the
cyber-security &lt;br/&gt;defenses and its results will be predictive of the
defenses performance in real &lt;br/&gt;deployment. The traffic generator's
capabilities to both generate traffic from &lt;br/&gt;learned models and to
replay it from network logs enable a wide range of &lt;br/&gt;testing strategies
and support thorough exploration of problem space. Better &lt;br/&gt;evaluation
strategies will lead to better cyber-security defenses. The project will
&lt;br/&gt;integrate our traffic generator with the DETER testbed for cyber
security &lt;br/&gt;experimentation. All software will also be released as open-
source under the &lt;br/&gt;GNU GPL v3 license.