* 1127205
* SBIR Phase II:  An Improved Open-Path FTIR Spectrometer for Remote Monitoring of Atmospheric Gases
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2011,09/30/2014
* Stephen Horne, Energetiq Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 487,023.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will enable
Energetiq Technology, Inc. to develop and commercialize an advanced Open-Path
FTIR Spectrometer (OPFTIR) instrument for monitoring of atmospheric gases over
extended distances. The Phase II technical goals will be the optimization of a
high-brightness infrared source and optical subsystem that will enable long path
instrument capabilities. For current FTIR instruments the infrared light source
is a thermal blackbody, limited to operating temperatures of approximately 1000
C. For OP-FTIR instruments the consequences of relying on such low-brightness
light sources are (a) bulky and expensive IR optics; (b) expensive IR detectors;
and (c) limited monitoring range ? typically less than a few hundred meters. The
laser heated IR light source developed in Phase I has demonstrated greater than
2000C operation. Direct comparison with a standard GlobarTM source shows an
improvement in signal amplitude of between 2 and 10 (depending on wavelength)
and signal to noise measurements imply an improvement in detectability of from
1.5 to about 6. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are
in the area of environmental monitoring and potentially in Homeland Security
applications. The cost and size of OP-FTIR instruments will be reduced and the
range and sensitivity increased. With increased emphasis on monitoring total
fluxes of atmospheric pollutants, including global warming gases such as CO2,
OP-FTIR instruments will be even more widely used in the future.