* 1127924
* Collaborative Research: Design of Accelerated Prognostics and Health Management
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Mohamed AbuAli, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shashank Priya
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Center for Intelligent Maintenance Systems &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#1127924&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #1127922&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding for the Center for Center for Intelligent Maintenance Systems sites at
the University of Cincinnati and the Missouri Institute of Science and
Technology. Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF
approved solicitation, NSF 10-601. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit
proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prognosis of industrial systems and the management of
their health based on system data typically requires significant analysis and
design prior to implementation of an effective detection and management system.
The proposed work seeks to accelerate the process of collection and assessment
of data in order to reduce the life cycle of Prognosis and Health Management
(PHM) research. The work plans to explore a framework with unified systematic
methods to ensure the precision of Remaining Useful Life (RUL) estimations that
are essential for effective health management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work promises to significantly improve methods to estimate the usable
lifetime of industrial equipment, thus enabling efficient maintenance of
operating production systems and reducing overall cost. The work is supported by
the Industry Advisory Board as well as individual industry members of the center
and has the potential to extend the center?s portfolio by virtue of the
framework to be established by the work. The center will involve graduate
students, teachers and undergraduates in the work emphasizing involvement of
minority and female students.