* 1127936
* FRP:  Energy Efficient Smart Building Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Daniel Inman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2015
* USD 199,518.00

Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS) &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#1127936 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for the Center for
Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS) located at the Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University. Requests for Fundamental Research
are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 10-601. The solicitation
invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental
research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Researchers at Virginia Tech's Center for
Energy Harvesting materials and Systems (CEHMS) propose to investigate two
approaches to energy harvesting. One mechanism is the capture of energy from
airflows with small scale wind mill, for placement in locations such as air
ducts to capture the wasted energy. The design and computational modeling of
this system is innovative and represents significant intellectual merit. The
second approach involves the development of structured materials to capture
indoor light energy and vibrational energy. The intellectual merit of the
investigation focuses on the detailed, comprehensive characterization of bismuth
layered structured materials that can serve to capture energy through
vibrational mechanisms. The concept is to first draw the materials into fibers,
then to develop methods to prepare the materials in sheet form for application
on the walls, much like wallpaper. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
harvesting energy through devices in the air ducts and walls is to provide
alternative power sources for wireless sensors. Such wireless sensors are
essential to monitor environmental factors and optimally manage energy usage.
While the power requirements of such sensors are decreasing through
improvements, their use remains a challenge as the cost of battery changes is
unacceptable and solar power in not available for interior sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal benefits of energy efficient smart buildings
are significant in terms of economy and environment. The proposed work would
result in capture of wastage energy in the building environment and its use
towards improving the comfort level of occupants. The success in proposed tasks
will lead to significant changes in the current generation building
infrastructure creating new economy and jobs. Students will benefit as
participants in the research and through incorporation of the project results in
a course on energy harvesting offered at Virginia Tech. Virginia Tech and CEHMS
have a strong history of intellectual property development, and the research
partners at United Technologies Research Center (UTRC) are interested in
commercialization of the results.