* 1127608
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Scientizing Science Policy: Implications for Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Gouk Tae Kim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 6,200.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support doctoral dissertation
research on the impacts of a recent decision in the federal government: To
formulate science policy strategies based on scientific studies of innovation in
science and technology. Implementation of this decision is referred to in the
dissertation as "scientizing science policy," or SSP for brevity. The researcher
will use an interdisciplinary approach to trace the emergence, history, and
ongoing struggles within the SSP framework as enacted through the Office of
Science and Technology Policy's Science of Science Policy (SoSP) and the
National Science Foundation's Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP)
programs. It will also assess the impacts of the SSP on shaping and evaluating
SoSP and SciSIP programs in order to provide a better understanding of the
promises, potentials, and lost opportunities presented by the SSP framework. The
researcher will conduct in-depth interviews with policy and research community
members who have been affiliated with or engaged in constructing the SSP
framework as well as those who are outside the framework. The primary goal is to
determine how the SSP framework was shaped and how it changed the landscape of
US science, technology, and innovation policies and
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
importance of SSP within the science, technology, and innovation policy field,
understanding the historical dynamics of the SSP framework, through lens of
Science and Technology Studies will offer new insights into the interactions
between the realms of science, politics, and policy. It will also promote
discussion of how the SSP framework creates either new opportunities or
challenges for the science, technology, and innovation policy community. The
results of this research should also promote further development of the SSP
framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyzing key processes of the SSP framework should
offer opportunities to broaden the purview of the SSP framework to better
integrate a range of social scientific perspectives. That should in turn provide
resources for future SoSP and SciSIP programs; encourage the infiltration of
Science and Technology Studies into SSP practices by suggesting new scientific
toolkits, models, and data infrastructure for science, technology, and
innovation policy; and it should contribute to the expansion of SSP research
into previously excluded topics such as the assessment of non-economic societal
impacts of science.