* 1127846
* AIR:  First stage commercialization of Oil Anti-Deposition Dispersant technology for spilled oil
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* SARAH MORGAN, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2014
* USD 234,946.00

Program Director's Recommendation &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #1127846
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a class of bio-derived,
biodegradable, oil dispersants which resist wetting and spreading on solid
substrates such as plants and animals. The intellectual merit of this project is
that more safe and effective dispersants are needed to help mitigate the impacts
of oil spill disasters such as the Deepwater Horizon incident. The PIs have
effectively used funds from the NSF RAPID program to identify a class of
dispersants that are macromolecular aggregates of natural cellulose polymers and
soy bean lecithin. A clear case is made that these compounds do not allow oil to
foul bird feathers, and it is presumed that since they are natural in origin,
they would be a safer alternative to the current petrochemically derived
dispersants. The PIs have a strong record of expertise in this area, and are
uniquely suited to this work. They clearly outline a detailed list of scientific
and business-related questions that must be answered to push this product to the
marketplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of discovering more
effective and non-toxic oil dispersants is clear. The PIs have a strong record
of incorporating others into their work, such as the local junior college
students and instructors, some of whom are included as inventors of the
disclosed technologies. There is a plan for student and workforce training that
will span both the academic laboratory and associated industrial partner
operations.