* 1127310
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Domestic Perspective on Wari State Expansion
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Maeve Skidmore, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. R. Alan Covey, Maeve Skidmore will excavate remains of
prehistoric houses from the archaeological site of Hatun Cotuyoc in Peru and
analyze material culture recovered from them. The site and its surrounding
region came under the influence of the 'Wari' one of the first Andean 'empires'
and this research examines the ways in which households were integrated into
this larger entity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of household integration
into larger political schemes is important for understanding the scope and
limits of both state-level and individual-based power. The research will
contribute to global archaeological perspectives on the development of early
states, but it also has relevance to today's world, in which political regimes
unable to integrate populations become frail. Understanding how people with
diverse identities and agendas chose to participate in or remain outside of
state institutions and social practices provides insight on the mechanisms that
bind groups together, as well as the ones that set them apart.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skidmore's research will acquire data on activities
carried out in households, consumption patterns of residents, and the affinity
of domestic material culture and practices to those known from other Wari
settlements. Information on how these patterns changed over time will be used to
evaluate three hypotheses regarding the consolidation of Wari state power in the
region. These include scenarios in which household integration into state
systems was maintained through time, diminished with the weakening of ties to
the state, or occurred only ephemerally and relatively late in the course of
state development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to supporting training for
Skidmore, this project will work to build collaborative relationships between
archaeologists from the United States and Peru. It will provide training
opportunities for archaeology students from universities in Lima and Cusco. The
work will also benefit people in the Huaro community, as the project will offer
employment to individuals who have limited economic opportunities. While
conducting research in the field, archaeologists will help to teach community
members about archaeological research, how it differs from looting, and the
importance of protecting cultural patrimony. This will especially be directed at
school-aged children, who will be invited to visit excavations and learn about
archaeology, but will reach others through periodic presentations made to the
community. Results of research will be published in English and Spanish language
journals and presented at professional conferences in the United States and
Peru.