* 1127216
* Influence of Head and Eye Movements on Visual Input Statistics and Early Neural Representations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michele Rucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2015
* USD 482,813.00

We are normally not aware that our eyes and head are always in motion. Yet
small, involuntary head and eye movements continually occur, even when we
attempt to keep our gaze fixed on a point in the scene. It has long been known
that the temporal modulations resulting from these movements are essential for
seeing: the world becomes progressively fainter and will eventually fade
altogether when the head and eyes are immobilized. However, the specific
mechanisms by which fixational movements contribute to vision remain unknown.
With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Rucci and his team at
Boston University will measure microscopic head and eye movements in human
observers and reconstruct the input signals entering their eyes. The
investigators will then use these data to quantify the impact of the observer's
actions on the sensory flow of information and examine how this flow changes
during the execution of different visual activities.

This research will investigate the mechanisms by which fixational movements
contribute to the processing of visual information in the brain and the
establishment of a stable visual percept. Elucidating the impact of fixational
movements is critical to advancing our knowledge of how the visual system
functions and how to build machines which replicate human visual capabilities.
Furthermore, abnormal fixational eye movements occur in various pathological
conditions. A thorough understanding of the functions of fixational eye
movements may lead to treatment of the visual impairments associated with such
conditions.