* 1127076
* Genetic and Histological Dissection of Phenotypic Variation in Quantitative Resistance to Maize Diseases
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Randall Wisser, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,977,771.00

PI: Randall J. Wisser (University of Delaware - Newark)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-
PIs: Kirk Czymmek (University of Delaware - Newark), Rebecca J. Nelson (Cornell
University), Gary Payne (North Carolina State University), Nick Lauter (USDA-
ARS/Iowa State University) and Alicia Carriquiry (Iowa State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other Senior Personnel/Faculty Associates:
Peter J. Balint-Kurti and James B. Holland (USDA-ARS/North Carolina State
University) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the causes of phenotypic
variation in the plant defense response is one of the most important challenges
faced by plant biologists. It is known that genetics plays a major role.
However, this genetic variation is typically expressed on a quantitative scale
that has made it difficult to pin down the genes and unravel the mechanisms
underlying defense. Recent advances in plant research have substantially
increased knowledge of the genetic architecture (i.e., information about how the
genetic code produces phenotypic variation) of plant defense. However, in order
to make this knowledge actionable, genetic observations must be mechanistically
understood at other biological levels such as the cellular and molecular levels.
In this project, a comprehensive analysis of maize quantitative defense will
refine the understanding of its genetic architecture and identify genes involved
in phenotypic variation for disease resistance. Furthermore, large-scale genetic
resources and modernized computational tools will be used to link genetic
architecture to mechanisms responsible for host defense. This project aims to
achieve a more holistic understanding of the biological basis of plant defense
so that novel long-term solutions for disease control can be
envisaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are several-
fold. First, the project will contribute to the development of sustainable
approaches to crop protection. The project's contributions to understanding the
mechanisms that underlie variation in plant-pathogen interactions will inform
the design of resistant germplasm. This is important in reducing losses of yield
and quality for US maize, but is even more critical for protecting the food
security of smallholder farmers in developing countries, where losses due to
maize diseases are proportionally greater. Second, project insights will be
distilled and conveyed to a large and diverse group of citizens in an effective
and entertaining way through partnership with the North Carolina Museum of
Natural Sciences. This partnership will improve science teacher competency in
plant sciences; strengthen education about plant genomics and biology for
seventh grade students by giving them hands-on experiences in state-of-the-art
labs; and to offer a lecture series to the general public to increase science
literacy. The museum is the highest attended in NC with over 650,000 annual
visitors of varied ages, educational and socio- economic backgrounds. Third,
scientific capacity building will be an integral part of the research conducted
across the four institutions involved in this project. Undergraduates, including
those from underrepresented groups in science, will be exposed to both field and
laboratory studies and mentored by project leaders and post-doctoral scholars.
Graduate and post-doctoral scholars will receive supplemental training through
specialized workshops and co-investigating laboratory visits. Exchanges between
laboratories will allow these researchers to acquire new skills and strengthen
their development in collaborative and integrative research. A dedicated project
website will act as a public awareness showcase for the project and access as a
portal to available data and resources generated by the project along with
information about the deposition of data into resource-appropriate public
repositories (such as GenBank, GEO, MaizeGDB, and Panzea) from which project
data can be accessed.