* 1127538
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra High Temperature Microwave Processing of Ceramics
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Holly Shulman, Ceralink Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2014
* USD 663,820.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
need for breakthrough technologies in the production of ultrahigh temperature
(UHT) ceramics, including nanograin structures, with improved performance-to-
cost ratio. UHT ceramics are often challenging to densify. The development of
UHT microwave assist technology (MAT) furnaces will dramatically improve the
commercial applicability of UHT ceramic products through lower temperature
densification and faster heating cycles. MAT, the combination of microwaves with
radiant heat, is proven to enhance diffusion, leading to finer grained
microstructures. This project will extend the use of MAT to temperatures above
1700 deg. C, into the range of sintering temperatures for UHT ceramics. A
prototype UHT MAT furnace will be designed and built, capitalizing upon in-house
MAT system design expertise and research results from Phase I. Proprietary MAT-
modeling software will assist with optimizing furnace design and process
efficiency. Selected UHT ceramics will be studied to demonstrate sintering with
the prototype. Three current industrial UHT ceramic manufacturers, who expressed
strong interest in using MAT for sintering products, will collaborate on the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes performance enhancements at reduced processing costs, and
growth in the use of ultrahigh temperature (UHT) ceramics. Expanded uptake of
UHT ceramics will benefit a wide array of manufactured products in electronics,
automotive, and aerospace applications. The process of sintering UHT ceramics is
extremely energy-intensive. UHT microwave-assist technology (MAT) processing
will reduce energy consumption and green house gas emissions by 50-80% for UHT
ceramic production. This process may replace pressure-assisted methods, by
combining MAT with techniques such as variable rate sintering. MAT may also
decrease the use of sintering aids to improve erosion and wear resistance, and
high-temperature strength. This faster process enables just-in-time manufacture
and enhances competition with respect to foreign competitors. Finally, the UHT
MAT furnace technology will lead to new and value-added products, through
property improvements from finer grain sizes and cost reduction. This will
position American manufacturers for new revenue opportunities and job growth.