* 1127970
* Organizational Sciences Workshop on Electricity Transmission Planning Organizations to be held at Boise State first part of 2012.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* David Solan, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 69,924.00

This workshop enables collaboration between Innovation and Organizational
Sciences scholars and regional electricity planning managers in the Northwest US
and Canada. Transmission planning is characterized by multiple processes and
organizations with overlapping and diffuse authority, as well as competing
interests and policy direction from different levels of government. The diffuse
authority in these systems presents an opportunity for the scholarly community
and a challenge to electric grid modernization and expansion. As part of the
project, IOS scholars will develop research papers and present and discuss them
with regional transmission planners and stakeholders from private industry and
non-governmental organizations. The collaborators aim to identify practical
lessons based on organizational theories to improve the overall effectiveness of
regional transmission planning. In addition, they will identify basic
organizational sciences research agendas that may be most relevant to regional
planning organizations, providing a foundation for future research in the field.
A workshop report detailing both the evidence-based practice lessons and the
promising agendas for future research will be made widely available.

In terms of broader impacts, this research will contribute to economic and
environmental improvement through improved planning processes and strategies.
Effective planning is an essential component to upgrade the electric grid and
realize smart grid benefits, bring more renewable-sourced electricity generation
online, and ensure the grid's stability.