* 1127164
* Paleoprimatology in sub-equatorial Africa: Views from the Oligocene Nsungwe Formation of Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Nancy Stevens, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 224,190.00

This project examines primate evolutionary history through field research in the
only Oligocene terrestrial vertebrate assemblage in Africa below the equator
(Tanzania). The researchers have previously recovered novel strepsirrhine and
anthropoid primates from this region. This research involves international
collaboration between Ohio University and the University of Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania. The project will provide training opportunities for three graduate and
three undergraduate students from Ohio University to conduct hands-on laboratory
and field research. Research will involve Tanzanian students and local
participants. Results will be disseminated in scholarly publications and popular
media. Science outreach for the project includes interactive websites,
multilingual museum exhibits, and K-12 learning
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how primates and other organisms
respond to environmental change is a timely topic for scientists and the general
public alike. The Cenozoic Era of Africa records a remarkable and deep record of
environmental change through time. This research project provides new data from
a previously undersampled interval in the fossil record, for the first time
documenting Oligocene mammals from Africa south of the equator. Included among
these finds are new species that fill a gap in the primate fossil record. Prior
to this work, a complete lack of data from this interval has hampered our
understanding of how changes in global climate patterns and landmass
configuration affected faunal composition through time. Near the Oligo-Miocene
boundary, dramatic changes occurred in African terrestrial communities, when a
collision between the Afro-Arabian and Eurasian landmasses resulted in
replacement of many of the resident organisms by invading immigrant species.
These changes had profound implications for the balance of predation and
competition for Africa's resident primates. This project has three main goals:
1) to characterize the new fauna from the late Oligocene Nsungwe Formation of
Tanzania, 2) to intensively sample for additional informative localities in the
region, and 3) to conduct geological analyses to document the precise age and
paleoecological setting of fossiliferous localities. Data from this project will
bridge early Oligocene northern African faunas with the wealth of data known
from Miocene localities across the continent, and will help to test hypotheses
regarding the continent's tumultuous history of biotic change.