* 1127640
* Diagrammatic Representations of Biological Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* William Bechtel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 183,279.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to generate a philosophical
account of the role of diagrams in the life sciences, one that does justice to
scientific practice while contributing deeper understanding of explanation and
other key concepts in philosophy of science. Diagrams are widely employed in the
life sciences for a variety of activities that are directly relevant to
philosophy of science such as presenting explanations, developing and revising
hypotheses, and reasoning about evidence. Until recently, diagrams were rarely
studied by philosophers of science, who mainly focused on linguistically
represented laws; however, recent interest in models as vehicles for explanation
has created a more receptive context for comprehensive investigation of
diagrams. This investigation will focus on the use of diagrams in a specific
field of biology, circadian rhythm research by chronobiologists. This is a small
recently emerging field for which a relatively comprehensive analysis is
feasible; there is ready access to a local community of prominent researchers,
and concern with complex molecular mechanisms renders reliance on diagrams
extremely important for these researchers. This project will build on recent
pioneering efforts in philosophy of science as well as a longer line of research
in cognitive science concerning reasoning and problem solving using
diagrams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Four lines of
investigation will be pursued simultaneously and synergistically, each making a
distinctive contribution to the project. A taxonomy of diagrams will be
developed, beginning with attention to the range of representational devices
available and the ways diagrams are used in scientific investigations but adding
other dimensions as work proceeds. Second, diagrams used by selected circadian
rhythm researchers will be closely examined, with particular attention to the
context in which they were developed and used, the differences between diagrams
developed by different scientists, and the ways diagrams are revised over time.
Third, cognitive science research will be examined, emphasizing the cognitive
processes involved in developing, understanding, or reasoning with diagrams and
applying this to understanding processes of scientific cognition more
specifically. Finally, the analysis of diagrams will be brought to bear on
philosophical accounts of explanation, with particular emphasis on how existing
accounts of explanation may need to be extended or revised.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this project involves several distinct audiences and their concerns. The most
immediate target audience is philosophers of science, for whom the project
should demonstrate the crucial and diverse roles played by diagrams in the
reasoning and explanatory activities of scientists. This has the potential to
expand the scope of current philosophy of science. Second, in addition to
drawing upon the results of cognitive scientists the project's focus on
particular scientific diagrams should itself contribute to thinking and
discourse in cognitive science. Third, chronobiologists and other scientists
whose use of diagrams are investigated should gain useful new perspective on
their own scientific practices. Finally, the results of this project will be
communicated to scientists more generally, especially those with an ongoing
interest in new perspectives from philosophy of science, and to educators
involved in both college and pre-college science teaching.