* 1127232
* Symposium on Teaching and Learning Indigenous Languages of Latin America
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Sharon Schierling, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 07/31/2012
* USD 25,000.00

The Kellogg Institute for International Studies will host the Symposium on
Teaching and Learning Indigenous Languages of Latin America (STLILLA) at the
University of Notre Dame from October 30 - November 2, 2011. STLILLA will be a
major gathering of scholars from the United States and Latin America to
disseminate research on diverse aspects of Latin American indigenous languages
and cultures.

Within this general framework, of particular importance is interdisciplinary
research on Latin American indigenous languages that leads to the documentation
and preservation of those that are most endangered. Documentation is critical to
the preservation of indigenous languages in the Americas. Approximately half of
the 6,000-7,000 human languages currently spoken worldwide are in imminent
danger of extinction. Furthermore, the fact that fewer than 5% of the world's
languages are even written. Sharing research and understanding the challenges
faced by those who work to document, preserve, and revitalize Latin America's
most endangered languages is critical to the preservation of indigenous
languages in the region.

STLILLA will promote a global dialogue by creating a forum where US academics
can engage with Latin American and indigenous scholars. An important hallmark
will be the significant presence of Latin American and especially indigenous
scholars, a rare occurrence in US academic settings. Therefore, the conference
will open new avenues of cooperation between native speakers and non-native
speakers of Latin American indigenous languages. By convening such a broad
spectrum of participants, STLILLA will allow people who often work in isolation
from each other to compare their approaches to documenting and revitalizing
endangered languages. By way of giving this research some permanence and impact,
the conference will also focus on the creation of pedagogical materials from
language documentation. This conference will, therefore, be making a significant
contribution to preserving the languages and cultures of various indigenous
groups, who are among the most underrepresented peoples in our hemisphere.