* 1127257
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Social Scientific Analysis of Architectural Design, Access, and Disability
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Wanda Liebermann, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 12/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This project examines how the meanings of disability become materialized in the
built environment. In particular, it looks at the role architecture plays in
constituting categories of ability and disability and how this connects to
discourses and practices of citizenship. Despite the huge impact of disabled
access requirements on practice, architectural scholarship and education hardly
engage with the topic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation will investigate
how different architectures create and understand disability, ability, and
access, as empirically grounded in three case studies: Het Dorp, a Dutch planned
community for the disabled, the New Ed Roberts Campus (ERC) in Berkeley,
California, and the controversial inaccessible Board of Supervisors Chamber
presidential podium in San Francisco City Hall. The investigator will use a
mixed qualitative methodological approach, which includes ethnographic
observation at research sites, interviews with users and architects, and
critical analysis of representations of disabled access from media and
architectural archives. The research will contribute to Science and Technology
Studies scholarship on the built environment and to theories of citizenship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impact is to reconceptualize the
relationship between architecture and disability through the development of new
analytical and creative modes that extend beyond the limited terms of code
compliance, currently the profession's standard operational practice. For
educators and practicing architects, this research will produce insights that
can be used to build a flexible design vocabulary and practice, as well as
contribute to a dynamic discourse about disability in architectural pedagogy. In
addition, the project will provide guidelines for designers and planners to
rethink design criteria, thus, contributing to new public policy debates about
the relationship between building codes, universal design ideas, and mainstream
architectural practice.