* 1127829
* Integrating Flash and Phase Change Memory into Memory/Storage Hierarchies for Enhancing High-End and Data-Intensive Computing
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* David Lilja, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shashank Priya
* 07/31/2014
* USD 199,427.00

Center for Research on Intelligent Storage (CRIS)&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#1127829&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for the Center for
Research on Intelligent Storage (CRIS) at the University of Minnesota ? Twin
Cities. Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF
approved solicitation, NSF 10-601. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit
proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migration away from Hard Disk Drives (HDD) to solid state
drives (SDDs) composed of NAND flash memory is viewed as essential to meeting
access speed, energy, reliability, and mobility requirements of emerging data
storage systems. The proposed effort seeks to investigate architectures for the
integration of NAND flash and Phase Change Memory (PCM) ? a new technology that
is highly scalable with improved performance (I/O, erase, write endurance). The
proposed research plans to address design issues peculiar to the integration of
these two technologies with the intent of developing new architectures,
algorithms and analytic tools with which to arrive at innovative solutions that
will enable use of flash-based memory devices in high-performance and low-power
computer systems and data intensive applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NAND-PCM
architectures have the potential to enhance the performance of high-end as wella
s data-intensive computing while addressing increasing the increasing need to
reduce energy consumption. Outcomes of the proposed research have the potential
for major impact in the US computing and data systems sector. The proposed
effort has garnered support from one center member, Los Alamos Nation Lab, for
execution of the proposed work. This industry sector will further benefit via
dissemination of the results through the Center membership and the extension of
the centers project portfolio into this area. Opportunities are planned for
graduate and undergraduate students including those in underrepresented groups.