* 1127760
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Mapping a Wildfire:  Mapping practices, environmental knowledge, and the unpredictable nature of disaster"
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* David Serlin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Mapping Wildfire: Mapping Practices, Environmental Knowledge,&lt;br/&gt;and the
Unpredictable Nature of Disaster&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;In October 2007,
Southern California faced one of the largest wildfire events in its history.
Developing ways to represent and visualize these wildfires posed a great
challenge for fire officials, disaster responders, and news reporters as they
worked to gather and share information about the unfolding situation. Maps
became both vital tools of communication and techniques for making the fires
knowable.&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project examines the production of the
maps made during the 2007 wildfires to explore how diverse groups of people ?
scientists, first responders, journalists, and the public ? interacted to
develop mutually legitimate ways of understanding the wildfires.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a mixed
set of methods including interviews of key actors, observation of wildfire map-
making, and analysis of government, scientific, and media documents to examine
the often-unanticipated synergy between technological change, human
interactions, cultural imaginings, and the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation will contribute
to studies of disasters that look beyond questions of risk management to
consider the types of knowledge used to make disaster plans, the practices of
communication in disasters, and the different community conceptions of a
disaster. As natural disasters create obstacles for normal infrastructures of
communication, they make it necessary for responders to push the limits of
policy to include messy and impromptu interactions in order to get their jobs
done. In the process, it becomes possible to see how these actors come to accept
new ways of thinking about the environment, new forms of legitimate data and
mapping technologies, as well as new types of expertise. Understanding the
creative and collaborative work behind these new methods of representation will
be of great importance for communities involved in disaster planning and
response as they help explain why environmental debates take their unique shapes
and make it possible to ask better questions about planning for future
disasters.