* 1127567
* SBIR Phase II:  Software to Automate the Detection of Websites that are Fraudulent or Otherwise Harmful to Consumers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Michael Lai, GGL Projects, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 600,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
software to automatically detect a broad spectrum of websites that are
fraudulent or otherwise harmful to consumers. Much work has been done on
specific software capable of detecting websites hosting malware or engaged in
phishing. However, software does not yet exist which can detect a broader array
of harmful websites, including those selling counterfeits, selling illegal
drugs, and hosting weight-loss scams, to name just a few. The challenge in doing
this involves selecting the right features of fraudulent sites which in
isolation or combination are good indictors of a site's harmfulness. Using these
features, a machine learning classifier can be trained using data on known
harmful websites. Unknown websites can then be run through the classifier to
evaluate their potential for harm. Additional challenges involve gathering
sufficient data to properly train the classifier, making the classifier general
enough to detect a range of harmful sites while still maintaining accuracy, and
updating the classifier in real-time such that it can improve with ongoing human
feedback and additional data.

The principal impact of this project is the protection of consumers from online
fraud. Today, consumers lack reliable resources to evaluate unfamiliar websites.
Most use familiar sites like Amazon or take a gamble on Google search results.
These gambles frequently result in fraud. It is believed that there are now over
250 million websites and $100 billion lost yearly to online fraud. While the
statistics cover many types of fraud, examples of risky sites include online
counterfeiters, pharmacies, and retailers. The software developed in this
project will greatly improve transparency around websites and protect millions
from fraud. The technical achievements in this project involve the use of a
vector space model in converting non-discrete features of fraudulent sites into
useful data that can be inputted into a machine learning classifier.
Additionally, this technology will include innovative feature choices, access to
high-quality data, and the creation of a general classifier capable of improving
itself in real-time and detecting a broad array of heretofore undetectable
fraudulent sites.