* 1127704
* Leadership and Overcoming Coordination Failure
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* John Hamman, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 403,882.00

This award funds research that tests economic theories about how leadership can
work to reduce coordination failures. Coordination failure is a common problem
affecting many organizations. For example, a single individual's weak effort can
drag down the performance of an entire group. An assembly line moves no faster
than the slowest person in the line or a report doesn?t get finished until the
last person completes their section. Organizations with a potential 'weak link'
are prone to being caught in productivity traps where all individuals exert low
effort. Leadership is a natural tool for managing and facilitating the process
of transitioning to a better outcome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs and their
collaborators have a long standing interest in the relationship between
coordination and leadership. Previous research demonstrates that able leaders
can increase the odds of successful coordination, but imposing a leader is not a
cure-all. The odds of success depend on who the leader is, how they are
selected, the tools they have available, and how they exercise their leadership.
We propose three projects which look at new environments in which coordination
and leadership are important and examine previously untested mechanisms for
making leaders more effective.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(1) Centralized vs.
Decentralized Management: Consider a firm with two divisions. The divisions can
gain by coordinating their activities but each division has private information
about the state of the world and, critically, the interests of the two divisions
are not perfectly aligned. Is it better to have a central manager collect
information from the divisions and impose choices on the divisions or to have
the divisions share information and make decisions separately? Centralized
management largely eliminates the coordination problem facing the divisions, but
gives the divisions incentives to distort their reports to the central manager,
leading to suboptimal outcomes. Alonso, Dessein, and Matouschek (2008) show that
decentralization maximizes firm profits under broad conditions, but this result
relies on behavioral assumptions that may be unrealistic. This award funds
experiments that simplify the environment of Alonso et al, stacking the deck
against centralization by eliminating information asymmetries between the
divisions. The PIs conjecture that even in an environment biased against
centralization, and contrary to theory, companies that use centralized
management will outperform firms with a decentralized approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Leadership and Advice: Imagine a group of investors
independently choosing whether to put their money into an investment
opportunity. The return of the investment depends on the number of investors and
an unknown state of the world. The investors receive advice from an adviser who
knows the state of the world, but has incentives to suggest investment when it
is not in the investors' best interest. Repeated interaction forces the adviser
to reconcile short term gains from deceiving investors with a long-term concern
for maintaining credibility. The PIs conduct experiments to study whether
advisers can successfully use their superior information to generate
coordination on an efficient equilibrium. They plan to relate the results of
this experiment with some of the problems facing economic policy makers as they
try to lift a country out of a recession like the one currently affecting the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Learning to Lead: Leaders can help groups overcome
coordination failure. Nonetheless many groups with leaders fail to coordinate on
an efficient outcome. This occurs not just because of bad luck, but also because
leaders make systematic errors. Because specific errors can be identified, it
seems plausible that bad leaders can be transformed into good ones if they can
learn (or can be taught) to avoid these errors. The third project uses economic
experiments to examine possible ways of improving leaders' performance: direct
experience, indirect experience, and several different varieties of
advice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Understanding how leaders
function in a variety of settings is central to improving our knowledge of how
organizations can achieve efficient coordination. Beyond an expansion our
knowledge of leadership, the research presented here is intend to improve the
design of institutions and the training of leaders to make it less likely that a
productivity trap will persist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected Broader Impact:
Coordination problems play an important role in many economic failures. Put
simply, the economy can be a self-fulfilling prophecy. If people believe the
economy is going to do poorly, it will. The work proposed here is intended to
help develop institutions and strategies for leaders that will make it easier to
escape from productivity traps. Software and techniques developed with the
proposed research should be useful in teaching a wide variety of economics and
business courses. Research assistants will receive valuable training.