* 1127101
* Collaborative Research: SDCI Net: Policy-driven Large Scale Data Access Framework with Light-weight Performance Monitoring and Estimation
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Ann Chervenak, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 01/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Large-scale science applications are expected to generate exabytes of data over
the next 5 to 10 years. With scientific data collected at unprecedented volumes
and rates, the success of large scientific collaborations will require that they
provide distributed data access with improved data access latencies and
increased reliability to a large user community. To meet these requirements,
scientific collaborations are increasingly replicating large datasets over high-
speed networks to multiple sites. The main objective of this work is to develop
and deploy a general-purpose data access framework for scientific collaborations
that provides lightweight performance monitoring and estimation, fine-grained
and adaptive data transfer management, and enforcement of site and Virtual
Organization policies for resource sharing. Lightweight mechanisms will collect
monitoring information from data movement tools without putting extra loads on
the shared resources. Data transfer management mechanisms will select transfer
properties based on each transfer's performance estimation and will adapt those
properties when observed performance changes due to the dynamic load on storage,
network and other resources. Finally, policy-driven resource management using
Virtual Organization policies regarding replication and resource allocation will
balance user requirements for data freshness with the load on
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The team will produce a
software framework that will improve the ability of distributed scientific
collaborations to provide efficient access to replicated datasets by a large
community of users; this framework will combine fine-grained transfer
management, transfer advice from policy-driven resource management, and light-
weight monitoring. Broader impact: The proposed development will facilitate
scientific advances in many domains that increasingly depend on replication and
sharing of ever-growing datasets.