* 1127412
* SBIR Phase II:  Promoting STEM Education for Students Who are Blind or Print Disabled through the Development of the First Talking Pocket Size Scientific Data Collection Device
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Ronald Supalo, Independence Science, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 926,145.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will produce
technology to provide students with print disabilities (i.e., blindness, low
vision, and learning disabilities that inhibit processing of text), who are
commonly relegated to being passive observers in science classrooms, with the
ability to directly participate in scientific data collection and analysis.
Science education involves the collection, manipulation, and examination of
data, most of which is in visually based textual form, which is problematic for
students with print disabilities. The project objectives involve the development
of non-visually-based technology for the collection and manipulation of data.
The LabQuest, a popular scientific data-collection device used in many
mainstream classrooms, is currently not accessible by students with print
disabilities because it is operated through a text-rich, visual touch-screen
menu. The objectives of Phase II focus on making all features of the LabQuest
accessible to students with print disabilities through fully incorporating text-
to-speech software (resulting in an enhanced version of the Talking LabQuest
developed during Phase I), non-visual collection and manipulation of data, the
development of software interfaces between the Talking LabQuest and peripheral
devices such as Braille note-takers (non-visually-based computerized devices
frequently used by individuals with visual impairments for storing and
manipulating data) and embossers for producing tactile graphs. All features,
functions, and interfaces developed will be field tested by individuals with
print disabilities for ease of operability. Based on Phase I successes, it is
anticipated that individuals with print disabilities will be able to
independently operate the proposed technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project concerns the inclusion in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and professions of a
population that has typically been disenfranchised from these fields. Persons
with print disabilities are underrepresented in postsecondary studies and
careers in STEM fields. Behavioral research suggests that self-belief in one's
capacity to independently function in a particular field is an important
determining factor in whether one chooses that field as a career path, and that
hands-on experiences contribute to one's self-belief regarding the capacity to
independently function. Data from Phase I of this SBIR project are consistent
with behavioral science research; specifically, it was demonstrated that the
technology can be independently operated by students who are blind or visually
impaired to collect and manipulate data. Phase I findings also indicated that
these hands-on science experiences were associated with increased beliefs in
students? capacity to independently function in science activities, increased
inclination to consider postsecondary studies and careers in STEM, and improved
academic outcomes. These data suggest that wide commercial availability of the
proposed enhanced technology will help increase the representation of
individuals with print disabilities in STEM studies and professions. Persons
with print disabilities will be able to work independently in science classrooms
and laboratories, and will be able to choose educational and career paths based
on aptitude and interest. Additionally, because individuals with disabilities
are frequently unemployed or underemployed and receive government assistance,
their increased entry into STEM fields may reduce taxpayer burden.