* 1127476
* SBIR Phase II:  Gene Signature Screening for Pancreatic Cancer Therapeutics from Sonoran Desert Extracts
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2011,05/31/2014
* Richard Kris, Nuvogen Research
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2014
* USD 390,647.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to address
the high lethality of pancreatic cancer. Screening has begun with Phase IB
funding, of natural products from the Sonoran Desert that have produced other
promising drug candidates, testing effects on human pancreatic cancer cells. The
objective of Phase II is to develop a drug candidate that alters expression of
selected pancreatic cancer-related genes and that kills pancreatic cancer cells
that express those genes. The drug candidates will be developed using a
personalized medicine approach. The gene expression profiles (or genomics
patterns) for many different pancreatic cancer tumors will be matched to the
effects on genomics produced by the drug. This personalized approach could
translate directly to clinical trials to pre-select patients most likely to
respond to the drug.

The broader impacts of this research are first to reduce deaths due to
pancreatic cancer, which ranked fourth among the leading causes of cancer death
with 35,240 deaths in the US in 2009. The 5-year survival rate for patients with
metastatic disease is 1.8%. The societal impact and commercial value of
targeting such a lethal disease are very high. Further, the personalized
medicine approach to drug development will impact many oncology projects. The
idea of matching each patient's genomics patterns with each drug that targets
that pattern will be critical. Each kind of cancer is not one disease, but a
wide spectrum of accumulated genomics changes that have to be addressed
individually.