* 1127258
* SBIR Phase II:  High Energy Density Nanodielectrics for Commercial Pulse Power Applications
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2013
* Je Kyun Lee, Agiltron Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 10/31/2013
* USD 224,978.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on
developing a new category of high energy-density nanocomposite dielectric
materials for use in high pulse power capacitors. The approach is to bring
together nanostructures in a polypropylene matrix to form a novel nanocomposite
material with high effective dielectric constant, high breakdown voltage, and
low dissipation factor. In Phase I we successfully produced a nanocomposite
dielectric material by uniformly dispersing chemically modified ferroelectric
nanoparticles into a polypropylene (PP) matrix to form a novel material with
high effective dielectric constant and high energy density for capacitor
applications. This high nanoparticle content film exhibits a charged energy
density of 6.85 J/cm3, a dielectric constant of 31.97, and breakdown voltage of
220 MV/m. This combination of high energy density and high dielectric constant
has not been attained previously from either commercial PP or PP nanocomposites
dielectric films. The Phase II effort is directed towards developing a prototype
process suitable for commercializing these high energy density nanodielectric
films for capacitor applications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the introduction of
new highperformance nanocomposite dielectric materials. The proposed materials
could be employed in commercial high-power pulse, fast pulse, and high-energy
density capacitors, resulting in reduced size, reduced weight, and improved
circuit design. The proposed nanocomposite dielectric technology can make a
needed difference in a variety of industrial fields. The commercial
opportunities include all high energy density electronic devices and packaging
for medical, communication, transportation, and power distribution systems, in
products such as implantable and portable defibrillators, lithotripters, medical
and commercial lasers, pulse forming networks, A.C. motors, ultrasonic
transducer exciter, strobe lighting, and acceleration and energy recovery
systems of automobiles. The proposed nanocomposite dielectric materials can also
be used in military and aerospace electronic devices. In addition, this new
class of nanocomposite materials may enable new devices besides capacitors that
need the unique properties of this novel material system.