* 1127509
* The Singularity Effect of Identifiable Victims
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tehila Kogut, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 338,995.00

The term "identified victim effect" refers to people's greater willingness to
help identified victims (victims about whom they have some information) relative
to unidentified persons. Past research suggests that the effect is restricted to
single victims; meaning that identifying a single victim (by adding a name or a
picture) increases helping, while the identification of individual members of a
group has less effect on helping. This project explores the roots of the
preference for helping a single, identifiable person, examining the development
of this preference in young children within individualistic and collectivist
societies. Hence the research intends to offer some insight into a most
important facet of human social behavior: the willingness to help others in
need. It aims to make significant theoretical contributions to understanding the
sources of the identifiable victim effect and to the literature on the
development of pro-social behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is
conducting nine experiments. Some examine young children?s willingness to help
identifiable single and group targets experiencing the same need to help clarify
whether the identifiable victim effect develops with age and if so, when, in
childhood, this tendency begins to appear. The research addresses the question
of whether society can impart the feelings that are needed for enhancing caring
for groups of people in need. In addition, the research explores whether the
preference for helping the single identifiable victim may be a result of culture
and education. Specifically, Western societies' individualism (according to
which the individual person is the purpose for which society exists) may enhance
people's caring for the one victim and cause the lack of relatedness to the
group. If that is the case, it is expected that people in societies that hold
more collectivistic views (emphasizing the primacy of the group or community
rather than each individual person) will show no such preference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its theoretical contribution, the proposed
research has important practical implications for increasing the frequency and
strength of pro-social behavior as part of optimal human development.