* 1127911
* Using Computer and Information Sciences to Understand Organizational Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Chengcui Zhang, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 395,458.00

This study addresses the engagement of organizations with policy processes in
the U.S. Congress. Organizations are often assumed to be influential but the
nature of the influence has not been fully specified. In this project, the
interdisciplinary team of Principal Investigators from computer and information
science and political science will develop a model of organization influence on
legislative outcomes. This study will use comprehensive reports of engagement
activities from the U.S. Senate Office of Public Records to evaluate the timing
and impact of engagement. The computer and information scientists will
collaborate with the political scientists to develop, enhance, and analyze this
comprehensive time series data. This includes building a database system for
engagement activities, merging theat data with other sources of information on
organizations and issues, coding bills and issues using software designed to
classify digitized text, and establishing organization policy preferences using
social network analysis techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
model the behavior of a variety of organizational types including corporations,
trade associations, professional associations, and nonprofit organizations
within a shared organizational field. The research will contrast theories of
isomorphism among organizations with theories of resource dependence to
highlight similarities and differences in organization behavior and influence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the project will establish an
interdisciplinary collaboration and apply information science methodologies to
the study of policy processes and will, more broadly, integrate computer and
information sciences into social science research. In addition, one of the
products of the study will be a comprehensive database available to other
researchers to address questions of policy development within the executive
branch, the development of important pieces of legislation, and the processes
associated with major policy outcomes.