* 1127112
* IPGA:    Gramene - Exploring Function through Comparative Genomics and Network Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2021
* Doreen Ware, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2021
* USD 11,331,328.00

PI: Doreen Ware (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory)&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Pankaj Jaiswal
(Oregon State University) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel: Paul Kersey
and Helen Parkinson (European Molecular Biology Laboratory-European
Bioinformatics Institute), Lincoln Stein (Ontario Institute for Cancer Research)
and Crispin Taylor (American Society of Plant
Biologists)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborators: Peter D'Eustachio (New York
University School of Medicine), Joshua Stein (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) and
Palitha Dharmawardhana (Oregon State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in plant biology is
reaching a tipping point at which the facility to examine entire systems,
increasing integration of information, and ever more sophisticated analyses of
experimental data are poised to enable sweeping advances in knowledge and
insight. Meanwhile, progress in understanding plant genomes and novel
information technologies are transforming the pace, scale, and strategies used
to conduct plant science research, allowing, for example, much richer
appreciation for the connections among genes, environments, and plant form and
function. These advances in plant science promise to revolutionize crop breeding
and help to keep pace with future population growth, environmental pressures,
and energy needs. In the past decade, the Gramene (www.gramene.org) database has
served the research community as a portal to information about gene structure
and function for multiple plant species. Tools offered through the Gramene
portal allow researchers to develop novel hypotheses on the bases of the most
recent information and analyses, using a standardized framework. Yet, there are
many remaining opportunities to more fully leverage functional information
available from diverse plant species. In this project, Gramene will
substantially expand the number of plant genomes incorporated into the portal,
add new capabilities for studying gene expression, pathways, and networks, and
fundamentally improve the database architecture and user interfaces to
facilitate sophisticated systems-level analyses. At least twenty reference
genomes, annotated by the scientists who are studying them and including crop
plant, model organism, and other species, will be incorporated into the expanded
Gramene portal. Rice, maize, and Arabidopsis will be emphasized through the
addition of publicly available data from expression, epigenomic, and genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). A single internationally-coordinated resource for
these data types will be maintained through collaboration with the Ensembl
Plants project (plants.ensembl.org). To better capture information about the
function of plant genes, Gramene will adopt two powerful tools: the Reactome
(www.reactome.org) platform, which can be used to represent curated pathways and
for performing pathways-based analyses; and the ATLAS (www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/)
platform, which can be used to display and analyze expression profiles. These
interfaces, along with Ensembl, BioMart, and a GWAS viewer, will form an
integrated analysis system that is built on structured metadata and implemented
through a high-capacity data warehouse and an advanced search
engine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To engage and nurture early career scientists, the
project will provide research training opportunities for postdoctoral associates
and students at all levels. Training on the use of Gramene tools will be
accomplished through presentations and workshops held at internationally
attended conferences; broader audiences will be reached through a series of
webinars. Another major objective is to achieve broad interoperability among
community resources. Standards development will be accomplished via outreach to
collaborative data partners and scientists identified through several NSF-
supported Research Coordination Networks (RCNs). Establishing common protocols,
vocabularies, and semantics will have the powerful effect of bringing scientists
together in research and educational fields, both domestically and abroad. A
further objective is to engage biologists who are best qualified in their field
to contribute to genome annotations on the basis of experimental evidence.
Gramene will hold annual jamborees to train scientists in the use of standard
curation tools that produce consistent definitions of data types and metadata.
Finally, the ubiquitous publication of peer-reviewed journals online enables new
opportunities to better link genome databases with the scientific literature.
Gramene will collaborate with the American Society of Plant Biologists (ASPB),
publisher of two high-impact journals, to prototype ways to couple collection of
structured experimental data to the manuscript acceptance and publication
process. As a whole, this project will contribute to long-term progress in
merging information sciences with natural sciences that will ultimately lead to
positive impacts on technology and society.