* 1127435
* SBIR Phase II:  Energy Efficient COD Removal and De-nitrification for Re-circulating Aquaculture Facilities with a Combined Bio-electrochemical Process
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,05/31/2018
* Zhen Huang, Cambrian Innovation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,207,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will optimize
and pilot test a novel, energy-positive approach to de-nitrification for the
global aquaculture industry. Recirculating aquaculture systems suffer from high
wastewater treatment costs. Leveraging recent advances in bio-electrochemical
systems, Cambrian's de-nitrification technology is capable of simultaneously
treating chemical oxygen demand (COD) at end of pipe and nitrates in culture
tank water while generating electricity directly. Phase I R&D demonstrated the
existence of exo-electrogenic microorganisms in aquaculture wastewater. A flow
through reactor consistently treated nitrate to below EPA drinking water
concentrations (10mg/L) while removing an average of 65% of end-of-pipe COD and
generating over 96 Amps/m3. An economic analysis demonstrated potential
operating savings of over 70%, and significant bio-security benefits, versus
competing systems. Phase II R&D will focus on optimizing treatment rates and
reactor parameters with partner firms, and piloting a scaled reactor at an
Aquaculture farm.

The broader impacts of this research are to introduce technologies and
strategies that solve water and energy problems for the recirculating
aquaculture industry. With the collapse of fisheries globally, the aquaculture
industry is poised to fill an important gap in our food production. However,
recirculating systems in particular are under pressure to limit environmental
harm caused by water intensity and pollution. Bio-electrochemical systems
represent a novel approach to turn waste resources into energy, thereby
increasing farmer?s bottom line and resolving the tension between economics and
sustainability. Future research can broaden applications to other industries.