* 1127222
* SBIR Phase II:  Fluid Submersion Cooling for Energy and Cost Efficient Data Centers
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Christiaan Best, Green Revolution Cooling, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,047,900.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to
commercialize liquid submersion cooling for computer servers. Liquid submersion
cooling involves submersion of heat-generating components in a non-electrically-
conductive liquid, replacing air as the heat transfer medium. Liquid is
significantly better than air to transfer heat, but historically has required
cost-prohibitive capital expenditures due to the added complexity of previous
liquid cooling architectures. The research objectives are to produce a system
capable of being mass produced at low cost, and with compelling system features
that drive customer demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project includes lowering of one of the largest marginal
contributors to US electricity use. The EPA estimates that data centers now use
nearly 3% of US electricity, up from nearly 1% in 2000, with nearly half of
power being driven by using air as the primary heat transfer medium. This high-
efficiency system offers the potential to cut total energy use by nearly 50% by
nearly eliminating energy for cooling and reducing server power through internal
fan removal, while offering higher cooling performance and lower costs. Also,
this new heat-recapture system offers the potential to eliminate nearly all
server energy in many locales. Alternate cooling solutions that are cost
effective only offer marginal improvements, and as computing becomes a larger
part of the economy, the search for more energy and cost efficient technologies
will become more critical.