* 1127774
* Biogenic Contributions to Aromatic Hydrocarbon Production over North America during the Winter/Spring Transition
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Barkley Sive, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 03/31/2012
* USD 75,319.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is for the timely deployment of
University of New Hampshire (UNH) personnel and equipment as part of a joint
NOAA-University field campaign (Nitrogen, Aerosol Composition and Halogens on a
Tall Tower - NACHTT) to take place during the winter/spring transition of 2011,
at a rural site in Colorado (Boulder Atmospheric Observatory, Erie, CO).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NACHTT campaign has as its goals the further
investigation of the activation of photolabile halogens species, such as may
generate chlorine radicals, by surface reactions on nitrogen oxide aerosol
particles. Speciated volatile organic compound (VOC) analyses proposed by UNH
researchers serves two distinct purposes, namely:&lt;br/&gt;i) providing an
independent check on the extent of halogen oxidation occurring at the NACHTT
study site, along with potential diagnostic information of the type and source
of air masses found at the site&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ii) taking advantage of an
extensive suite of key nitrogen, aerosol and halogen species measured during
NACHTT for tracing the winter/spring reactivity of monoterpene hydrocarbons, a
class of naturally produced biogenic hydrocarbons whose gas-phase oxidation may
lead to secondary products such as aromatic hydrocarbons and organic aerosol
species , typically attributed to man-made pollution sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of these objectives contributes to the broader
NACHTT measurement campaign. The second will lead to a further understanding of
both the seasonality of biogenic VOC emissions at a rural, mind-continental
site, along with their potential subsequent oxidation .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNH
graduate students will be involved in the field sampling, measurement, data
reduction and synthesis aspects of the study. The outcome of the measurements
will be explained to and made available to the public and other investigators
through the UNH AIRMAP website.