* 1127534
* Trans-Border Indigenous Environmental Governance: Assessing the Connections of Indigenous Mexicans in the U.S. to Their Communities of Origin
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Daniel Klooster, University of Redlands
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 161,998.00

This project investigates the environmental consequences of the outmigration to
the U.S. of indigenous people from areas of the Mexico that are considered
biodiversity hotspots in Mexico. Mexico is a mega-biodiverse country, a center
of agricultural domestication, and a country where indigenous communities
control more than 10% of the national land area. Mexican indigenous "territorial
communities" are essential for helping to conserve and maintain the biodiversity
of the country through their environmental governance. Not only do the
collective decisions of the communities guide individual members use of common
lands, but they have also become recognized as key actors in conservation
strategies increasingly promoted by the Mexican federal government and non-
governmental organizations, including community forestry, community conservation
areas, land use planning and zoning, and payment for environmental services
programs. All of these environmental management strategies rest on communal
institutions and collective decision-making about the use of communal
territories. However, the ability of territorial communities to govern the
environments of their territories is threatened by patterns of outmigration that
remove the people that provide the collective decision-making, leadership, and
labor in the construction and maintenance of public works. In a previous era,
the ideal was for community members to be born, to live in and die in the home
territory, with interruptions only for temporary migration. This geography is
changing. Currently, many have become trans-border communities with members who
do not live in the community territory for long periods of time, but who often
financially support families in the home territory, who may participate in
collective decision-making from afar, and who may return to the home territory
at various times in their lives. This project examines trans-border aspects of
environmental governance in Mexican indigenous territorial communities (i.e.
ejidos and comunidades), which include land, the members of that community, and
the institutions through which those residents govern themselves and their
territory. In collaboration with Mexican scientists, this project seeks to
uncover the trans-border geographic dimension of these communities through semi-
structured interviews with migrants in the US about their connections to the
home territory, especially whether they participate in formal or informal
hometown associations, whether they answer their territorial community's call to
return to Mexico to serve in unpaid leadership posts, to make payments to cover
community-levied labor taxes, to send remittances for environmental or other
activities, and whether they have plans to return to the home territory to live
later in life. Interviews will also investigate agricultural land-use in the
home territory, such as loans to other household members, land abandonment, and
plans for using fields in the future.

The project demonstrates the role of trans-border Mexican indigenous communities
in the environmental governance of biologically-diverse territories. The project
broadens the participation of US Latino students as project research assistants
and study abroad scholarship recipients. The project also enhances the
infrastructure for research by cementing collaboration between US and Mexican
institutions.

This project is supported through co-funding between NSF's Geography and Spatial
Sciences Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).