* 1127832
* AIR:  Sophisticated Electronic Markets for TV Advertising, Powered by Novel Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

The proposed project utilizes advances in key classic computer science problems
such as search tree restructuring to implement an optimized auction system for
acquisition/sale of media advertising time. The proposed system would move away
from the current manually negotiated approach to an expressive auction approach
in which buyers can express rich preferences and constraints through which they
can more effectively conduct their campaigns. The optimization software of the
PI currently underlies the nationwide kidney exchange. This effort will scale
and adapt the PI's prior work in expressive auctions for transportation and
medical markets to match the richness of the TV market. Based on requirements
gathering to be undertaken, a prototype application for the TV ad market will be
completed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the potential to reap
significant savings though efficiencies and added derived value obtained for the
expressive auction approach. This is anticipated by the PI to be anywhere from
13-41% of the current $75B market. Moreover, implementation of these approaches
has the potential to create fairer and open markets while consumers benefit from
viewing of ads relevant to their interests and needs. The approach has broader
application in other areas such as electricity and pollution rights/credits as
well as other media markets. The effort has a relationship within an established
innovation ecosystem at CMU and a new small company will be launched.