* 1127992
* Informed Principals and Learning Agents: Modeling Outcomes from Federal Grants for Sustainable Energy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Richard Feiock, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 317,120.00

In this project the research team will examine how intergovernmental grants
shape agents' preferences so that the agents' choices will be influenced beyond
the lifespan of a grant program. In particular, the project focuses on how
federal grants may shape the preferences of local governments. The work is based
on an "informed principals-learning agents" (IP-LA) framework which argues that
the information, shared risk, and policy learning produced through grant
application and implementation alter the preferences and goals of agents so that
the desired behaviors should persist. In this model, preferences are endogenous
to strategy, which contrasts with most principal-agent models that assume fixed
preferences. The research will analyze the impact of energy efficiency and
conservation grants on the energy program and sustainability preferences of
local governments and whether municipalities continue existing programs, alter
or reconfigure programs, or discontinue them after federal funds have been
exhausted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this work addresses
practical policy issues involved in the design and implementation of
intergovernmental programs, especially targeted one-shot grants. The outcomes of
this research can inform policy designs and implementation strategies,
especially in new or rapidly expanding policy arenas such local energy/climate
policy.