* 1127460
* SBIR Phase II:  Clean Tool: A Unified Approach to Wafer Cleaning
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2013
* Hang Ji, Uncopiers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a single wafer processing clean tool for semiconductor wafer cleaning at all
stages of wafer processing. The method relies on using acoustically controlled
micro-cavitation to remove on-wafer particles. This is a chemical-free cleaning
method, using ultra-pure water as the only processing fluid. During cleaning the
particles will be counted as they get removed. The cleaning is deemed complete
when there remain no more particles to be removed. The wafer will then be rinsed
and dried in the same tool. This project is expected to provide a one-at-a-time
wafer cleaning method with all the four functionalities of cleaning, inspection,
rinsing and drying accomplished in a single setting.

The broader/commercial impacts of this project will be the potential to provide
a complete environmentally-friendly solution to the wafer cleaning predicament.
Cleanliness is a critical requirement in semiconductor manufacturing that
directly impact the chip yields. Among all processing steps in semiconductor
manufacturing, approximately one in every five processing steps is wafer
cleaning. Perfect wafer cleaning is a significant, yet unsolved, problem in
semiconductor industry, and the need is becoming more urgent as the technology
moves towards sub-50nm design nodes. In this project, a wafer-cleaning tool will
be developed to address this market need. This tool will also be useful in
precision cleaning needed in the cleaning of lithography masks,
Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS), solar cells, flat panel displays, and
hard disk drives (HDDs).