* 1127272
* Collaborative Research: Smart Grid: An Analysis of How Socio-Political Contexts Shape Energy Technology Development and Policy
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Elizabeth Wilson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 173,206.00

The term Smart Grid represents a complex set of technologies with potential to
enhance the efficiency and reduce costs of electricity production, storage,
transmission, distribution and use. Advances in nanotechnologies and new
nanomaterials will play crucial roles throughout Smart Grid systems, changing
electricity transmission, reliability, resilience, and energy storage, and
shaping electricity use and demand management in novel ways. Although Smart Grid
systems are critical to developing a sustainable U.S. energy system, significant
variation is apparent in visions of what these systems are and how they are
developing. By exploring the values and contexts that shape Smart Grid
development and implementation, this project contributes to ongoing efforts to
accelerate the transition of our aging electricity system to increase future
energy security, reduce the threats of climate change, and contribute to
sustainable development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, funded by the CISE
directorate, the SBE Nano Initiative, and the STS program, is guided by four
questions: (1) What are the parameters of the political and policy debates
surrounding Smart Grid? (2) How do stakeholders in different regions articulate
their visions of Smart Grid development and deployment? (3) What are the major
deployment challenges for Smart Grid technologies? (4) How can theory on
science, technology and society, socio-technical transitions, and energy
technology deployment be refined and expanded to more effectively integrate
empirical components of emerging energy technology systems? To answer these
research questions, the investigators will analyze Smart Grids in three
electricity transmission systems of North America: the Midwest Independent
System Operator (MISO), the New England Independent System Operator (ISO-New
England) and the Electricity Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT); both MISO and
ISO-New England include Canadian interconnections. The principal investigators
will conduct policy review and analysis, focus groups, interviews, and media
analysis to examine the values that inform Smart Grid development and use as
well as barriers to implementation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
contributes to a growing body of social scientific research on nanomaterials and
scientific innovation. In addition to increasing understanding of national,
regional and state-level influences on Smart Grid technology deployment, the
researchers' results will enable energy professionals, state and regional
planners, policy analysts, non-profits, and businesses to develop more effective
strategies for involving the public in Smart Grid technology design, technology
implementation, and policy formation.