* 1127975
* Scalable, approximate dynamic programming algorithms for high-dimensional storage portfolios
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Warren Powell, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop methods to
design and control heterogeneous portfolios of energy storage devices for the
power grid. The approach of this research is to use approximate dynamic
programming to develop optimal control policies, that will then be used to
understand the economic value of different technologies in the context of a
complete power grid. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the project is the development of scalable algorithmic technologies for
solving high-dimensional stochastic optimization problems arising in energy
storage. We propose to use the framework of approximate dynamic programming
coupled with tools from machine learning and convex optimization. We exploit
convexity which makes it possible to construct effective approximations that
scale to handle large numbers of storage devices. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research will be: 1) The research
will guide the design of storage devices so that they meet the specific needs of
the power grid in the presence of large supplies of intermittent energy such as
wind and solar. 2) Renewable energy, coupled with appropriately designed
storage, should dramatically reduce the need for coal. 3) The research,
including the approximate dynamic programming models and algorithms, will be
made available using a special website with datasets, software, published
research and working papers, and downloadable presentations. The results will be
integrated in courses at Princeton University, and presented at conferences and
workshops to a broad community spanning energy systems and economics, as well as
the algorithmic communities.