* 1127264
* SBIR Phase II:  Sample Classification and Biomarker Discovery by Comprehensive Metabolomic Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Stephen Reichenbach, GC Image, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 829,971.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to develop a
system for automated classification of biological samples and discovery of
biomarkers. The system will be designed to perform comprehensive pattern
analysis of state-of-the-art biochemical separations generated by comprehensive
two-dimensional chromatography (GCxGC) with high-resolution mass spectrometry
(HRMS). The pairing of GCxGC and HRMS combines highly effective molecular
separations with precise elemental analysis. A critical challenge for effective
utilization of GCxGC-HRMS for biochemical sample classification and biomarker
discovery is the difficulty of analyzing and interpreting the massive, complex
data for metabolomic features. The quantity and complexity of the data, as well
as the large dimensionality of the metabolome, and the possibility that
significant chemical characteristics may be subtle and involve patterns of
multiple constituents, necessitate investigation and development of new
bioinformatics. The principal technical objective is an innovative framework for
comprehensive feature matching and analysis across many samples. Specifically,
the framework will incorporate advanced methods for multidimensional peak
detection, peak pattern matching across large sample sets, data alignment,
comprehensive feature matching, and multi-sample analyses (e.g., classification
and biomarker discovery) with large sample sets. The anticipated result is a
commercial system for automated multi-sample analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be realized through
improved informatics for biological classification and biomarker discovery.
These tools will enable researchers to better understand biochemical processes
and to discover metabolic biomarkers, which could lead to improved methods for
disease diagnoses and treatments. These information technologies will foster
utilization of advanced GCxGC-HRMS instrumentation, thereby contributing to the
impetus for future instrument development. The informatics developed in this
project also will be relevant for other classification problems involving
multidimensional, multispectral data, including other applications (such as
biofuels), other types of chemical analyses (such as multidimensional
spectroscopy), and other fields (such as remote-sensing multispectral geospatial
imagers). This project will contribute to national competitiveness in the global
market for analytical technologies and will contribute to workforce development
by involving students in research experiences through internships and student
projects. Software developed in the project and an example dataset will be
available to educational institutions to allow students to more easily explore
biochemical complexity.