* 1127200
* AIR:  Enhancing Nanotechnology Advances in Businesses Leveraging Energy (ENABLE)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Pradeep Haldar, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 04/30/2014
* USD 1,192,325.00

This work proposes to create the Enhancing Nanotechnology Advances in Businesses
Leveraging Energy (ENABLE) program to accomplish the goals set forth by the
NSF's Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) programs Option 2, Research
Alliance Competition. ENABLE will leverage an existing Collaboration for
Leveraging Energy And Nanotechnology (CLEAN) Partnership For Innovation (NSF
PFI) program currently in process, and will assist researchers' close
collaboration with three companies (Magnolia Solar, Nexeon and MTech) and a
regional innovation partner (NYSERDA) to build on the emerging innovative
ecosystem in New York State. Research objectives will be based on industry input
to improve performance/cost targets, achieving milestones and economies of scale
by increasing process throughput, yield and reliability over large areas. The
goal is to accelerate transition of recent developments in graphene research,
into clean-energy based commercial products for the company partners, in order
to have a positive economic impact throughout New York State.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in graphene-based materials are expected to give
rise to significant opportunities to create multifunctional electrode structures
for solar cells, smart windows, supercapacitors, thermoelectric devices,
batteries etc. Third party funding from NYSERDA will be utilized to expand the
innovation ecosystem by providing commercialization assistance to the industry
partners in the form of services to assist with business plans, marketing plans,
technology roadmaps, establishing partnerships and raising private investments.
ENABLE is expected to develop and commercialize innovations and create economic
development opportunities, resulting in green jobs in the U.S., as well as
ensuring independent and secure energy resources for the nation.