* 1127461
* Latino Suburbia: Examining the Politics of Race and the New Immigration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Ana Aparicio, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 131,343.00

Dr. Ana Aparicio (Northwestern University) will conduct qualitative research on
the development of inter-group relations among three (Dominicans, Puerto Ricans,
Salvadorans) Latino populations in suburban New York and on how they represent
and perform cultural identities and political perspectives in public spaces.
Recent census data reveal that Latino and immigrant populations comprise a
significant and ever-growing segment of the population in non-urban locales in
the United States. Through the use of ethnographic, interview, mapping, and
archival methods, this study will document demographic, political, and social
transformations occurring in a contemporary Latino suburb of New York with
special attention to emergent forms of pan-Latino identity. Examination of these
transformations will be understood and contextualized within three marked shifts
in the contemporary U.S.: 1) the suburbanization of poverty in the the late 20th
and early 21st centuries, 2) increasing levels of heterogeneity (with respect to
class, race, citizenship status, and national origins) of Latinos and Latino
immigrants in non-traditional receiving areas, and 3) increased legal attention
to citizenship status in these landscapes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study
will address a series of objectives: understand what places, policies, and
processes affect the manner in which different groups relate to one another;
develop analysis of how the political, economic, and social topographies of a
locale affect the manner in which diverse Latino groups organize public events
that signal identity and relationship; provide data and analysis of new
immigrant destinations and how these populations are transforming suburbs and
public spaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research findings and outcomes will provide
information about and contribute to theorizing on racial/ethnic formation,
inter-group relations, immigrant politics, "Latinidad" (new identity movement),
and urban-suburban transformations in the 21st century. The study will also
offer a timely contribution to local and national debates about Latinos and
immigrant policies in non-traditional receiving areas.