* 1127086
* Leadership Support for Core Activities of the Board on Behavioral, Cognitive and Sensory Sciences (BBCSS)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Barbara Wanchisen, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2016
* USD 750,000.00

The Board on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences (BBCSS), a standing
body of the National Academies, was established in 1997 with five principal
goals: (1) to engage academic and other researchers in these sciences in the
consideration of major national policy issues; (2) to promote and advance cross-
disciplinary inquiry into complex scientific and policy questions; (3) to
provide a forum for objective, independent, and rigorous deliberation among
researchers, the public, the media, Congress, professional associations, the NSF
and other federal agencies; (4) to draw attention to the significance of the
behavioral, cognitive, and sensory sciences to national policy; and (5) to link
these sciences to the diverse policy issues addressed by the National
Academies.&lt;br/&gt;The Board convenes meetings for planning and other
purposes, develops workshops and consensus studies that are separately funded
and conducted by committees of experts, suggests appropriate experts for other
National Academies studies, participates in the review of study activities and
reports, and widely disseminates study results. It also regularly grapples with
broad issues such as future directions and emerging trends of the behavioral
sciences, with an emphasis on policy implications. Members of the Board serve as
volunteers.