* 1127163
* SBIR Phase II:  An Interactive Music Analysis, Re-synthesis and Distribution Engine
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Charles Spencer, ZOOZ Mobile
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2013
* USD 499,960.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to extend work in
developing computational music systems that will automatically analyze and re-
synthesize digital music for the purpose of transforming a linear and passive
music listening practice into an interactive, expressive and creative music
experiences. Building on the work in phase I, which focused on segmentation and
user interaction, the company propose to extend the work in the following areas:
Utilizing machine-learning techniques to extract instrumental content of musical
segments; Developing automatic compositional techniques that would sequence
annotated musical segments to create musically meaningful compositions;
Developing visualization techniques for representing musical compositions;
Develop a set of applications utilizing our technology, and implement a Cloud
based service that would support seamless interaction with these applications.
The intellectual merit of the project lies in the fundamental contribution to
human knowledge in the areas for music perception and analysis, machine
learning, automatic composition, user interaction, and visualization. The
project will advance current knowledge in areas such as music information
retrieval, music perception, machine learning, automatic composition, signal
processing, visualization and cloud computing. The proposed research would shed
light on broader concepts such as human and artificial creativity and expression
and the feasibility of utilizing artificial music intelligence as an enabler of
novel forms of music creativity for children, novices and experts.

The project will lead to broad impact in the public sphere by creating engaging
and rewarding musical experience for users at all skill levels. Zooz?s music
intelligence engine will allow even those who believe they are not musically
inclined to become engaged in expressive and creative musical experiences. As
part of the project, we will continue to conduct workshops with educational and
musical institutions where children and novices will interact and create music
using the Zooz engine. High visibility public concerts will be conducted to
bring the technology to the public eye. From a business perspective, the broad
impact of the project is in providing a novel solution to the significant
problems faced by the music industry today. The industry, which has suffered
from a significant annual drop in music sales, is looking for new ways to
monetize their content by engaging fans with music games, personalization tools
and cloud-based musical interaction. Zooz Mobile will address these needs by
providing an intelligent system that will allow fans to interact, personalize
and share their favorite music in the Cloud in novel and expressive manners.