* 1127748
* Dissertation Research: "Out of the Shadows": Technical Democracy and HIV Risk in Morocco
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Carole Vance, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Dissertation Research: "Out of the Shadows": Democracy and HIV Risk in Morocco

Technical description Through 12 months of fieldwork, combining network
analysis, participant observation, interviews, and document analysis, this
project draws on and contributes to science, technology, and society studies
through an examination of Morocco's AIDS response at two levels of interaction:
between locally-based NGOs and larger structures of AIDS governance; and between
NGOs and their clients. A comparative ethnographic approach will yield rich data
on how different NGOs solicit the participation of affected persons, formulate
and enact public health interventions, produce knowledge about heath and
disease, and influence the national AIDS response. Broader impacts International
health organizations have argued that without greater efforts to manage AIDS in
the Middle East and North Africa, the disease will exact a grave toll. Morocco
presents a critical case study because its strategies to involve NGOs in AIDS
governance are being promoted throughout the region. The objective of the
project is to track the practical consequences of efforts to make public health
science, policy and practice more responsive to the needs of affected
populations. This research will also provide an important comparison for
scholars doing work on participatory public health programs in other parts of
the world.