* 1127475
* SBIR Phase II:  Commercialization and Scale Up of Ultra Low Fouling and Functionalizable Surface Coatings Based on Zwitterionic Polycarboxybetaine
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,11/30/2013
* Jeff Chamberlain, Zwitter Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2013
* USD 441,415.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to
demonstrate the extraordinary performance of zwitterionic technology in protein
interaction analysis. Zwitterionic polycarboxybetaine (pCB) is not only highly
resistant to nonspecific protein adsorption, but also has abundant functional
groups for the convenient and effective immobilization of biomolecules via
conventional chemistry. This dual-functional property distinguishes pCB from
other existing low-fouling materials, and enables diagnostics or molecular
recognition in complex media. In this project, high-quality zwitterionic
materials and coatings will be scaled up with low-cost and simple production
process. The expected outcome is that one can immobilize molecular recognition
elements directly onto a non-fouling background for a wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this
project will be the potential to offer an effective approach in protection of
surfaces from unwanted interactions in complex media for biomedical and
engineering applications. Zwitterionic technology has superior advantages of low
cost, stability, effectiveness and additional functionalities. For protein
interaction analysis and medical diagnostics, this technology will improve the
sensitivity and specificity of a biosensor, and enable the detection of analytes
in undiluted human blood plasma and serum.