* 1127930
* Society of Wetland Scientists Diversity Program: Undergraduate Mentoring
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Frank Day, Society of Wetland Scientists
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 74,800.00

The Society of Wetland Scientists (SWS) Diversity Mentoring Program for
Undergraduates is in its eighth year. Previous support has helped young
scientists in their career decisions and leveraged funding from seven SWS
regional chapters to double the number of students supported in the program.
This new award provides support for participation of seven undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups in each of the next four years. It will
also support collaboration with the Ecological Society of America SEEDS minority
undergraduate mentoring program initially through involvement in a leadership
training workshop conducted every spring. This promises to be a productive
relationship that will develop to also include symposia, social events, field
trips, mentoring, career development workshops, and guidance for SWS award
recipients to enhance the ethnic and racial diversification of the ecological
sciences. SWS spans academic, government and private consulting sectors, and
students are able to tailor activities to their personal interests. By pairing
undergraduate students with graduate student or faculty mentors and providing
workshops and symposia oriented toward career development, SWS fosters active
participation and discussion, the key components to advancing science and
promoting the intellectual development of undergraduates.

SWS recognizes the need to reach out to underrepresented groups and provide
intellectual opportunities for personal growth and development. Attendance at
scientific meetings often provides the intellectual spark, along with
opportunities to make contacts for the future that encourage undergraduate
students to continue their professional education. A major goal of this
mentoring program is to open doors for these students. Diversification of
ecologically oriented professionals is expected to promote better science and
science applications as a result of melding more diverse perspectives.