* 1127761
* AIR:  PTTP: Si nanoelectronic FemtoSensor as ultrasensitive, label-free, protein based molecular diagnostic platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Walter Hu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 07/31/2015
* USD 366,000.00

This proposal aims to translate a unique Si nanoelectronic biosensor technology
well developed at the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) towards commercial
products through a strong academia-industry partnership. The proposed work will
develop a prototype instrument called FemtoSensor (femtoMolar sensitivity)
Application Development Kit (ADK) based on a nanoscale Si on insulator (SOI)
field effect transistor (FET) and to establish proof-of-concept protein-based
tests towards a portable and low-cost diagnostic platform capable of label-free,
rapid and early diagnostics of various diseases. The novel design of multiple Si
nanochannel architecture brings critical advantages over previous bio-FETs, e.g.
simultaneously achieving high sensitivity (femtoMolar), selectivity, and
stability, as demonstrated by repeated tests in serum and tumor-cell lysate
sample without pre-purification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full exploitation of
the multi-nanochannel bio-FETs will contribute novel knowledge to the field of
biosensor. The parametric evaluation of the sensor will address major unknowns
of biosensing mechanism where strong electric field is applied, which is highly
transformative to many types of sensors using electrokinetics. The proposed
study will establish a numerical model of the performance curves to possibly
predict sensing results, estimate correlation errors, and eliminate the need for
sensor calibrations. If successful, the FemtoSensor ASK instruments with much
better figure of merits than ELISA ($240M market size/year) would enable many
researchers in university, research institutes, pharma, hospitals/clinics,
diagnostics companies, government/defense facilities, to develop many new assays
for diseases. The proposed activity will advance discovery and understanding of
bio-FETs, while also promoting academic and industrial learning and training
experiences. Inclusion of MBA students for entrepreneurship will complement the
science and engineering student team members and give a more rich opportunity
for learning and practicing innovation. Existing outreach programs from the PI's
NSF CAREER award will be leveraged for this project.