* 1127262
* Workshop on Biotransport Education during Summer Bioengineering Conferences, Farmington, PA, June 22-25, 2011 and Summer 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Ram Devireddy, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 04/30/2014
* USD 18,000.00

1127262, Banerjee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this Biotransport
Education workshop is to improve biotransport education. A survey conducted by
Biotransport committee of ASME Bioengineering Division (BED) in year 2002
revealed that a) biotransport is being taught at a rapidly increasing number of
institutions; b) in many cases it is being offered in the context of a basic
course in transport fundamentals, rather than as a special or advanced
application of transport; c) there is a long standing paucity of learning
materials, especially those that treat bioheat transfer; and d) the ASME BED
provides the primary venue for organizing biotransport faculty for possible
collaborative efforts and for develop educational materials. The absence of a
textbook on biotransport has hindered academic instruction and student learning
of this important subject. Thus, there is a need for comprehensive courses
related to Biotransport Education that can be offered at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. The objective of this Biotransport Education workshop, to be
conducting during the 2011 and 2012 ASME Summer Bioengineering Conference (SBC),
is to broadly disseminate successfully proven methods for teaching this
interdisciplinary topic to students at the undergraduate and graduate level. The
hypothesis is that such workshop is an effective platform for efficient exchange
of teaching ideas between diverse institutions involving complex topics of
biotransport. To address the hypothesis the three specific agendas are to: (1)
Pre-conference agenda: We will develop a repository of biotransport course
syllabi from top universities around the world. We will invite experts in the
field of biotransport who have taught graduate and undergraduate courses to
speak followed by panel discussion at the workshop during 2011 and 2012 ASME
SBC; (2) Conference agenda: We will exchange ideas for teaching biotransport by
having experts share their own successes and failures and permitting questions
by the audience consisting of primarily of junior faculty.(3) Post-conference
agenda: We will develop a website for posting the repository of biotransport
course syllabi, book and journal chapters, and course materials such as quizzes
and exams. A journal publication on Biotransport education will be submitted to
either the JBME or ABME, or the American Society of Engineering Education
(ASEE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Biotransport research and
education involves the integration of experimental measurements and
computational modeling of the coupling between multi-domain and multi-scale
processes in cells and tissue. Recently developed experimental techniques, such
as radio-frequency, optical, magnetic resonance, high intensity focused
ultrasound, have been utilized by our community to better understand
biotransport processes, but many of these techniques and results have not been
integrated into undergraduate and graduate curriculum. Additionally, novel
development of integrated multi-physics and multiscale computational modeling of
biotransport processes have been presented in journals and conferences such as
ASME, however, these advancements are lacking in university education. The
Biotransport Education workshop and website repository will specifically be
designed to translate these state-of-the-art research discoveries into classroom
learning experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project will
permit improved education of graduate and undergraduate students in the field of
biotransport. It will permit exchange of ideas for teaching this challenging
subject matter, including a more unified syllabus, textbook, and other teaching
materials. Additionally, by improving student perception of biotransport
research in the classroom, we will improve recruitment and retention of
undergraduate and graduate level student researchers. The interdisciplinary
nature of biotransport research will provide a unique opportunity for students,
including minorities and women, to gain experience in experimental design,
engineering, physiology, imaging, and computational modeling. Broader societal
impact of improved education in biotransport will improve advancement in
application areas such as thermal comfort and environmental heat transfer,
biopreservation (molecular, cellular, and tissue torage/banking), thermal
therapies (ablation, sub-ablative therapies, hyperthermia, and cryosurgery), and
drug delivery, oxygenation, and thermoregulation.