* 1127503
* SBIR Phase II:  Materials for Renewable Energy Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Balakrishnan Nair, Oscilla Power, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,384,723.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
a prototype wave energy harvester using advanced materials developed in the
Phase I effort. We have developed a patented concept for wave energy harvesting
using low-cost magnetostrictive alloys. This technology shows promise as a means
for delivering utility-scale electric power to the grid at a price that is
competitive with conventional fossil or renewable technologies. The technology
will also be applicable to other proprietary energy harvesting systems that we
are developing. In the Phase II project, we will design, build, optimize and
demonstrate a sub-scale system in one of the largest open-air salt water wave
tanks in the world. After prototype validation in Phase II, we will pursue
further scale up and commercialization of the device with additional
private/government funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
commercial potential of this project address the global need for the rapid
development and deployment of low-carbon, renewable electricity sources, which
unquestionably ranks as one of this century's global grand challenges. Such
technologies will fuel our economic growth, contribute to global environmental
sustainability, and reduce our dependence on polluting and exhaustible fossil
fuels such as coal and natural gas. The world's oceans, with global capacity
estimated to be around 2 TW, constitute a vast but untapped energy source that
is particularly well-suited to address underserved and/or growing coastal
populations. The World Energy Council estimates that wave energy can meet up to
6.5% of U.S. energy needs. Efforts to tap utility-scale energy from the ocean
continue to be hampered by high capital costs, high maintenance costs, and low
energy efficiencies. The technology developed through this project will
accelerate the commercialization of a wave energy harvester with substantially
lower capital and operating costs than existing alternatives, enabling a
levelized cost of electricity that is competitive with conventional electric
power technologies.