* 1127410
* Towards an Understanding of Honest Signaling Utilizing Captive Macaques
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2015
* Gregory Demas, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2015
* USD 304,269.00

Animals utilize a variety of ornamentations or signals, including coloration, to
attract the attention of potential mates. Such condition-dependent signals may
reveal current health status and thus reflect genetic resistance to pathogens.
In fact, signal expression is related to immune status in a number of species
investigated to date. However, the relationships between "honest" indicators of
quality and immunity have not been adequately evaluated in primates. Despite
this fact, much work in primatology and human evolutionary biology is based on
assumptions that these signals are indicative of immunity, and that they are
related in complex ways to hormone levels. To evaluate these assumptions, a team
of scholars with combined expertise will measure body condition, behavior,
endocrine function, and immune function in 150 adult male and 150 adult female
rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta), each sampled during breeding and non-breeding
seasons at the Tulane National Primate Research Center. It is hypothesized that
sex skin coloration is an honest indicator of robust immunocompetence, and that
both coloration and immunocompetence are modulated in part by the functions of
various hormones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the immunomodulatory
actions of hormones allows greater understanding of the evolutionary
significance of immune-endocrine interactions and provides a unique life-
historical perspective on mammalian immune function. Research to clarify these
interactions in nonhuman primates will provide a valuable comparative and
evolutionary perspective to selection in our own species. The project also
offers valuable training opportunities to graduate, undergraduate and high
school students of diverse backgrounds to become members of a collaborative
research community and learn sophisticated laboratory techniques and their
applications. Another important applied aspect of this project includes the
organization of a workshop on biomarkers in evolutionary anthropology. Future
project development will include additional hormone and genetic analyses in
remaining samples collected and stored from the current project.