* 1127549
* SBIR Phase II:  An innovative ablation device for treating atrial fibrillation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,01/31/2016
* Joann Heberer, Apama Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2016
* USD 1,060,044.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to develop a
novel ablation balloon catheter to perform radiofrequency ablation on atrial
fibrillation patients. The intellectual merit of this project is in its use of
an innovative approach to positioning, mapping, and ablation for atrial
fibrillation patients, negating the need for excessive catheter rotations and/or
serial point ablations. This new technology significantly reduces user
variability, procedural time, and the resultant cost burden on the hospital,
physician, insurance payer, and patient. The research objectives for this
project are to design and develop an improved prototype that enables
verification of balloon-to-tissue contact; design and develop a 2nd generation
radiofrequency generator capable of powering 20 electrodes; refine catheter
design to increase reliability/robustness and sheathing capability; and develop
2nd generation handle that allows for the balloon extension. All of these
changes will be validated through in vitro and in vivo testing.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is an improvement in the
treatment of atrial fibrillation, which is the most common heart rhythm
disturbance encountered in clinical medicine, accounting for 1/3 of hospital
admissions for cardiac rhythm disturbances. It is estimated that nearly 2.6
million individuals are currently afflicted with atrial fibrillation in the
United States, with a projected increase to nearly 4.4 million people by the
year 2030. Given the significant public health and economic impact of atrial
fibrillation, there is an urgent need for practical and cost-effective
approaches to treat atrial fibrillation. This technology aims to answer this
need, providing an improved method of treatment for patients as well as highly-
marketable technology that will save hospitals time and costs burdens.