* 1127568
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra Low Power InAsN Semiconductor Transistors
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Matt Kim, QuantTera
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2014
* USD 659,526.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
a new III-V nitride semiconductor alloy and bipolar transistor structure with
the potential to enable ultra low power device operation in applications
requiring both Radio Frequency (RF) and digital electronics. The problem to be
solved is that for RF power amplifier increasing power efficiency has been a
major issue for portable and high performance electronic devices. The research
objectives is to demonstrate on a standard gallium arsenide (GaAs) transistor
platform that the inclusion of our low band gap nitride semiconductor will
significantly reduce the turn on voltage, thus increasing the battery life of
the device. Our research will start from the development of a low bandgap
material to the fabrication of transistor that will be compared to the
specifications of cellular based RF amplifiers. This program will begin with
device design and material synthesis and end with prototype demonstrations, with
our commercial partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will have a huge impact on power consumption in the
realm of high-performance personal communication electronics, as the requirement
for greater functionality in cell phones rises. GaAs wafers dominate the market
for amplifiers in wireless communication products. Transistors have advantages
over existing standard GaAs-based devices with reduced power consumption could
impact the entire electronics industry. As portable or wireless cellular devices
continue to become ever more functional they will require significantly lower
turn-on voltages so as to minimize power consumption while sustaining operation
over longer periods of time. The overall structure of the project has been
designed to provide enriching opportunities in the areas of teaching and
training for both the graduate students and university researchers. The exchange
ideas between industry and academia will ensure research candidates with an
excellent technical background and a sophisticated understanding of the
industrial environment.