* 1127810
* Towards General Purpose Design System for Composite Materials and Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jacob Fish, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Multiscale science and engineering have so far been largely driven by needs of
specific applications, and lack of a mathematical foundation and systematic
approach has limited progress. To develop a general purpose theoretical
framework and to transform it into a useful design system, this project
addresses the following fundamental issues: (1) What is the validity limit of
homogenization and how to extend it to boundary layers at a reasonable
computational cost? (2) How to deal with the issue of lack of periodicity that
naturally arises due to high gradients even in a periodic heterogeneous medium?
(3) What should be the size of the representative volume element and how it is
affected by large distortions? (4) How to introduce multiple temporal scales
arising in mechanical/thermal fatigue problems? (5) How to account for multiple
physical processes inherent in environmental degradation problems involving
coupled mechanical-diffusion-reaction processes? These issues will be studied
and the resulting design system will be validated against experimental data
provided by industrial partners.

The Multiscale Design System that will grow out of this research program will
advance a wide array of fields requiring light weight structural components in
aerospace, printed circuit boards, robotic arms, medical prostheses, implants,
valves, seals, electronic devices and radiological equipment. This general
purpose multiscale design system offers a transformational approach that may
lead to life-saving improvements in medical devices, more resilient
infrastructure, energy-saving measures that will increase the efficiency of
environmental processes, and a variety of more cost-effective products. The
education program will extend from undergraduate to graduate work with outreach
to women and minorities. Technology transfer to industrial partners from GE,
Boeing, GM and Renegade Materials has a potentially of impacting their design
processes.