* 1127047
* Workshop on Addressing Complexity in  Multiscale Modeling and Analysis of  Complex Data
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Bulent Yener, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

All branches of modern science demand data, and modern data acquisition
technologies in biomedical research have adapted to increase the volume of data
by at least three orders of magnitude in the past three decades. Much of this
data is rather complex. Complex data has three properties: high volume (e.g.,
genome data, gigabyte per person), multimodal (e.g., Time x Genes x Control),
heterogeneous (e.g., different time scales, data feeds).How these data are
analyzed now presents a major challenge in scientific discovery. Although a
series of powerful algorithms for statistical learning can yield accurate
predictions for pattern recognition problems, the increased power of these
learning algorithms has come at the expense of a considerable increase in
complexity for adjusting a large number of parameters in a high dimensional
space. Yet, such mathematically sound models that are computationally stable and
statistically meaningful still demand more data than most biology laboratories
and clinics can provide. This workshop focus fits into the initiative between
NSF and NIH to investigate developing science and technology for merging
computational, physics based models with biology and medicine. This two day
workshop at RPI fits into the initiative between NSF and NIH to investigate
developing science and technology for merging computational, physics based
models with biology and medicine. There will be a panel at the end of each day
on a particular topic, e.g., how to integrate scales, how to deal with
uncertainty and missing data, how to use data semantics in multi-scale modeling.
The panel discussions will be organized into a report and will be made publicly
available. The seminars and panel discussions will be recorded and made it
available to public.