* 1127425
* SDCI Sec: SESv3 (Security Event System - Version 3)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Minaxi Gupta, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2015
* USD 799,322.00

Activities undertaken in the SESv3 Federated Security Intelligence project will
develop significant new capabilities supporting the collection and sharing of
cybersecurity threat data and intelligence, and a rich analytic knowledge of the
reputation and forensic history of Internet elements. Work will be based on the
existing open source REN-ISAC Security Event System (SES) and sister system, the
Collective Intelligence Framework (CIF). Developed capabilities will be
transitioned to operational practice in the REN-ISAC community, supporting
security protection and response in the higher education and research
communities, and will support the sharing of security event and incident
intelligence among other discrete trust federations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
2008-9, REN-ISAC developed SESv1 with funding from the US Department of Justice
through Internet2. A production service in the REN-ISAC community, SESv1
collects aggregated security event information from participating sites and
information sharing partners, correlates the data to develop confidence in the
identification of bad actors, and provides resulting high-confidence threat
intelligence back to participating sites for use in local protections. SESv2, to
be deployed summer 2011, advances SES with the addition of the "Collective
Intelligence Framework". CIF integrates a vast array of data from private
partners, public sources, and mining, to provide intelligence supporting
reputational knowledge and forensic history of Internet elements, including IP
address, URL, domain name, CIDR, AS, and email
addresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SDCI Sec: SESv3 will substantially increase the
reputational knowledgebase and forensic history by incorporating additional data
types, such as BGP and passive DNS. These data types will permit analytic
identification of miscreant cyber infrastructures. Free form data types such as
e-mail, IRC, tweets, etc. will be incorporated to enrich threat understanding by
correlating human conversations with the structured security event information.
The underlying repository and system architectures will be redesigned in order
to support massive scaling required by the additional data types and historical
record. Leveraging the flexible SES/CIF v2 RESTful API, access and submission to
SES and CIF will be incorporated into common incident analyst and responder
tools. And importantly, methods will be implemented permitting unique and
discrete information sharing trust communities to share event and incident
intelligence, mediated by policy. SESv3 will be transitioned to operational
status in the REN-ISAC community, providing direct support to the higher
education and research communities, will be open source published, and the SESv3
team will continue with their strong advocacy for standards-based security
information interchange, and SES/CIF technologies in the security community at-
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: SDCI Sec: SESv3 will lead
development and deployment of inter-community security event and incident
information sharing (addressing technical and policy issues), will significantly
reduce human interrupt in the discovery, analysis, and protect cycle, and will
develop advanced correlations among threat data types. SESv3 will provide novel
integration of federation-based intelligence and data collection into the
workflow of the security incident responder and analyst, and novel correlation
of human conversations to structured data regarding Internet
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: SDCI Sec: SESv3 will provide
fundamental improvement to national and international capabilities concerning
the protection of critical cyberinfrastructure. Intelligence developed and
shared in SES is actionable, and is a resource for understanding threat and
criminal operations. Advanced new capabilities and information sharing
relationships with industry, government, and law enforcement will be established
in REN-ISAC, supporting the research and education sector. Outside R&amp;E,
national capabilities and information sharing practice will be stimulated by
SESv3 concepts, open source code, data standards advocacy, and the technical and
policy information sharing frameworks.