* 1127346
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultrahigh Speed Micromachining Spindle
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Said Jahanmir, MOHAWK INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2014
* USD 520,438.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is directed
towards the development of an ultrahigh speed micro-spindle for micro-machining.
The proposed spindle for micro-milling and micro-grinding at speeds near 500,000
rpm will be implemented with existing commercial micro-machining systems. Micro-
manufacturing refers to the creation of high-precision three-dimensional (3D)
products using a variety of materials and possessing features with sizes ranging
from tens of micrometers to a few millimeters. While micro-scale technologies
are well established in the semiconductor and microelectronics fields, the same
cannot be said for manufacturing products involving complex 3D geometry and high
accuracies in non-silicon materials. The trends in industrial and military
products that demand miniaturization, design flexibility, reduced energy
consumption, and high accuracy continue to accelerate -- especially in the
medical, biotechnology, telecommunications, and energy fields. The principal
advantages of the proposed micro-spindle include higher production rates and
precision obtained through the implementation of ultrahigh speed machining that
will decrease the cutting forces and tool vibrations. The prototype micro-
spindle will be evaluated in a series of alpha and beta testing with commercial
micro-machining systems. The objective of Phase II is to perform the necessary
R&amp;D to prepare the micro-spindle for marketing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project encompasses the following.
The ultrahigh speed micro-spindle will enable the production of cost-effective
micro-components and will positively impact the micro-fabrication industry.
Since the underlying scientific principles of micromachining at such high speeds
are not known, the availability of the proposed spindle will allow for basic
studies to uncover the response of materials under these conditions. Such basic
information could lead to new scientific discoveries and further extend the
micromachining processes. The data and information generated will undoubtedly be
used in future for training of graduate students. The broad impact of this
research includes expansion of micromanufacturing research, and research
opportunities for next-generation scientific researchers and technology
developers to pursue micro machining and micro manufacturing related efforts in
the broader fields of micro positioning devices, micro die-and-mold
manufacturing, micro sensing and monitoring systems, and micro factory
integrations and optimization. Commercialization of the proposed micro-milling
spindle will be instrumental in the development of new businesses and
industries, and high value added jobs.