* 1127663
* Scholars Award: A Study of Interdisciplinary Materials Research and Training in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jody Roberts, Science History Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 79,244.00

Abstract

?A Study of Interdisciplinary Materials Research and Training in the United
States? PI: Hyungsub Choi (Chemical Heritage Foundation)

Technical description

This project brings historical grounding to a crucial contemporary issue in
science and science policy: How can the U.S. federal government best maximize
its investment in research? Much of federal research policy today emphasizes the
importance of interdisciplinary collaboration as an effective pathway toward
solving critical societal problems. This line of thought is reflected in the
proliferation of conglomerate and mega research centers in many
interdisciplinary fields, including nanotechnology, energy technologies, and
biomedical research. Thus, the idea of interdisciplinary research and training
undergirds, in the words of Vannevar Bush in the oft-cited 1945 report Science:
The Endless Frontier, the ?health, prosperity, and security as a nation in the
modern world.? In short, interdisciplinary research is the ?basic research? of
the early 21st century, one of the key building blocks that constitute the
modern state. While the National Science Foundation has kept a keen eye on this
topic through organizing workshops and publishing reports, the scholarly
literature is sorely in need of a historical dimension. The origin of such
research and funding practices can be traced back to the large-scale
interdisciplinary materials research centers established in the early 1960s,
which serve as the focal point of this research project. Based on extensive
archival research and oral history interviews, this project will trace the
continuities and discontinuities of interdisciplinary research and federal
funding practices in the second half of the 20th century using as comparative
case studies the Materials Science Center at Cornell University, the Laboratory
for Research on the Structure of Matter at the University of Pennsylvania, and
the Materials Research Center at Northwestern University), identifying the
enduring patterns of institutions, disciplinary boundaries, and funding streams
from the early years of materials research in the 1960s through the transitory
phase in the 1970s to interdisciplinary nanotechnology research.

Broader impact

The Chemical Heritage Foundation will serve as an effective home base to
disseminate the results of this project to a broader audience. The summary
report will be published and distributed as part of the Studies in Materials
Innovation white paper series in the Chemical Heritage Foundation?s Center for
Contemporary History and Policy. This series reaches an established audience of
research managers and Chief Technology Officers at corporate and government
laboratories across the country. Copies of the report will be made available to
the members of the U.S. Congress, specifically those sitting on the House
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology and the Senate Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.