* 1127662
* Travel Support for the Annual Algorithms Workshop (Summer, 2011 and 2012)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Abel Rodriguez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2013
* USD 40,300.00

The increasing availability of new sequencing technologies has dramatically
reduced the cost of obtaining genomic data from biological threats. Similarly,
the recent development of new technologies for the analysis of chemical samples,
such as gas chromotography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and liquid chromotography-
multi-stage mass spectrometry (LC-MSn), has increased the availability and
complexity of data on chemical threats. This deluge of information creates the
need and the opportunity for the mathematical sciences community to develop
technology for controlling and reducing the threat from biological and chemical
attacks. This proposal aims at securing funding for the participation of student
and postdoctoral researchers in two DTRA/NSF algorithms workshops. The first one
of these workshops will be held in Boston, between June 6 and June 10, 2011, and
the second will be held during the summer of 2012. The purpose of these
workshops is to provide a forum for scientists and mathematicians that have
interest in this NSF/DTRA sponsored program to share their results, and to
foster interaction between experts in innovative algorithm development and
experts in the sensor R&amp;D community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Defense Threat
Reduction Agency (DTRA) and the National Science Foundation (NSF) have recently
formed a partnership to support the development of the next generation of
mathematical and statistical algorithms for the detection of chemical and
biological threats. The result is a new program within the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS), which is called "ATD: Algorithms for Threat
Detection". This proposal seeks to secure travel support for students and
postdoctoral researchers who will participate in the 2011 and 2012 NSF/DTRA
Algorithms Workshops. Providing this type of funding is critical for the
training of the next generation of mathematical scientists. In particular, by
providing opportunities for students and postdoctoral researchers to be exposed
to problems of chemical and biological threat detection, the NSF creates
incentives for junior researchers (and specially those from underrepresented
groups) to focus on this important and timely area of research.