* 1127083
* A Genetic Resource for Gene Discovery in Soybean
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Peter LaFayette, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/29/2016
* USD 3,073,055.00

PI: Wayne Parrott (University of Georgia)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Tom
Clemente (University of Nebraska-Lincoln), Gary Stacey (University of Missouri-
Columbia), and Carroll Vance and Robert Stupar (University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soybean is the world's largest single source of
vegetable protein and edible oil and thus a key crop for meeting the nutritional
needs of the increasing global population. Therefore, a thorough understanding
of soybean genetics will be important for the development of new soybean
varieties to meet the nutritional, environmental, and industrial requirements
that soybean will fulfill over the coming decades. There are many research tools
available that facilitate the genetic study of soybean. However, there has been
one resource notably absent for soybean - reverse genetic tools. These tolls
provide a way to identify and determine the function of soybean genes of
academic, biological, or agricultural importance. Therefore, the long-term goal
of this project is to build upon previous funding to develop and distribute the
resources to needed to investigate the function of soybean genes, especially
those involved in soybean quality and yield. The primary objective of the
project is to provide novel mutant plants for soybean functional genomics
research. This goal will be accomplished by building and cataloguing a
collection of soybean insertional and gene activation mutants derived by
engineering soybeans with a transposable element from rice which naturally moves
around the genome and inserts itself into other genes. When the transposable
element inserts itself into soybean genes, it prevents the gene from functioning
which in turn can alter the appearance of the plant, or can be detected in the
laboratory. Fast neutrons will also be used to derive additional mutations, as
fast neutrons delete genes altogether, also changing the plant's appearance. The
change in appearance that results from disrupting or deleting a gene is a direct
indication of that gene's function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the genetic
stocks developed by this work will be made available to the soybean research and
breeding communities upon request. To aid in identifying and distributing mutant
plants, interested researchers will attend workshops where they will search for
mutants that are relevant to their research programs. Besides the basic research
community, soybean breeders also will benefit directly, by gaining the ability
to make informed decisions about which genes to select for in order to more
easily develop higher-yielding, disease and stress resistant soybean varieties.
Genotype and phenotype information will be available via SoyBase
(www.soybase.org), Soybean Knowledge Base (SoyKB; http://soykb.org), and/or the
project website at http://soymutants.uga.edu.