* 1127393
* SBIR Phase II:  Rapid Assessment of Antibiotic Resistance by Mass Measurement
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Ken Babcock, Affinity Biosensors
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 956,807.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
"close-to-care" instrument that can assess antibiotic susceptibility of
infection-causing bacteria in less than one hour. MEMS-fabricated sensors and
integrated fluidics will measure the mass and growth rate of a small number of
bacteria in-vitro with a resolution near 1 femtogram. By exposing the bacteria
to a panel of antibiotics while monitoring growth rate, an infection's
susceptibility profile will be determined very rapidly. Using this information,
doctors will be able to select targeted antibiotic treatment much faster than is
possible using conventional methods that require incubation and take 24 hours or
longer - a crucial time savings. The platform will be validated on multiple E.
coli strains that have a range of susceptibility, in both saline and healthy
urine matrices. To demonstrate clinical value, the results will be compared to
conventional methods. Additional tests will be performed on clinical isolates of
E. coli and K. pneumoniae that cause urinary tract infections, and on MRSA
(methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be to improve medical outcomes
of infection and to facilitate antibiotic stewardship. The rapidly expanding
prevalence of resistant bacteria, combined with a decline in the discovery of
new antibiotics, pose one of today's most dire health threats. More than 100,000
people die of infections each year in the U.S., behind only cancer and heart
disease. There is unanimous consensus among infectious disease experts that
rapid diagnostics to identify resistance are crucial for administering targeted
antibiotic therapy, leading to better outcomes, and for minimizing the spread of
resistant strains. The test to be developed here directly addresses these needs.
The project targets UTI (urinary tract infections) that are responsible for the
majority of hospital-acquired infections; and MRSA (methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus) that kills more than 20,000 Americans every year. The
platform will be configured for "close-to-care" use in microbiology labs found
in most hospitals, and capture a significant fraction of the $500M U.S. market
for susceptibility testing equipment and reagents. The platform also will
address nearer-term markets in antibiotic discovery and laboratory research.