* 1127692
* Collaborative Research: The Wasatch Hydrometeor Aggregation and Riming Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Timothy Garrett, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 448,091.00

Simulated storm lifetime and precipitation production is exquisitely sensitive
to the parameterized rate of precipitation formation and condensate removal.
Extensive prior research has shown that the achilles heel in our ability to
provide accurate weather forecasts lies in how models represent bulk
microphysics parameterizations (BMPs), particularly when it comes to mixed and
ice phase processes. There are two core questions here:&lt;br/&gt;1) For a given
meteorological scenario, how is hydrometeor habit and particle diameter (or
area) related to particle mass and fallspeed?&lt;br/&gt;2) How do the
relationships between hydrometeor habit, size, mass and fallspeed in a storm
evolve due to aggregation and riming processes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next
generation of BMPs for weather models needs to be informed by new measurement
methods that must be capable of detailed characterization of hydrometeor form,
three-dimensional structure, and fallspeed, conditioned by detailed information
about the local meteorological context. Past research into these problems has
been challenged by either a necessity to mathematically idealize ice crystal
shapes, imprecise measurement methods, or an element of subjectivity due to a
need for direct human participation in field
measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will remove much of the guesswork in prior observational efforts with an
unprecedented combination of meteorological and microphysical measurements. For
the winter of 2011-2012, the Wasatch Hydrometeor Aggregation and Riming
Experiment (WASHARX) will have as its centerpiece the newly developed Multi-
Angle Snowflake Camera (MASC). This is a potentially transformative instrument
since it will provide, for the first time, fully-automated 20 Ã¬m-resolution
multiply-stereoscopic color photography of hydrometeors, along with concurrent
measurement of their fallspeed. Within the bounds of a high-altitude ski resort
along the Wasatch Front near Salt Lake City, two of these new instruments will
be installed within a steep, highly protected side canyon. The two MASCs will be
vertically separated by 410 m. This observing system will also be accompanied by
meteorological measurements along the full canyon depth of 760 m, as well as a
cloud droplet size distribution probe and the North Carolina State University's
vertically-pointing 1.2 cm MicroRainRadar. The expected outcome of this project
will be an unprecedented data set that will be used for studying hydrometeor
fallspeed relationships and their vertical evolution due to aggregation and
riming processes within a storm system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific progress in our field has regularly hinged on
broad accessibility of new tools. In addition to providing new BMPs for future
integration in weather and climate models, this study will help support
scientific development of a new instrument (and manufacture of a replica) that
we intend to make available for future scientific field programs. Indeed,
initial steps have been made toward commercial production of this instrument for
scientific research, environmental safety applications and public interest. The
project also has a broad educational component. The 3D steroscopic images
obtained at the local ski area will be made accessible in real-time to
classrooms and the general public through a website developed in cooperation
with Alta Ski Area. Finally, we will work with local K-12 level teachers to
develop modules for relating snowflake form to local meteorology.