* 1127564
* STTR Phase II:  High Energy and Power Density Supercapacitors Utilizing Electrodes Comprising Nanofibrous Carbon-Carbon Composites
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* John Ferraris, SOLARNO
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 10/31/2014
* USD 634,939.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will optimize
the technology developed in Phase I for the fabrication of composite carbon
nanofibers incorporating mesoporous high surface area carbon as an electrode
material for supercapacitors utilizing ionic liquid electrolytes. The Phase I
results showed that test devices incorporating our patent-pending carbon fibers
have surpassed the performance of commercial supercapacitors and can provide
energy densities approaching that of lead acid batteries with superior
gravimetric power density. The technology is to be further developed and
optimized using lower cost polymer precursors and carbon templates. Achievement
of our Phase II goals of 30 Wh/kg at 10 kW/kg (packaged) with consistent
performance up to 5x10^5 cycles means that this technology can become the
material of choice for application to high-energy, high-power energy storage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project lies in greatly expanding the market for supercapacitors for existing
products and enabling new technologies, especially in those areas requiring
energy densities that are higher than those provided by current supercapacitors.
Such supercapacitors will be well suited for application to the Hybrid Electric
Vehicle (HEV) market, including rapid charging stations; frequency regulation
for the electric grid; and load leveling for renewable energy sources. Direct
societal benefits will come from improving the viability of HEV due to
reductions in fossil fuel consumption, improvements in power grid reliability,
reducing costs for renewable energy production, and in replacing lead acid
batteries. The world demand for supercapacitors is expected to reach $1.2
billion by 2015.