* 1127331
* RAPID:  Drought Risk and Low-frequency Hydroclimatic Variability in CMIP5 Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Julia Cole, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2013
* USD 29,999.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers the
extent to which model simulations prepared for AR5 are capable of reproducing
the low-frequency hydroclimate variability found in the instrumented and paleo-
proxy records. The earlier generation of models used in the IPCC Fourth
Assessment Report (AR4) was found to be deficient in capturing low-frequency
hydroclimate variability, and this deficiency could mean that future projections
from the models underestimate the risk of prolonged drought in regions including
the US southwest. Research conducted here seeks to determine if the current
generation of models produces more realistic low-frequency hydroclimate
variance. In addition, methods are developed to rescale drought projections from
the models to produce observationally corrected estimates of future drought
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project lies in its support
of the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide information on climate change and
its consequences to decision makers worldwide. Hydroclimate variability and
change are of great societal interest given their large impacts on people,
agriculture, and ecosystems. This is particularly true in southwestern North
America, a focus region for the research.