* 1127084
* MRI: Instrumentation Development for Sustainable Distributed Cyber-Aquatic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Bing Wang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 438,015.00

Proposal #: 11-27084 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Wang, Lei; Cui, Jun-Hong (June); Li,
Baikun; O?Donnell; Wang, Bing &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Instrumentation for Sustainable
Distributed Cyber-Aquatic Systems&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, called DiCAS, developing a novel instrument and testbed environment
based on an underwater sensor network platform that harvests energy underwater
and incorporates power metering and power/performance tradeoff-aware schemes and
protocols for longer network life, considers specific underwater
characteristics, such as underwater faults and communication link conditions.
Adaptive strategies to save energy will be built as part of the work. The
instrument enables research in/with:&lt;br/&gt;- Advanced instruments and tools
that enable researchers to observe physical, chemical, and biological processes
and monitor the aquatic environments in real time, across broad physical
expanses and durations, continuously and reliably;&lt;br/&gt;- Novel hardware
and software for the cyber-aquatic system; &lt;br/&gt;- Two types of testbeds:
&lt;br/&gt;-- Lake field testbed;&lt;br/&gt;-- Sea field testbed,
&lt;br/&gt;with specific applications using the testbed for: &lt;br/&gt;---
Resolving vertical mixing in the ocean;&lt;br/&gt;--- Identifying/predicting
harmful algae; and &lt;br/&gt;--- Monitoring distributed offshore oilfield
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project,
unique in its goals and expected results, exhibits potential for large broader
impacts in the area of sustainable aquatic observation and exploration systems.
The instrument will enable a wide range of research activities, from aquatic
scientific research (such as oceanography, limnology, and hydrology) and
pollution detection, to offshore oil/gas exploration and coastal and harbor/port
protection. Planned is a unique hands-on learning environment for undergraduate
and graduate students, as well as a program engaging K-12 students and teachers,
particularly in underserved communities. The PIs have prior track record of
involving women, minority, and undergraduate students in their research.