* 1127487
* STTR Phase II:  High Performance Piezoelectric MEMS Microphones
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Karl Grosh, Baker-Calling
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2014
* USD 496,373.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop a
microphone for the test and measurement (T&amp;M) market that utilizes
piezoelectric microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology. During Phase I
of this project, feasibility was demonstrated by building and testing a
microphone with the necessary performance for this market. Specifically, this
microphone has a noise floor that is 10 times lower than any piezoelectric MEMS
microphone previously demonstrated. The unique device modeling and optimization
that allowed for this significant performance improvement enables a new class of
microphones. During Phase II of this project, the commercialization effort will
be accelerated by partnering with a production foundry to develop a fabrication
process, enabling the mass fabrication of these parts. Successful completion of
this task requires the repeatable fabrication in a production foundry with yield
exceeding 90%. This Phase II project also seeks to further develop self-
calibration capabilities, building on a unique aspect of these microphones
demonstrated during Phase I. Successful completion of this task will result in a
microphone capable of determining its own sensitivity to within 1 dB of that
determined by standard calibration methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is significant due to the widespread
use of microphones in today's markets. This microphone?s unique combination of
device simplicity and high performance enables a new class of microphones that
fills the gap between extremely low-cost microphones used in consumer
electronics applications and extremely high-cost microphones used in
laboratories and test facilities. Through discussions with manufacturers and
end-users of microphones and related systems, the company have determined that a
wide range of applications would benefit from such a device. These microphones
will significantly reduce the cost of complex T&amp;M systems such as arrays
that can cost more than $1M and improve the accuracy of equipment used by noise
control engineers, work safety inspectors, police officers, and many others.
Further, this microphone technology not only has the potential to impact the
T&amp;M market, but provides advantages for the hearing aid and consumer
electronics markets as well. The total addressable market for this technology is
more than $2.5B.