* 1127545
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-high-speed 3-D imaging
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Benjamin Braker, Chiaro Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2014
* USD 607,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will produce a
commercial prototype of a new 3-dimensional (3-D) imaging technology capable of
measuring 3-D surface profiles up to five orders of magnitude faster than
existing techniques. 3-D imaging technology is increasingly used for many
applications, but current approaches have slow acquisition speeds and cannot
accurately measure certain types of objects and scenes. The proposed technology
will dramatically advance the state of the art in 3-D imaging speeds from a few
Megapixel frames per second up to MHz frame rates without sacrificing
metrological precision. At the same time, this approach enables surface
profilometry of objects and scenes that are difficult or impossible to measure
with existing techniques. The approach uses an innovative projection system to
illuminate a scene with patterned light and simultaneously acquire multiple
images of the scene. The 3-D image is reconstructed from the acquired images
using novel, robust, pixel-independent algorithms that improve accuracy for
diverse illumination, object reflectivity characteristics, and minimize the
number of images required for an object-independent reconstruction. This Phase
II program will build on successful Phase I feasibility demonstrations to
produce a complete system suitable for beta deployment at a customer site.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will emerge when the
technology is used in applications that boost productivity, increase security,
improve health, and advance the progress of science. Commercialization will
initially target the research market, where scientists and engineers studying
mechanics, aerodynamics, robotics, and ballistics require the ability to image
dynamic systems in 3-D to validate models, to provide feedback in the design
process, and to verify performance of prototype designs. A second target market
is manufacturing, where trends towards 100% testing and increased use of 3-D
measurements will drive the need for high-speed 3-D imaging capability to
improve efficiency, quality, and yield. Beyond these markets, the proposed
technology could serve a variety of other unmet needs for high-speed 3-D
imaging, such as facial recognition, haptic vision for the blind, robotic
navigation and object recognition, entertainment, and others. Because the
proposed technology offers unprecedented measurement capabilities in terms of
speed, resolution, and versatility, it holds the potential to reveal new
phenomena that were previously inaccessible, giving researchers a new tool for
understanding our dynamic 3-D world.