* 1127396
* SDCI: Integrated Simulation and Emulation Platform for Security Experimentation
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Yuan Xue, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2014
* USD 449,576.00

Trustworthiness of cyberphysical systems (CPS) is an essential concern since
such systems are routinely employed in critical settings. Currently many
components of CPS are built without sufficiently formalized and analyzed
properties and guarantees. Such inadequacies in the system design phase can lead
to catastrophic consequences in operations, as they are interconnected to open
networks and become increasingly exposed to security attacks. There is a
pressing need to evaluate both cyber- and physical systems together and
holistically for a rapidly growing number of applications using simulation and
emulation in a realistic environment, which brings realistic attacks against the
defensive capabilities of CPS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this need, this
project proposes to build iSEE - integrated Simulation and Emulation platform
for security Experimentation, as a software supporting research infrastructure
used for cyber security research and development. iSEE allows for the concurrent
modeling, experimentation and evaluation of CPS that range from a fully
simulated to a fully implemented system. iSEE has two major components: 1)
modeling environment for system specification and experiment configuration and
2) run-time environment that supports experiment execution. iSEE employs the
Model-Integrated-Computing (MIC) approach, which explicitly uses models
throughout the experiment environments and integrates them at the domain-
specific model level. Though iSEE will be primarily used in the CPS domain, the
meta-models for system-of-systems modeling and security attack modeling will be
developed at a fundamental level, such that they will be generalizable to many
domains with similar security assessment needs. iSEE will provide CPS
researchers a tool to evaluate CPS with respect to their security properties. It
will set the stage for building security as a key property in early CPS design
and promote interdisciplinary research and education between computer science
and other engineering domains.