* 1128150
* International: IRES Mexico RFID in Logistics
* O/D,OISE
* 01/26/2011,10/31/2013
* Erick Jones, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/2013
* USD 140,249.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) projects engages
undergraduate students in an intensive six-week research program in Mexico, with
the overarching goal of enhancing students' research skills and cultural
literacy in an internationally emerging field of engineering. Under the
mentorship of Drs. Neale Smith and Beatriz Murrieta Cortés of the Instituto
Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM), six U.S. students per
year will investigate radio-frequency identification (RFID) applications in
health care, aerospace manufacturing environments, and inter-modal and
warehousing logistics. Specific research themes include security and inventory
control in hospital settings, real-time adjustments of the supply chain in
aerospace manufacturing facilities, and tracking the delivery of products from
supplier to customer in multistep transportation systems. Students will also be
involved in pre-trip and on-site orientations, a research methods seminar
focusing on the Design for Six Sigma (DFSS-R) approach, graduate student
development seminars, and oral and written presentations. Spanish language
instruction and cultural activities will also be an integral part of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international research collaboration brings
together researchers at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) and ITESM,
along with industry partners such as the Hospital San José, Bombardier, and
Werner Global Logistics. UNL will recruit a diverse group of undergraduate
students to participate, with strong representation of women and
underrepresented minorities. Results from the experience will be shared by
students and faculty at educational conferences, through annual reports, and the
program website. This partnership will also allow the further testing of models
and innovations that have significant practical implications for U.S. - Mexico
trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).