* 1128901
* DDIG: The development and function of the nasopharynx and its role in the evolution of primate respiratory abilities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Jeffrey Laitman, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2014
* USD 19,964.00

This study will use both bony and histological morphology of the nose
(nasopharynx) to examine a comparative sample of modern primates and apply that
study to answering climatic adaptational questions about Neandertals and Homo
heidelbergensis. All methods used to analyze the specimens will be combined to
create a three-dimensional map of the nasopharynx. By studying interaction of
its hard and soft tissue components, a more robust model of its functional
morphology may be derived. Data on normal growth of nasopharyngeal boundaries
holds clinical importance with regard to URT diseases, which are the most common
pediatric clinical conditions. This project provides previously unavailable data
on the normal growth and functional morphologic relationships of nasopharyngeal
boundaries, which are directly relevant to URT disease etiology.

The nasopharynx comprises a vital portion of the upper respiratory tract. Yet,
patterns of morphologic change in this region over human evolution remains
poorly understood. This study tests the hypothesis that the bony nasopharyngeal
boundaries share a functional relationship with other units of the craniofacial
skeleton. As an upper respiratory tract (URT) component, the nasopharyngeal
boundaries may be subject to patterns of climatic stress and adaptation. It will
thus be tested whether climatic adaptations are present in primate species
inhabiting cold, dry environments. To test this hypothesis, CT imaging of
nasopharyngeal boundaries will be performed on postmortem samples of macaque
monkeys that died of natural causes (Macaca mulatta, Macaca fascicularis) from
warm and cold climates. Those from colder environments are expected to exhibit
greater nasopharyngal surface area-to-volume ratio, which would increase contact
between airflow and nasopharyngeal epithelia for more efficient warming and
humidification. Finally, fossil specimens attributed to Neanderthals (from cold,
dry climates) and Homo heidelbergensis will undergo Generalized Procrustes
Analysis (GPA) of URT landmark coordinate data for comparison with
geographically diverse modern human crania. The relationship between
nasopharyngeal morphology and histology will also be evaluated via light
microscopy of a diverse primate sample.

As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, it will provide support
to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.