* 1128475
* SBIR Phase II: ERC-Small Business: Micromachined Thermal Probes for Localized Nano-Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Angelo Gaitas, Kytaro Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 11/30/2013
* USD 199,920.00

NSF invites funding requests from current Small Business Innovation Research and
Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) Phase II grantees to perform
collaborative research with an Engineering Research Center (ERC). The goals of
this collaborative effort are to provide a mutually beneficial research and
commercialization platform where SBIR/STTR Phase II grantees can perform
collaborative research with ERC faculty, researchers, and graduate students, to
strengthen the capacity of their firms, and/or speed the transition of ERC
advances to the marketplace.

In accordance with the NSF solicitation NSF 10-617, PICOCAL, Inc has submitted a
request for additional funding. The sub-awardee identified in the request is the
University of Michigan. This proposal/request meets the requirements of the
solicitation NSF 10-023.

The proposed collaboration leverages and extends the work from PICOCALs Phase II
(SBIR Phase II Award Id: 0822810) and the Engineering Research Center (ERC) for
Wireless Integrated Microsystems grants. PICOCAL would be leveraging technology
developed during its NSF SBIR Phase II in order to grow individual
nanostructures while controlling their dimensions and orientation. During its
Phase II effort, a vacuum scanning system was developed to provide nanometer
positioning accuracy and accommodate specialized scanning thermal probes and
probe arrays. From the ERC's side, the on-going research in the AMPP (advanced
materials, processes, and packaging) thrust is relevant to the manufacturing of
probes that can operate at elevated temperatures and in chemically reactive
environments.

This proposal provides an opportunity for the small business (PICOCAL) and the
ERC (WIMS) to work synergistically together to develop a manufacturing
technology for carbon nanotubes (CNT) that would have control over location,
size, shape, and orientation not currently possible by other commercial methods.
The SBIR Phase II to PICOCAL developed a specialized vacuum scanning system to
allow nanometer accuracy when using scanning thermal probes and probe arrays.
The ERC provides advanced materials expertise and additional expertise in
scanning probes that will be important to the extension of the Phase II
technology. The proposed collaboration will extend the Phase II technologies and
translate this technology into the marketplace more rapidly.

The proposed work, if successful, can have broad applications across a number of
fields, including health care, energy systems, and environmental monitoring. The
use of nanoprobes to control the growth and orientation of nanostructures can
have a tremendous effect on nanotechnology and is something that will be
synergistic with research now being pursued in the WIMS Engineering Research
Center. The expected deliverables from this work include an improved probe tip,
and improved probe wear. The proposed activity also helps broaden the
participation underrepresented groups.