* 1128518
* Transistor-Based and Voltage-Compatible Nanoscale Memories and Configurable Elements using Phase Transitions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sandip Tiwari, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

Phase transitions result in significant changes in properties of materials and
occur down to nanoscale dimensions. Ferroelectric, ferromagnetic,
superconductivity, etc. are examples of phase transitions which happen
reproducibly and are employed in miniaturized devices. An additional phase
transition phenomenon, not as commonly employed, is that of metal-insulator
transitions. Ferroelectric and metal-insulator transitions are very compatible
with electronic device structures, in use and in fabrication. This work aims to
employ a new invention based on phase transition phenomena to achieve 10
nanometer scale non-volatile memory capable of terascale density with nanosecond
speeds and low power. The work will explore the use of this component as stand-
alone memory and for reconfigurability to efficiently implement computing tasks.
The structure employs phase transition phenomena in a floating gate within a
single element (a cross-point transistor) to achieve hysteretic characteristics
at 1 V of operation at nanosecond speeds. This claim is based on an exploratory
demonstration of few 1000?s of nm by 1000?s of nm dimension. The 10 nm
capability will lead to 1012 bit density on integrated chips. These memory
elements are programmed through control gates and can provide pass functions.
This permits a very dense programmable interconnect fabric whose simplest form
is the replacement of the six transistor static random access memory programming
element by a single phase transition memory element.

This effort will extend the preliminary demonstration of the single element
phase transition memory to nanoscale by exploring scaling, exploring new
materials as replacements, developing the understanding of the underlying
phenomena, and developing models for use. Such memories, in themselves, will be
a very desirable robust storage medium for highly dense integrated systems. The
effort will also explore the use of this new element as a programmable
interconnect element. This very exploratory direction holds the promise of
replacing custom design, as currently practiced, by software programmable
computing where the ability to configure and reconfigure highly dense
interconnections between computational elements is utilized. This part of the
effort has the potential for providing major improvements in power dissipation
and in mitigation of custom and expensive design and production.

The intellectual merit of the proposal is that it will explore, develop,
understand, and demonstrate a nanosecond low power terascale memory element that
will be of universal use. The effort will also point to new directions in
achieving reliable low cost computing by implementing fast on-chip
programmability at nanoscale.

The broader impact of this effort will occur through (a) development of
educational class-room material for two lectures that can be incorporated in a
capstone course in nanoscale device physics, (b) the inclusion of two
undergraduate students, one a student from Cornell during the school year, and
the second an under-represented student from outside Cornell during summer
months as part of a research experience for undergraduate. The principal
investigator will also organize a day-long course on advanced memories and
architectures leveraging them at a major IEEE conference in the third year of
this effort.