* 1128907
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Influences of Brain Anatomy on Facial Positioning in Anthropoid Primates: Implications for Modern Human Origins
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Gary Schwartz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 07/31/2012
* USD 14,080.00

This dissertation research will investigate variation in the anatomical
relationship of the facial skeleton and the braincase in anthropoid primates.
Particularly, this study will test three hypotheses that represent non-mutually
exclusive explanations for the position of the facial skeleton relative to the
rest of the skull. The first two hypotheses posit that the position of the
facial skeleton in anthropoid primates is determined by the anatomy of the brain
-- by the overall size of the brain and the size of the temporal lobe,
respectively. The third hypothesis represents an alternative to the notion that
facial positioning in anthropoids is determined by the anatomy of the brain, and
suggests instead that the size of the facial skeleton itself determines its
position relative to the braincase. The hypotheses will be tested using data
collected from digital radiographs of anthropoid skulls and MRI scans of
anthropoid brains. The predictions of the hypotheses will be evaluated using
metric and geometric morphometric methods, and phylogenetic comparative methods
will be employed to adjust statistically for the evolutionary relationships
among the taxa in the sample. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research
will have important implications for understanding craniofacial architecture in
anthropoid primates and will specific relevance for understanding the derived
cranial form of Homo sapiens. The radiographs collected in the course of this
dissertation will be published on a free online database that will be useful for
physical anthropologists and other scientists and for educators. This project
will also support the graduate training of a promising scientist.