* 1128004
* Dissertation Research: Assessment and Development of Community Leaders for Sustainability
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Jeannie Achterberg, Saybrook University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2012
* USD 14,000.00

This project would support the dissertation research of graduate student Enrico
J. Wensing to develop the Global Sustainability Inventory (GSI) an assessment
instrument to help characterize community leaders for sustainability (CLS). This
is a social psychology project that proposes to identify key psychological and
social factors that lead to the development and efficacy of community leaders
for sustainability, which are known by a number of labels such as cultural
creatives, positive deviants, social entrepreneurs, sustainability champions,
international social workers, and knowledge or boundary managers; these are the
people that actively participate in movements for positive social change within
and between communities and seek to help move global societies toward a
sustainable future. They make up a very small but effective percentage of the
total population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing various field sites, PhD
Candidate Enrico J. Wensing will research and develop the GSI across a few of
the diverse sociocultural communities that are faced with some of the various
challenges in a transition toward sustainability and sustainable development. By
implementing cross-cultural collaboration to research the assessment instrument,
this project proposes to develop the GSI so that it can be administered via the
web and ultimately assist the development of community leadership for
sustainability across the world.