* 1128342
* Design of impedance matched infrared antennas using optical vector near-field mapping
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Glenn Boreman, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Samir El-Ghazaly
* 12/31/2011
* USD 390,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;We seek to increase sensitivity of antenna-coupled infrared
detectors by an order of magnitude. We will gain understanding of relevant
design parameters, and subsequently design impedance-matched antenna-sensor
combinations. We utilize our newly developed high-spatial-resolution, three-
dimensional probe techniques to measure electric fields in the vicinity of the
infrared antennas. This enables us, for the first time, to determine the
infrared-frequency impedance as a function of position. Combined with an
iterative design-fabrication-test approach, this will enable development of
infrared impedance-matching components.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;We scale up the concept of a radiofrequency network analyzer by
nine orders of magnitude in frequency. This proven advance yields experimental
tools needed to extend the performance of antenna-coupled sensors by a similar
scale in frequency, making the entire field of passive
low-&lt;br/&gt;5&lt;br/&gt;frequency electronics operational in the infrared
range. Infrared antennas have been proposed for a wide range of applications,
including nanoscale chemical and photon sensors, nearfield microscopy, and
optical rectennas for energy-harvesting. Such devices would transform the field
of optics, enabling sensing devices of nano-scale dimensions with order-of-
magnitude enhancement in sensitivity, responsivity, and reliability compared to
conventional optical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research greatly extends the frequency range of classical electronics,
while serving as the foundation for a dynamic and engaging learning environment
at each of the PIs? institutions. All three PIs have an established track record
of mentorship of underrepresented students, and all three participate in
programs for science and engineering outreach to K-12 students and research
participation of undergraduate students.