* 1128909
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Comparison of the Holocene Extents of the Greenland Ice Sheet in Western and Eastern Greenland
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Laura Levy, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The Arctic is currently warming more rapidly than other locations on the planet
and the response of the Greenland Ice Sheet to this warming is a focus of many
current studies. Model projections of the contribution of the Greenland Ice
Sheet to global sea level rise range from 4.5 to 17 cm by 2100. This project
will help to understand the possible response of the Greenland Ice Sheet to
future warming by developing records of the ice sheet margin during past warm
times particularly during recent interglacial period (the Holocene Epoch, 11,650
years B.P. to present). The research will focus on the Kangerlussuaq region
(67.0N, 50.7W) in western Greenland where a record of ice margin extents during
the Holocene is marked by belts of prominent, well-preserved moraine ridges.
Preliminary ages of moraines, determined by surface-exposure dating using the
cosmogenic nuclide Beryllium-10, demonstrate the ability to date precisely the
moraines near Kangerlussuaq. Results from one set of moraines, the ?Orkendalen
moraines?, located just outboard of (and in some places adjacent to) the
historical moraines, indicate that the Greenland Ice Sheet was smaller than at
present between ~6,500 years ago and the historical advance culminating in A.D.
1850. The project will develop a chronology of the Greenland Ice Sheet margin
fluctuations near Kangerlussuaq using a combination of detailed geomorphic
mapping and surface-exposure dating of moraines. Ice sheet margin fluctuations
will be compared with Holocene records of insolation, ocean circulation and
surface air temperatures to examine the possible climate mechanisms that may
have influenced the fluctuations of Holocene ice extent in eastern Greenland.
The timing and spatial continuity of these fluctuations will provide insight
into how the Greenland Ice Sheet will respond to future climate changes.

This research will produce the first directly dated ice margin chronology in the
Kangerlussuaq region in Greenland. Ice cores from the Greenland Ice Sheet
register temperature, dustiness and other atmospheric conditions over the ice
sheet, but do not provide information on how the sensitive margins of the ice
sheet have changed. Combined with data from eastern Greenland, this new record
from western Greenland will provide a geographically broad, spatial comparison
of ice margin fluctuations that will be useful for testing hypotheses of climate
mechanisms that cause ice sheet variability.

As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.