* 1128099
* Tunable Plasmonic Devices Enabled by Holographically-Formed Polymer Dispersed Liquid Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Yuankun Lin, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2015
* USD 359,216.00

Tunable Plasmonic Devices Enabled by Holographically-Formed Polymer Dispersed
Liquid Crystals

Abstract Objective: The goal of this project is to address the challenge for the
design and fabrication of tunable plasmonic devices through the electrical
tuning of refractive index in holographicallyformed polymer dispersed liquid-
crystals (H-PDLCs). Both tunable plasmonic nano-antennas and reconfigurable
surface plasmon polariton (SPP) devices will be investigated using
transformation optics and cellular liquid crystals. The resulting tunable
plasmonic devices will feature fast tuning speed and flexible function for
practical applications. Intellectual Merit: The proposed tunable plasmonic
devices rely on the H-PDLCs, which feature electrical tuning capability and can
be fabricated by the nano-fabrication technique. This is in contrast to the
conventional plasmonic devices that are usually non-tunable, which has limited
their applications in optical systems. Moreover, the proposed uniform and
gradient index H-PDLCs provide us with large flexibility in designing different
tuning structures. Combining these structures with device design techniques will
lead to many new tunable plasmonic devices. Broader Impact: The successful
design and fabrication of proposed H-PDLC based tunable plasmonic devices will
have a large impact on future optical systems for uses in both civilian and
military sectors. Especially, they will find applications in the areas of
sensing, imaging, energy harvesting, and communication systems. Other areas of
impact include the following: (1) enhancement of optical devices research and
education experiences for student researchers; (2) increased participation of
high school students, and underrepresented groups in science and technology; (3)
rapid dissemination of research results through workshops, seminars, and
publications.