* 1128459
* Electron Heating in Superconducting Heterostructures for Advanced Sensing and Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Myriam Sarachik, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2015
* USD 366,847.00

Objectives: The recent impressive progress in the MBE growth of high-temperature
single layer superconductors in oxide heterostructures opens exciting
possibilities for novel sensors ? superconducting hot electron nano-bolometers ?
that may lead to potential breakthroughs in modern THz sensing and IR fiber
communications technologies. This project pursues complex research of
nonequilibrium effects in these novel La2CuO4 /La2-xSrxCuO4 heterostructures to
establish the foundation for sensing and communication technologies based on
unique superconducting nanomaterials with ultra-small electron heat capacity.

Intellectual Merit: The research plan includes comprehensive, fundamental
investigations of the transport properties of the superconducting interface,
focusing on critical issues related to the nonequilibrium electron and phonon
effects in low-dimensional superconductors and heterostructures. By providing
the needed fundamental and technological bases, this program includes design and
development of advanced optoelectronic devices, such as ultra-fast detectors,
THz mixers, single IR photon counters with outstanding sensitivity.

Broader Impact: The proposed devices have a number of important applications in
THZ environmental and industrial monitoring, astrophysics, homeland security,
and medicine. If successful, the proposed program will have a strong impact on
optical communication and networking, quantum imaging and metrology, quantum
optical computing, bio-photonics, and single-molecule spectroscopy. In addition,
this research will provide a strong platform for the training and education of
students of minority institutions in important areas of growth and
characterization of new materials, research and development of novel nanoscaled
devices.









