* 1128281
* Adaptive Dynamic Programming-based Control of Unknown Networked Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Jagannathan Sarangapani, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 346,149.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this study is to provide online
robust adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) based optimal controllers with
guaranteed performance, supported by a rigorous design and mathematical
framework, and without utilizing policy and value iterations, for unknown linear
and nonlinear networked control systems (NCS). The approach taken here employs
adaptive network learning as a fundamental block and utilizes past history of
cost-to-go information, and updates the control input once a sampling interval
in a forward-in-time manner without using a system model and offline learning
phase for the NNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research presents an opportunity to deal with a more powerful and
unified paradigm of complex learning problems and envisions a brain-like
controller. The proposed effort will advance the state of the art in ADP for
control and guarantees stability and performance in the presence of not only
uncertain system dynamics and disturbances, but also network imperfections such
as random delays, packet losses and quantization errors without using iterative
approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This effort would
directly impact all real-time practical systems such as the efficient operation
and energy security of the smart grid, near zero-emission automotive control
systems, and next generation manufacturing system. Such control schemes are
required for global competitiveness of the US industry. Technology transfer will
occur through the NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on
Intelligent Maintenance Systems. Within the research community, this work will
inspire more theoretical results while providing training opportunities to next
generation students, future scientists and engineers including from
underrepresented groups.