* 1128148
* Collaborative Research: Cross-Layer and Unified Signal Processing System Design for Ultra-High-Capacity Next-Generation Magnetic Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tong Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 221,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop signal processing system design
solutions to enable high-performance and low-cost hybrid solid-state/magnetic
hard disk drives with beyond 1 Tbit per square inch areal density. The proposed
research aims to cohesively develop powerful signal processing algorithms and
low-cost VLSI architecture solutions that can simultaneously address the low
signal-to-media-noise ratio and high system fault tolerance implementation cost
faced by the emerging hybrid shingled written recording systems.

The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the theme of developing unified
signal processing system design solutions from both theory and practical
implementation perspectives. New non-controllable trellis-based finite-state
detectors and their efficient VLSI architectures will be developed to address
the loss of signal-to-media-noise ratio caused by shingled writing. A unified
read channel design approach and a data-management-aware signal processing
strategy will be further developed to reduce the overall system signal
processing implementation cost.

The broader impact of the proposed research is that it will enable the
development of low-cost ultra-high capacity mass data storage drives to
accommodate the exploding global data volume. It also contributes greatly to
sustaining the historical magnetic recording areal density growth rate,
providing a direct benefit to this strategically important high technology
sector critical to the economic health of the nation. Extra effort will be made
to recruit women and other under-represented groups as research assistants in
this project, involve representatives of the Pacific Islander minority as
undergraduate researchers, and reach out to high school students as part of
outreach efforts.