* 1128104
* Development of a Tender-Energy Microspectroscopy and Imaging User Facility for Earth Sciences at NSLS and NSLS-II
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Donald Sparks, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2015
* USD 1,000.00

This project will create a new, unique synchrotron-based user facility to
examine geologic materials at the micron scale with a focused X-ray beam tuned
specifically for lighter elements Na through Ti. This facility is designed and
optimized for "tender" (1-8 keV energy) X-ray micro-spectroscopy and imaging
applications for Earth Science research, and will complement existing and highly
productive "hard" X-ray facilities operating above about 4.5 keV. It will extend
to lower energies the X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy
(XAS) capabilities typical of hard X-ray microprobes, as element-specific non-
invasive probes of elemental distribution and local physical and electronic
structures and states in crystalline and non-crystalline materials. In addition,
it will offer advanced capabilities for microbeam extended X-ray absorption
spectroscopy (EXAFS) for determination of more detailed local structure around
the selected element. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be undertaken by
adding new micro-focusing capabilities at an established and proven macro-
focused (~1mm spot size) tender-energy XAS beamline at X15B of the National
Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) at Brookhaven National Laboratory, and will
subsequently transition to the new Tender Energy Spectroscopy (TES) beamline
under development at NSLS-II. Its key attributes will be the distinct 1 to 8 keV
energy range, user-tunable spot size from about 50 microns to 1 micron, high
flux and stability optimized for high-quality and extended XAS, options for both
XRF and XAS mapping with rapid scanning, and a helium glove-box sample
environment. Performance will improve when transferred to NSLS-II, a state-of-
the-art new Synchrotron designed for high brightness applications. These new
capabilities are critical for advancing our knowledge of geochemical and
biogeochemical processes, in particular those involving lighter elements, and
will be openly available for use through the NSLS General User program. Specific
applications targeted include the mineral-water interface, nutrients and
contaminants, carbonates, paleoclimate, redox processes, high-pressure
mineralogy; and health effects of Earth materials.