* 1128869
* Collaborative Project: Building Cybersecurity Capacity by Means of a National High School Digital Forensics Challenge
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Delaram Kahrobaei, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 99,012.00

This is a collaborative project involving the Polytechnic University of New York
(NSF Award No. 1129459) and CUNY New York City College of Technology (NSF Award
No. 1128869).

This SFS Capacity Building project is engaging high school students in
cybersecurity-related activities and inspiring them to pursue higher studies in
this important area. The project is creating a nationwide high school forensics
challenge, which attracts thousands of students to get first-hand experience
learning and working on security-related issues. In order to help the student
participants, the project is training a cadre of high school teachers to mentor
and coach teams that take part in the challenge and thereby to facilitate the
integration of cybersecurity topics into high school curricula. The project is
also creating a portal of Web resources for high school students, to facilitate
their engagement in self-learning activities in the area of cybersecurity.

The evaluation component of the project aims to answer the more difficult
questions related to impact. Namely, does the creation of a contest lead to an
increased number of students pursuing higher education in STEM disciplines? Does
it stimulate creative thinking? Does it broaden participation? Does
participation in a cybersecurity competition enhance students' interest in
cybersecurity, computer science, math, and science? Do competition participants
enroll in computer science programs at college in higher proportion than their
peers?

The project includes collaboration with a minority serving institution in order
to increase the participation of women and minorities. The project is
specifically recruiting 10 women and minority teachers to attend the summer boot
camp and is inviting 10 groups of women and minority teachers and their students
to attend the Cyber Security Awareness Week (CSAW) award ceremony. These two
activities contribute to the formation of a network of personal, educational,
and professional ties; provide young students with role models; and lead to
fruitful mentoring relationships and research.