* 1128562
* High power quantum cascade lasers for terahertz applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sushil Kumar, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2015
* USD 358,448.00

The objective of this program is to develop single-mode terahertz semiconductor
lasers emitting more than hundred milliwatts of optical power in continuous-wave
operation at liquid-nitrogen temperature, which is two orders of magnitude
higher than that demonstrated previously. The gain medium will be comprised of
GaAs/AlGaAs quantum-cascade heterostructures. Such narrow-band terahertz sources
have applications in areas as diverse as radio-astronomy, chemical and
biological sensing, and imaging and spectroscopy for identification of concealed
weapons, drugs, and explosives.

The intellectual merit is in the use of novel waveguide architectures that
combine techniques from microwave engineering with those of infrared
distributed-feedback lasers. Phased-array antenna structures will be
incorporated into semiconductor microcavities with the embedded quantum-cascade
gain medium, made possible owing to the unique properties of terahertz
radiation. A potentially transformative impact on the field of terahertz science
and technology is envisioned by bringing terahertz quantum-cascade lasers out of
the mold of research laboratories, to a situation where practical instruments
could be built for important applications.

The broader impacts are in providing education in the areas of nanophotonics,
quantum-electronics, microfabrication, and terahertz technology to graduate and
undergraduate students within a research environment. Elements of research will
be incorporated into a new course on nanophotonics, and will also be showcased
to create scientific interest among high-school students through participation
in outreach activities. A program is in place to actively involve undergraduate
students in the terahertz research activities in the laboratory. New research
collaborations in the area of terahertz applications will be pursued across
different institutions.