* 1128304
* Coupled Charge and Spin Transport in Topological Insulators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Alexander Balandin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

Topological insulators constitute a new class of quantum materials with bulk
insulating energy gaps and gapless Dirac-cone edge or surface states. The
surface states are protected against time-reversal-invariant perturbations such
as non-magnetic impurities, defects, and reconstruction. The charge is uniquely
coupled to the spin, and charge current creates spin polarization. Since the
surface states are topologically protected, and the momentum states are coupled
to spin states, scattering is reduced and noise is suppressed. In thin
topological insulators, a Rashba-type spin splitting occurs which can be
controlled by a gate voltage. The thermoelectric figure of merit, ZT, increases
as film thickness is reduced. In summary, topological insulators have shown
exceptional properties for thermoelectric, charge, and spin transport. These
materials and properties will be investigated from an engineering electronics
point of view. Devices that exploit these properties will be built, modeled and
characterized, and the performance metrics and fundamental limits of such
devices will be determined.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will be simultaneously carried out both
experimentally and theoretically. The project will (i) add to the fundamental
knowledge of the material properties and physical processes in highly-scaled
topological insulator materials; (ii) build, model, and characterize devices
that exploit topological insulating properties for computation, signal
processing, and sensing; (iii) determine the performance metrics and the
fundamental limitations of such devices, (iv) explore the use of topological
insulators for low-dissipation, low-noise interconnects; and (v) develop the
electrochemical atomic layer deposition technique to grow few-atomic-layer films
of topological insulators. All materials will be extensively characterized using
a wide range of methods including atomic force, scanning electron, and
transmission electron microscopy, low energy electron diffraction, X-ray
spectroscopy, Auger spectroscopy, electron probe micro-analysis, micro-Raman
spectroscopy, electrical, and thermal measurements. Experimental measurements
will be compared to device models and ab initio, density functional theory
calculations of the electronic structure and vibrational modes of the thin film
and nanowire materials. Transformative concepts include the use of low-
dissipation, low noise topologically protected states of topological insulators
for electronic / spintronic devices and low-noise, low-power
interconnects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt; The successful
project has the potential to lead to new technologies that exploit the low-
dissipation, low-noise states of topological insulators for computation,
communications, and sensors. The broader impacts of this project affect all 5
example areas described within the grant proposal guide, and they are
particularly strong in the areas of (i) broadening participation of
underrepresented groups and (ii) promoting teaching and training through
undergraduate research. The University of California Riverside is a Hispanic
serving institution with the largest Hispanic student population among all of
the University of California campuses. The principal investigator and co-
principal investigator have a long history of successful supervision of
underrepresented minorities, they served as principal investigator and co-
principal investigator of the National Science Foundation Research Experience
for Undergraduates Site for Nano Materials and Devices that focused on minority
undergraduate student participation in research, and they plan to hire minority
graduate and undergraduate students as research assistants for this project.