* 1128186
* EAGER: Directed Ozonolysis in Liquid Carbon Dioxide
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Bala Subramaniam, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Luke Achenie
* 03/31/2012
* USD 99,878.00

PI: Bala Subramanian &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Kansas Center for
Research Inc.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Numbers: 1128186&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER:
Directed Ozonolysis in Liquid Carbon Dioxide&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals and
Objectives: This EAGER project is aimed at laying the foundation to establish
ozonolysis as a viable technology for producing industrial chemicals and fuels.
Recent finding indicate that O3 solubility is dramatically enhanced in liquid
CO2 compared to conventional solvents. This finding has prompted this
investigation aimed at exploring whether controlled ozonolysis in liquid CO2 can
be performed with a broad range of substrates. Specific objectives are therefore
to investigate (a) ozone miscibility and stability in inert solvents such as
dense CO2 aimed at establishing appropriate media for ozonolysis; (b) the
conversion and selectivities obtained during ozonolysis of fatty acid methyl
esters and aromatic structures (containing C=C bonds) in liquid
CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance: Ozonolysis is capable of producing a
rich variety of valuable intermediates such as carboxylic acids and aldehydes by
oxidative cleavage of C=C bonds and linear hydrocarbons from polyaromatic
structures such as lignin. However, there are relatively few industrial
applications because of the challenges to protect reaction intermediates from
further oxidation and to find viable solvents that are inert to ozone.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Activities: The aforementioned objectives will be
pursued with a suite of model substrates of increasing complexity. Initial
substrates will include: (a) stilbene and cyclohexene; (b) methyl stearate and
methyl oleate as model saturated and unsaturated fatty acids; and (c) aromatic
compounds representative of functionalities commonly found in natural products
derived from lignin. The experimental investigations will be supported by a
state-of-the-art research infrastructure that includes high-pressure view cells
equipped with in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy, ultrasound-enabled mixing and in-line
sampling features for performing the reaction and phase equilibrium
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Successful completion will lay
the foundation for widespread applications of ozone in industrial chemicals and
fuels processing, with the following attributes that promote sustainability:
process intensification at relatively mild conditions (tens of bars and near-
ambient temperatures), efficient O3 utilization for maximizing the desired
products, waste minimization and inherent safety. The outcomes associated with
fatty acid methyl esters and polyaromatic substrates will provide a hitherto
unexplored reaction pathway for transforming lignocellulosic biomass and natural
oils to fuels and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
synergistic interactions between faculty, students and industrial researchers in
a cross-disciplinary setting at the Center for Environmentally Catalysis (CEBC)
is expected to produce a diverse cadre of uniquely trained students, recruited
through the CEBC?s diversity recruitment efforts. The PI has a history of
training students from under-represented groups including women and minority
students recruited from ongoing partnerships with Prairie View A&amp;M
University and the University of Puerto Rico. The technical outcomes will be
integrated into an ongoing graduate course titled Development of Sustainable
Chemical Processes, which is team-taught by chemists and engineers.