* 1128050
* Adaptive Dynamic Programming for Real-Time Cooperative Multi-Player Games and Graphical Games
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Ali Davoudi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 272,730.00

The Objective of this research is to design new algorithms for decision and
control in multi-player games for complex human-engineered systems interacting
on communication graph topologies. Standard differential game solutions are for
systems with a single dynamics and multiple action inputs. However, realistic
systems are composed of agents having their own individual dynamics and only
interacting with their immediate neighbors in a social graph topology. The
Approach is to bring together discoveries in neurobiological learning,
sociobiological systems having local interactions between agents, and multi-
player differential games to develop novel feedback control structures for
nonlinear dynamical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Standard
differential game theory solutions are generally offline design methods that
rely on solving nonlinear design equations requiring knowledge of full system
dynamics. Approximate Dynamic Programming techniques based on reinforcement
learning will be used to develop novel adaptive control structures that learn
game theory solutions online in real time using data measured along the system
trajectories and without knowing full system dynamics. Solutions for different
definitions of game equilibria will be sought including Nash, Pareto, Nash
bargaining, and cooperative games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The
research will help bridge the gap between the Computational Intelligence and the
Control Systems communities by bringing together reinforcement learning, game
theory, and differential dynamical systems. Applications will be made to
cooperative control of distributed electric power microgrids for renewable
energy such as wind and solar generation. Existing programs at UTA will be
expanded in women in engineering, research for US students, high school
engineering technology, and K-12 outreach.