* 1128076
* QMHS Targeted optimization of the dispersion of quantum wires and nanomaterials for nonlinear optical applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Mark Kuzyk, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 03/31/2016
* USD 301,443.00

The proposal objective is to invent new approaches for manipulating quantum
systems to enhance their nonlinear-optical response. Rather than studying
specific systems, this work seeks to discover universal properties that are key
to optimizing a material for a given task, which may identify altogether new and
transformative materials paradigms and applications.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this proposal is in the development of fundamental quantum mechanical
concepts that build an understanding of the performance limit of optical
materials and practical methods for attaining the limit. The fundamental
knowledge gained will guide chemists and nanotechnologists in designing new
materials and nanostrucutures, provide new paradigms to physicists/materials
scientists for making novel functional materials, and generate ideas for
engineers to develop novel devices.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are diverse by
virtue of the generality of the approach, which is based on sum rules that apply
to all materials that interact with light including organic molecules, inorganic
crystals, nanoparticles, smart materials, nanowires, etc. For example, medical
imaging and diagnostics based on selective two-photon absorption would be made
more efficient with better tagging chromophores. Other applications of this
project include ultra fast switching for telecommunications, logic elements for
computing, light-emitting materials for displays, and 3D photolithographic
materials for optical memory. In addition to visits to local schools, online
interactive resources will be developed to disseminate information to high-
school and undergraduate-level students; and, numerical code that is developed
as part of our work will be distributed over the web so that students can
participate in publishable research.