* 1128715
* Scalable and Synthesizable Analog Circuits for Nanometer CMOS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Nima Maghari, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

ECCS-1128715&lt;br/&gt;PI: Un-Ku Moon &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oregon State
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Scalable and Synthesizable Analog Circuits for
Nanometer CMOS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Analog-to-digital converters are a mixture of analog circuits and digital
blocks. The analog portion of such analog-intensive blocks requires careful
design, layout, and are often the main source of power consumption and chip
area. The objective of this research is to develop such analog-intensive blocks
with all digital cells and automatically generate the final chip design and
layout using digital synthesis tools such as Verilog. Instead of combating the
challenges brought forth by the new nanometer processes, this work seeks to
analyze and take advantage of these non-ideal effects. Problems such as
increased offset and reduced intrinsic gain of the minimum size transistor will
be addressed, and new approaches at both system and circuit levels will be
explored to overcome these issues. Different structures such as stochastic
analog-to-digital converter and oversampling delta-sigma modulator will be
explored. Semi-analog blocks such as inverter-based integrator that would either
be synthesized via existing synthesis tool (e.g. Verilog) or newly developed
automatic synthesis tools will be explored. By synthesizing semi-analog and
digital blocks, the proposed research will further enable highly integrated
analog-intensive blocks for the next generation nanometer processes. Proficient
high level modeling of blocks via synthesis tools allows fast simulation and
verification, and effortless migration to another process, alleviating the
typical brute-force redesigning tasks required in traditional analog-intensive
blocks. A readily available synthesized digital signal processing system is also
expected to further enhance the performance of these new synthesizable analog
functioning digital structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The design
methodology that will emerge from this research merges both the analog and
digital functionality in the automatic synthesis of a system from a software
program to an integrated circuit realization. Such combined optimization of
analog and digital signal processing, as incorporated into undergraduate and
graduate education, will reshape the way students approach chip design
challenges. Such foundation will provide and push students to seek solutions
from a much wider perspective before making the final design decisions. This
training will lead to well-rounded and innovative future engineers who are well
versed in both digital and analog aspects of chip design. The research results
to be disseminated in prestigious journals and conferences will expose and
educate the public at large and further motivate these new concepts to be
investigated by other researchers. Also, the enabling ideas explored in this
proposal will directly affect most portable and stationary systems, which are
important segments of the microelectronics market today. The ability to
automatically synthesize data converters with all-digital blocks may allow the
use of these structures in digital processors, medical and bio-medical
integrated circuits, and other important systems utilizing analog-to-digital
interface and digital signal processing, significantly lowering the cost of
integrated circuit systems.