* 1128936
* Facility Support: AfricaArray - Advancing Earth Science Research and Education with an Interdisciplinary Network in Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Andrew Nyblade, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2016
* USD 213,777.00

AfricaArray (www.africaarray.org) is a multifaceted initiative focused on
developing a pool of diverse and talented undergraduate and graduate students
for the geoscience workforce in the U.S. and Africa through linked research and
training programs. Launched in 2005 with support from government, academic and
industry partners, AfricaArray now supports three coupled activities, 1) a
multidisciplinary observatory network in Africa, 2) a graduate training program
for U.S. and African students focusing on research in Africa, and 3) a program
to enhance diversity in the geosciences in the U.S. and Africa. This grant
supports the operation and maintenance of the observatory network, which
provides seismic, GPS and weather data openly to the science community. The
network consists of 44 observatories spanning 17 countries in eastern, southern
and western Africa. All but one of the observatories houses seismic sensors, and
by the end of 2012, twenty-one of the observatories will also be equipped with
GPS receivers and automated weather stations. The seismic data are archived and
distributed by the IRIS data management center, and the GPS and weather data are
archived and distributed by the UNAVCO data management center. Data from the
network are being used for solid earth and atmospheric research projects by a
wide range of students, faculty and researchers worldwide, including a number of
underrepresented minority students in the U.S.