* 1128481
* ERC-Small Business:  Micropatterning of Film Extrusion Die Surfaces
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Amod Ogale, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This is a collaboration between the Engineering Research Center (ERC) for
Advanced Engineering Fiber and Films (CAEFF) at Clemson University and Hoowaki
LLC. CAEFF is a graduated, self-sustaining ERC (EEC-9731680) that continues to
conduct systems-level research and educate students on advanced fibers and
films. Hoowaki LLC is a small business company that has completed a Phase I SBIR
(Grant No. 0945386) and developed unique expertise in surface microstructuring
of metal molds. The vision of the Hoowaki-CAEFF Clemson team is to translate
research and test-beds developed in CAEFF into commercial products being
developed by Hoowaki LLC to radically modify surface properties of extruded
polymeric articles to create large markets and to realize important societal
benefits. The Hoowaki-CAEFF team proposes to develop micropaterned extrusion
dies to attain micron- and submicron-level (nano-level) features on film
surfaces. Hoowaki researchers have demonstrated superhydrophobic microstructures
of polymers using 3-D patterns on mold surfaces used in batch processing. The
proposed program will result in extruded films with desired micro-patterns and
functional performance (such as superhydrophobicity) using the continuous, high-
volume extrusion process, which is well suited for scale-up to commercial
processes. Dies developed by Hoowaki will be used by CAEFF researchers in
extrusion test-beds developed under the auspices of the ERC program. The
proposal will draw upon CAEFF's custom-designed single- and multi-layer polymer
film extrusion test-beds equipped with real-time Raman spectroscopy and x-ray
diffraction capabilities. Extensive rheological and analytical instrumentation,
also available in CAEFF, will be used for flow and microstructure measurements.
CAEFF-Hoowaki team will complement these experimental studies with computer
modeling using FiSim software, which was also developed under the auspices of
the ERC program. Validated computer modeling predictions using accurate
viscoelastic constitutive equations will systematically guide the
micropatterning geometries for attaining superhydrophobic microtexture and
reduced friction properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The
Hoowaki R&amp;D Manager and CAEFF Director will mentor a post-doctoral research
associate and a graduate, who in turn will mentor an undergraduate student.
Thus, integration of research and education will be accomplished to ensure
training of research personnel for U.S. competitiveness. Hoowaki personnel will
also advise post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students on aspects of
product-development and entrepreneurship. This work is expected to benefit
society and U.S. consumers by improving packaging films to improve cleanliness
for improved hygiene. The micro-patterned dies are expected to lead to improved
energy efficiency of film extrusion due to improved production rates. In
addition, reduction of fluoropolymer coatings, in favor of the microtexture to
enhance superhydrophobicity, will provide significant environmental benefits.