* 1128948
* Investigating the Effectiveness of TinkerPlots in Helping Students with Learning Disabilities Understand Statistical Concepts
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Ibrahim Dahlstrom-Hakki, Landmark College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 70,936.00

The goal of the project, "Investigating the effectiveness of TinkerPlots in
helping students with learning disabilities understand statistical concepts", is
to increase the number of students who successfully complete introductory
statistics courses by using TinkerPlots as a tool to help them visualize and
understand key statistical concepts. A secondary goal is to increase confidence
in and understanding of statistics that will motivate students to pursue
additional training in statistics or in a data-driven STEM field. The PI
hypothesizes that students with diagnosed learning disabilities who have access
to and instruction in the use of TinkerPlots within a classroom in a post-
secondary introduction to statistics course will experience better academic
performance on standard statistics assessments, exhibit a deeper understanding
of key statistical concepts, and will be more likely to pursue additional
training in a statistics related field. This is a demonstration project; the
purpose of demonstration projects is to conduct proof-of-concept studies that
will lead to full research projects aimed at increasing the knowledge base about
the participation and success of students with disabilities in post-secondary
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals are being addressed via the
following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Integrate TinkerPlots into Landmark College's
introductory statistics curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;2. Conduct a pilot study to test
the effectiveness of the curriculum for students with a diagnosed learning
disability at Landmark College.&lt;br/&gt;3. Conduct a pilot study to test the
effectiveness of the curriculum for a more typical population of students at
Holyoke Community College.&lt;br/&gt;4. Investigate the usability and
accessibility of TinkerPlots for students with a diagnosed learning disability.
&lt;br/&gt;5. Broadly disseminate information about the approach and results
from the pilot study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first pilot study addresses the
question: How effective is TinkerPlots as a tool for helping students with
diagnosed LD grasp statistical concepts? Data is being collected from at least
two experimental and two control classrooms (using the traditional curriculum)
per semester over two semesters and intersessions. Dependent variables include
statistical knowledge, competence and perceived competence in statistics, and
interest in STEM related courses and careers. These measures are administered at
baseline and post-course intervals. ANOVA comparisons are conducted for both
experimental and control groups. The college's records are used to follow those
who complete the experimental and control courses to ascertain subsequent
enrollment in more advanced statistics coursesor STEM courses.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;During the second year of the project, the study is replicated at a
neighboring community college, Holyoke, where the population does not focus on
students with learning disabilities, as does Landmark College. The replication
at Holyoke includes other typically underrepresented groups including women,
minority students, English language learners, and students from lower socio-
economic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conceived as a pilot
project for gathering preliminary data on the impact of TinkerPlots at two
community colleges. It has the potential to contribute to the knowledge base by
investigating the impact of statistical software on achievement in post-
secondary statistic classes. Results from this proposed work have the potential
to inform a larger research study that would contribute to the delivery of
practices employed by the RDE-funded Alliances for Students with Disabilities in
STEM and other post-secondary programs for individuals with disabilities in
STEM.