* 1128608
* ERC - Small Business: Biological and Biomechanical Assessment of Magnesium as a Possible Bioresorbable Material for Intervertebral Spinal Fusion
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Yeoheung Yun, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This effort is a collaboration between the Engineering Research Center for
Revolutionizing Metallic Biomaterials (RMB) at the North Carolina A&amp;T State
University, its partner institutions (the University of Pittsburgh, the
University of Cincinnati, Hannover Medical School, industrial, innovator, and
state and local government partners) and NC-based ERC small business innovation
partner OrthoKinetic Technologies LLC and Southeast TechInventures, Inc., a
technology accelerator also located in NC. The ERC was started in 2008. This
proposal, specifically addresses the degradable Mg system developed at the ERC-
RMB as a possible material for intervertebral spinal fusion
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this effort is to transform current medical and surgical treatments
by creating "smart" implants for craniofacial, dental, orthopedic,
cardiovascular, thoracic and neural interventions. The ERC will develop
biodegradable systems that combine novel bioengineered materials based on
magnesium with miniature sensor devices that can control the integrity of
implants. The ERC will develop biodegradable systems that combine novel
bioengineered materials based on magnesium with miniature sensor devices that
can control the integrity of implants. Biodegradable systems offer significant
therapeutic advantages over implants used today. Such systems will be able to
grow and adapt to the human body and eventually dissolve when no longer needed.
The first phase of this research is to synthesize magnesium alloys that are
biomechanically stable for possible use as a spinal fusion cage. The effort
explores the use of alloying elements to increase corrosion resistance, increase
toughness, and promote osteointegration. The second phase of this study will
provide a comprehensive mechanical assessment of a spinal fusion cage for the
lumbar spine using magnesium and its alloys as the bioresorbable materials. The
third phase will be corrosion assessment or resorption process analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spinal surgery is
often a final alternative to spinal stabilization and relief of pain. Bone graft
fusion with accompanying spinal instrumentation systems is a conventional
surgical technique used to stabilize the spine. The eventual goal of this bone
graft and spinal instrumentation construct is to create a balanced environment
where the spinal instrumentation is used to initially function as the load
bearing element that immobilizes the fusion segment during the early unstable
stages of bone grafting and healing. The U.S. market for spinal implants is
estimated to exceed $8 billion by 2016, while the minimally invasive surgical
(MIS) spinal implant market is estimated to reach over $3 billion. The education
and outreach plans are achieved through the ongoing ERC programs through broad-
based outreach programs targeted at elementary and secondary school students,
community college students and their teachers, counselors, parents and
administrators. These include informal education, parent information sessions.
This effort addresses the need for a novel biocompatible biomaterial capable of
resorbing and allowing creep substitution by bone during resorption, while
maintaining mechanical structural integrity, as an ideal alternative to spinal
fusion.