* 1128682
* GOALI:  Quantum structures and nanostructure-based photon management for high-efficiency photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* authi narayanan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 370,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The object of this
research is to investigate the use of metal and dielectric nanostructures to
enable, via optical scattering, improved absorption in thin-film solar cells,
and to explore applications in terrestrial and aerospace photovoltaic systems.
The approach is based on GaAs/InGaAs/InAs quantum well-based heterostructure
solar cells, which have been postulated to offer maximum power conversion
efficiencies of ~45% to over 60%. Use of metal and dielectric nanostructures for
scattering and light trapping within devices will enable absorption efficiency
to be improved over selected wavelength ranges in very thin device layers. The
University of Texas at Austin and Boeing will collaborate in exploring both
basic device physics and photovoltaic system
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental issues in the physics, design, and
fabrication of quantum-well and related multiband solar cells will be
elucidated. Understanding of the interaction between metal and dielectric
nanostructures and semiconductor devices, particularly with regard to the design
of nanophotonic structures and achieving control over photon propagation and
absorption within thin-film semiconductors, will be
advanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work could have a major impact on renewable power generation, particularly in
concentrating photovoltaic systems, and could advance a broad range of device
concepts in which semiconductor, metal, and dielectric nanostructures are
integrated. Introduction of freshman electrical engineering students to
photovoltaics and solar energy, senior-level design projects, and university-
industrial collaboration will provide a broad range of students with exposure to
state of the art energy technology and provide a path for rapid technology
transfer.