* 1128489
* Electrically pumped microcavity polariton lasers on nonpolar m-plane and semipolar GaN
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Vitaliy Avrutin, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this program is to understand the fundamentals governing
vertical cavity emitters and cavity polaritons leading to attunement of
electrically pumped microcavity lasers and polariton lasers on nonpolar m-plane
and semipolar GaN. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is in demonstrating a new
type of gain medium and advancing microcavity technologies by developing a model
system using nitride materials with large exciton binding energies, improved
optical matrix elements and high hole concentrations in the nonpolar and
semipolar orientations. Developing room temperature low threshold polariton
lasers will require integration of high reflectivity GaN-based bottom and
dielectric top reflectors, high quality nitride epitaxial heterostructures and
quantum wells, and efficient contact layers and active region heterostructures
supporting uniform carrier injection while preserving the strong exciton-photon
coupling state. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the advancement of materials
science and microcavity device technologies for the development of a new type of
laser with significantly lower threshold compared to the vertical cavity surface
emitting lasers and in providing an ideally suited multidisciplinary research
environment for educating graduate and undergraduate students in the
fundamentals of cutting-edge semiconductor optoelectronics and microcavity
physics. The transformative applications include optical logic elements
operating at much lower power levels compared to conventional Si-based
electronics for ultrafast optical computing and on-chip communications with
significant energy savings and therefore reduced carbon emissions. Undergraduate
students, recruited through existing summer research programs, will be included
in this research and educational infrastructure will be enhanced by web-based
efforts and by incorporating the fundamental discoveries into the graduate
curriculum.