* 1128080
* G8 Initiative: G8 Research Councils Initiative on Multilateral Research Funding
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2015
* William Tang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 469,246.00

This NSF award to Princeton University funds U.S. researchers participating in a
project competitively selected by the G8 Research Councils Initiative on
Multilateral Research through the Interdisciplinary Program on Application
Software towards Exascale Computing for Global Scale Issues. This is a pilot
collaboration among the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Canadian National
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence Nationale
de la Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian Foundation for
Basic Research (RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils (RC-UK),
supporting collaborative research projects selected on a competitive basis that
are comprised of researchers from at least three of the partner
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fusion of light nuclides forms the basis of
energy release in the universe, which can potentially be harnessed and used as a
clean and sustainable supply of energy on Earth. In order to build the
scientific foundations needed to develop fusion energy, a key need is the timely
development of an integrated high-physics-fidelity predictive simulation
capability for magnetically confined fusion plasmas. An associated central
physics challenge is understanding, predicting, and controlling instabilities
caused by the unavoidable spatial variations (gradients) in a magnetically-
confined thermonuclear plasma. One consequence is the occurrence of turbulent
fluctuations (microturbulence) which can significantly increase the transport
rate of heat, particles, and momentum across the confining magnetic field in a
tokamak device such as ITER -- a multi-billion dollar international experimental
device being built in Cadarache, France and involving the partnership of 7
governments representing over half of the world?s population. Microturbulence
can severely limit the energy confinement time for a given machine size and
therefore it?s performance and economic viability. Understanding and possibly
controlling the balance between these energy losses and the self-heating rates
of the actual fusion reaction is key to achieving the efficiency needed to help
ensure the practicality of future fusion power plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate calculations of turbulent transport are vitally
important and can only be achieved through advanced simulations. The current
U.S. project uses ab initio particle-in-cell (PIC) global (3D) codes to solve
the nonlinear equations underlying gyrokinetic theory with excellent scaling to
more than 100,000 processor cores having already been demonstrated. It is
planned that these codes will be deployed at the two supercomputing centres
involved in this G8 project (Argonne National Laboratory in the U.S. and Juelich
Supercomputing Centre in Germany), where state-of-the-art HPC systems are
operative. In order to move in a timely manner to producing simulations with the
highest possible physics fidelity, it is expected that computing at the exascale
will be necessary to achieve the ultimate goal of computational fusion research
? an integrated predictive simulation capability that is properly validated
against experiments in regimes relevant for practical fusion energy production.