* 1128023
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Geothermal Energy Piles: A New Sustainable Green Energy Solution for Middle East Buildings
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Guney Olgun, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

1128023 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr.
James Martin, Dr. Guney Olgun both at Virginia Tech. and Dr. Amr Darrag, Cairo
University, Egypt. They plan to conduct research on Geothermal Energy Piles as a
new sustainable green Energy solution for buildings, especially in the Middle
East. There is a strong interest around the world in exploring alternative
energy sources. Among the driving forces are growing energy demand, depleting
natural resources and the adverse effects of greenhouse gas emissions from
fossil fuel consumption. Energy Piles are a relatively new deep foundation
engineering technology designed to access and exploit the relatively constant
temperature of the ground (i.e., they extract heat energy from the ground) for
efficient heating and cooling of structures. In ideal conditions, they can
reduce heating and cooling costs of buildings by as much as 80%, and
simultaneously help reduce the problem of greenhouse gas emissions. Although the
use of Energy Piles has seen steady increasing usage in Europe and Japan over
the past decade, more research is needed before they can enjoy common usage
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: There is a need to
investigate the long term thermo-mechanical behavior of energy piles. The
collaboration with researchers in Egypt would advance research that the US PIs
are currently conducting. The PIs plan to conduct a full scale field test which
will improve understanding of the behavior energy piles, and to develop
laboratory test equipment which will improve testing capabilities for energy
pile, including continuing to conduct FEM analysis of energy piles. A workshop
organized by the PIs has identified certain barriers to the wide use of these
piles, such as the lack of long-term Energy Pile performance data, a lack of
refined design and testing standards, a lack of region specific field case
histories, a lack of awareness among owners and engineers, and widely varying
regulations for installation of geothermal wells. This proposal will help
addressing these issues. The project will expand the PIs' ongoing work,
currently involving Europe and the US, by developing region specific field
performance data needed to optimize Energy Pile design and promote usage in
Egypt. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Currently there is reluctance by
engineers, contractors and owners to incorporate energy piles in foundations
because of concerns of the thermal effects on the load carrying capacities of
the foundations. This research could help to reduce some of their concerns. The
US PIs are working with the deep foundations industry for this purpose. The use
of energy piles in building foundations will enhance green construction efforts
directed towards increasing energy efficiency and reducing energy demands. The
work will promote wider usage of energy piles in the Middle East and in the US.
Energy Pile may be an important part to the development of net-zero energy
buildings. The project involves a significant international collaboration,
including unique educational opportunities for a PhD student at VirginiaTech and
students at Cairo University, and will likely continue partnering with Deep
Foundation Institute (DFI). The project will promote wider usage of this new
technology in the Middle East where more efficient solutions for cooling are
increasingly needed. Also, because this work involves an innovative energy
technology, it has great potential to create Egyptian jobs in the field of green
energy. The project would also help lay the groundwork for a joint degree
program in civil engineering between Cairo University and Virginia Tech. The
findings will be disseminated via journals, the Internet, and incorporated into
academic courses and the PIs? professional short courses for ASCE, FERC, USACE,
etc. Key partners in this effort will be DFI and the US Green Building Council
(USGBC).