* 1128282
* ERC - Small Business: Remote chemical sensing instrumentation based on chirped laser dispersion spectroscopy
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Gerard Wysocki, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative project between
an NSF Engineering Research Center for Technologies for Health and the
Environment (MIRTHE) and Physical Sciences Inc. (PSI), a company that is a
world-renowned leader in the research and development of laser chemical sensing
technologies. The proposal focuses on developing a new, compact, cryogen-free
mid-infrared hard-target LIDAR (laser detection and ranging) technology for
remote spectroscopic chemical sensing that will target atmospheric methane. The
proposed system will be based on a new chirped laser dispersion spectroscopy
(CLaDS) technique, recently invented by the PI, who is a researcher at the
MIRTHE ERC. The proposal will develop a new remote sensing technology that is
capable of atmospheric CH4 monitoring and will provide significant improvements
over the current state-of-the-art. Present concentration in North America range
from 1600 to 2200 parts per billion by volume (ppbv). Unfortunately, it is
difficult to fully quantify its emission rates and location of sources and sinks
using existing methane monitoring instrumentation. Thus technologies that enable
remote sensing of natural and anthropogenic methane emissions are needed for
accurate source and sink assessments of this important greenhouse gas. The new
sensor system, CLaDS, is based on measurement of resonant molecular dispersion
and provides unique capabilities for remote chemical detection (i.e. immunity to
optical power fluctuations). The proposed instrumentation will also take
advantage of another core MIRTHE technology; quantum cascade lasers (QCLs). QCLs
give an access to the mid-infrared region of electromagnetic spectrum between ~3
and 16 Ã¬m where most chemical compounds in the gas phase (including methane)
possess their strongest fundamental ro-vibrational absorption features. As a
result, detection at mid-IR wavelengths enables ultra-high sensitivity detection
of trace-gases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-
sensitive, fast, in-situ molecular remote detection has a large number of
applications in environmental studies, industrial emission monitoring and
security. Therefore new discoveries and scientific advancements in this field
integrated with a comprehensive educational program will provide an excellent
training for the new generation of scientists and engineers as well as have a
strong impact on the well being of society. The versatility of the project
provides a full spectrum of education and training opportunities integrated with
the research goals and specifically addresses career development goals at each
academic level from high school students to post-doctoral researchers.
Participation of a graduate student and a post-doc is planned within the budget
of this project. The engagement of undergraduate students will be provided
through other programs including a strong MIRTHE Research Experience for
Undergraduate (REU) Program.