* 1128512
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Vulnerability-Reliability Modeling and Analysis of Cyber-Physical Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Chee-Wooi Ten, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The complexity of power grids has significantly increased in recent years, both
in terms of the interconnection of more physical components and the deployment
of more advanced monitoring and control systems. The grid has become critically
dependent on the supporting communication infrastructure for control, monitoring
and management, including supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
systems. The objective of this project is to develop a system-wide
vulnerability-reliability modeling and evaluation framework for modern power
systems, taking into account various uncertainties from both physical and cyber
domains. The approach is based on the integration of cyber vulnerability into
the power grid reliability model and the development of new methodologies for
efficiently calculating composite vulnerability-reliability indices.

Intellectual Merit: This project will develop analytical and statistical
inference models for anomaly detection of potential malicious activities across
control networks for an enhanced SCADA cybersecurity framework. Credible
scenarios and the impact of their failures will be examined. Wind-farm
management systems will be incorporated into the analysis of overall system
vulnerability and reliability by accounting for various uncertainties in a
cyber-physical environment. Methodologies to model and evaluate the overall
reliability of cyber-physical power systems will be developed in a probabilistic
manner. New reliability test systems, including current-carrying components and
cyber components, will also be developed.

Broader Impacts: The project will generate critical knowledge for a broad
spectrum of vulnerability-reliability issues in cyber-physical energy
infrastructures. In turn, this project will yield far-reaching benefits for
society and the nation as a whole by accelerating technological development,
training a well-qualified workforce, and promoting participation of
underrepresented groups through the integration of our research results into
undergraduate and graduate power and energy courses and curriculum. The power
and energy engineering community will benefit from broad dissemination of our
research findings in leading journals, conferences, workshops, the Internet,
short courses and tutorials.