* 1128085
* I/UCRC Supplement (membership):  Center for the Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Sami Rizkalla, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 25,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to start a new I/UCRC "Integration of Composites
into Infrastructure (CICI)" with a focus on ushering applications and cost-
effective rehabilitation schemes using composites in civil and military
structures. The lead institution of the proposed Center is WVU with RU, NCSU and
UM as research partners.

This new IUCRC will focus on creating new products for specific applications
such as pre-cast composite bridge decks and pavement panels, and protection
systems to increase the service life of infrastructure damaged by natural and
man-made disasters such as earthquake and terror attack. Advances in processing
of composites will lead to environmental benefits, as estimates indicate that
natural fiber based composites can be manufactured at one-fourth the BTU level
of comparable steel sections, and similarly self-cleaning structural composites
will help oxidize car exhaust. The Center will integrate scientific endeavors
complementing the strengths of all four universities to advance the composite
knowledgebase and applications.

The center activities will enhance the international competitiveness of the
American industry in the area of composites including modular construction and
rapid deployment techniques using natural and bio-materials; thus reducing
carbon emissions into the atmosphere. The Nation as a whole would benefit as
composite and hybrid material use would, in general, lead to structures of
higher safety, shorter construction times and longer life spans at a reduced
overall cost with the creation of new job opportunities. The Center plans to
recruit graduate students from under-represented groups, including minorities
and women by reaching out to the undergraduate student population at each
university. In addition, Historically Black Colleges and Universities will be
contacted to recruit their students for center activities. The PIs also plan to
publish in various journals and conferences to promote the scientific research
and knowledge dissemination, and will utilize separate funding mechanisms to
educate practicing engineers and end users who are not familiar with composites.