* 1128242
* American Institute of Mathematics Research Conference Center: A Model for Collaborative Research
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* David Farmer, American Institute of Mathematics
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2017
* USD 12,550,200.00

The American Institute of Mathematics (AIM) Research Conference Center will
continue in its mission of promoting focused collaborative research on important
topics from all areas of the mathematical sciences. These workshops are
distinguished by their emphasis on identifying key problems in a given field and
in establishing teams of researchers to work collaboratively toward resolving
these problems. The workshop topics encompass outstanding fundamental problems
as well as important applied and interdisciplinary problems facing 21st century
mathematical scientists. In addition to conducting 20 workshops annually, AIM
will run 30 Structured Quartet Research Ensembles per year; these are groups of
four to six mathematical scientists who have an ambitious research goal and meet
for a week at a time at AIM, multiple times over a multi-year period. AIM has
committed to increasing diversity in the mathematical sciences workplace and has
put a structure in place to ensure that such diversity occurs in all of AIM's
programs. In addition, AIM holds special workshops that directly address
workforce issues and strives to ensure that the discipline has a healthy
pipeline to the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Institute of
Mathematics was founded with the goal of fostering mathematical research through
collaboration. AIM's guiding premise is that collaboration is essential to the
development of modern mathematics, where the depth and breadth of fields have
become so great that understanding the connections between various mathematical
areas is increasingly difficult, yet many of the most important and interesting
developments occur at the confluence of different research areas. AIM has
created a collaborative model for workshops that facilitates collaboration,
bridging the gap between the various subject areas and between the different
mathematical communities. This model is complemented by the Structured Quartet
Research Ensembles (SQuaREs) program, which hosts smaller groups of four to six
participants to work on ambitious projects over a three-year period. The
American Institute of Mathematics Research Conference Center will host 20 AIM-
style workshops (each with up to thirty participants) and 30 SQuaREs per year.