* 1128999
* Collaborative Research: Facility Support: Center for Transformative Environmental Monitoring Programs: Fiber-Optic Distributed Sensing
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Scott Tyler, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 538,447.00

1129003 Selker

This collaborative grant between Oregon State University (PI: Selker) and the
University of Nevada Reno (PI: Tyler; EAR-1128999), supports a three year
continuation and enhancement of national multi-user facility support for the
Center for Transformative Environmental Monitoring Programs (CTEMPs). CTEMPs was
established in 2009 with initial support through the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA; EAR-0943682). CTEMPs offers community support for
planning, training, equipment lease and field implementation using distributed
fiber optic methods including Raman backscatter Distributed Temperature Sensing
(DTS) to allow for unprecedented observation of the spatial and temporal
distribution of temperature for environmental applications including but not
limited to, snow, groundwater and watershed hydrology, aquatic and terrestrial
ecology, karst geology, soil science (including permafrost studies), atmospheric
boundary layer turbulence and glaciology. Data collected using the CTEMPs DTS
systems will be integrated into the CUAHSI Hydrologic Information System (HIS)
and CTEMPs will become a Hydrologic Measurement Facility (HMF) Node of CUAHSI.
CTEMPs plans training workshops and field deployment for up to 26 research
projects a year with this support. CTEMPs currently maintains five DTS system,
one of which is high resolution, and 27 km of fiber optic cable. High resolution
DTS systems allow for near continuous (0.25 m) and precise (+/- 0.3 deg C)
observations of river bottom, lake, or estuary bottom, snow pack, soil horizon
or atmospheric temperatures over distances as great at 8 km at high temporal
frequency (1 Hz). Temperature precision of +/ 0.01 deg C can be achieved when
observation are sampled hourly. When placed in a stream or river, fiber optic
DTS allows for observation of the location, temperature, and flux of each
groundwater inflow, calculation of an exact heat budget to determine hyporheic
exchange, and observation of micro-thermal habitats critical to successful
larval fish recruitment. DTS systems were originally developed for applications
in the oil industry and for fire detection in high rise buildings. Support for
CTEMPs will make this developing technology available to broader scientific
community for marginal instrument lease costs and applications for instrument
use will be prioritized by an advisory committee with external representation.

***