* 1128644
* Electrically Controlled Metal-Insulator Transition and Its Terahertz Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mark Holtz, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 396,001.00

Overview: We propose to investigate dramatic changes in electronic and
photonic&lt;br/&gt;properties of new functional devices based on the reversible
metal-insulator transition&lt;br/&gt;(MIT) of vanadium dioxide. The electrical
resistivity of VO2 changes by 4 to 5 orders.&lt;br/&gt;Variations in refractive
index exceed 15%, giving an index contrast of greater than 3&lt;br/&gt;relative
to free space. This unique combination of properties motivates the study of
its&lt;br/&gt;phase transition mechanisms, control of its properties, and
development of terahertz&lt;br/&gt;(THz) functional
components.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: We will explore the fundamental
physics of VO2 phase transition,&lt;br/&gt;particularly when driven electrically
in pulsed current mode or in gate electric-field mode,&lt;br/&gt;and develop new
functional devices for THz switching and modulation applications
with&lt;br/&gt;the aim of reconfigurable manipulation. Through the study of
phase transition&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms and factors to influence the transition
?speed? we will engineer the material&lt;br/&gt;structure to achieve abrupt
?digital? switching and controllable percolative phase&lt;br/&gt;transition for
?analog? modulation. The result will provide fundamental understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;electrically controlled metal-insulator transition and promote the
application of phasetransition-&lt;br/&gt;based materials for electronic and
photonic applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Study of phase transitions will
provide new opportunities to achieve&lt;br/&gt;innovative functional devices.
These devices will exhibit unprecedented operational&lt;br/&gt;principles for
electronic and photonic applications, in addition to fundamental
scientific&lt;br/&gt;understanding. The proposed components will find broad
applications in THz technology.&lt;br/&gt;The project provides excellent
opportunities for interdisciplinary research education and&lt;br/&gt;training.
Outreach efforts will attract new students, especially those
from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups, to science and engineering fields.