* 1128888
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Challenges in Central American Migrant Communities
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Peter Katzenstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 01/31/2013
* USD 8,000.00

SES-1128888 Peter Katzenstein Noelle Brigden Cornell University

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Challenges in Central American Migrant
Communities

Abstract Several academic studies have examined the dangers facing unauthorized
migrants at the borders. But the border zone represents only one segment of a
long and dangerous journey for Central American migrants, who face increasing
criminal violence along clandestine routes through Mexico. Meanwhile, internal
policing within the United States and Mexico augments border patrol. These new
immigration enforcement strategies target the arteries of the migration system
crisscrossing nation-states, not just their frontiers. Along these migratory
routes, immigration enforcement has transformed migration practices, but it has
not eradicated the informal institutions and practices that facilitate
undocumented migration.

This dissertation research analyzes how intensified policing transforms
migration practices, and how it affects migrants along the Central American
routes through Mexico to the United States. To this end, the study involves
U.S.-based ethnographic interviews, mapmaking workshops, and participant
observation with Central American migrants at various stages in their journeys.

Broader Impacts The public has shown great interest in immigration reform, both
efforts to curtail the arrival of undocumented migrants, as well as efforts to
make the process of migration more humane. The intended and unintended
consequences of border control and policing mechanisms has sparked considerable
public debate. This study seeks to inform our understanding of how to balance
the need for national security with the need to ensure social and political
stability in sending countries as well as the safety and welfare of migrants
(including limiting their exposure to violence and exploitation).