* 1128545
* Self-Powered Ultra High Vacuum Technology for Harsh Environment Wireless Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Amit Lal, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches

The objective of this research is to develop science and technology of
radioisotope powered ultra-high vacuum ion-vacuum pumps and ion-gauges, with
direct charge radioisotope power sources and wireless transmitters. The approach
is to use the electrons emitted from beta-emitting radioisotope thin films to
ionize gases, and also generate high voltages for removing gases, while
realizing power extraction from the radioisotopes using self-reciprocating
cantilever.

Intellectual Merit:

The effort will lead to building blocks of miniature UHV technology that can be
used for a host of micro and nanoscale vacuum devices. The basic processes of
beta-particle induced ion creation, secondary and primary ion/electron diffusion
within micro vacuum packages will be measured and modeled to optimize atom
removal for self-powered pumping. This active getter technology will enable the
operation of direct charge radioisotope power sources, which inherently enable
very small amounts of radioisotopes to be used to generate useful power levels.

Broader Impact:

This work will lead to power sources with integrated wireless transmission for
decades of operation where life-saving reliability is required. These
applications include long-term implants in tiny body cavities, and wireless
sensors that need to operate in very high and low temperatures such as car
engines, chemical processing centers, and mixed into concrete for structural
monitoring. By increasing the reliability of miniature power sources, many
applications will become within national and corporate budgets for making lives
safer and efficient., A graduate level course will be developed on the science
and technology of radioisotopes applied to microsystems.