* 1128677
* Nanolayered PVDF Thin Film Device for Implantable Cardiac Power Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Chris Ellison, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 379,876.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to design flexible, multilayered polymer film power generators that convert
cardiac motion into electrical power to recharge automatic implantable cardiac
defibrillators and bi-ventricular pacemakers. The approach is to engineer the
film thickness, crystalline and surface energy states, towards orders-of-
magnitude enhancement in power output. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;While longevity of average congestive heart failure patients has
increased to 15 years after implantation, batteries for the cardiac
defibrillators and pacemaker are replaced every 4-5 years. This mismatch poses
significant clinical and economic burden. Our hypothesis is that flexible,
conformable poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) films containing many nanolayers
(each 10-100 nm thick) can be embedded inside the current intra-cardiac leads to
convert cardiac mechanical motion into electrical energy by exploiting the
piezoelectricity of PVDF. The research tasks include designing a power generator
made of PVDF films, characterization and optimization of energy generation, and
determination of mechano-electrical coupling efficiencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This research paves the way
towards the creation of robust, scalable, energy-relevant nanomaterials and
implantable microsystems that capitalize upon with the extraordinary efficiency
of the hearts contraction and relaxation. The findings will enable development
of broad classes of tunable nanomaterials to tailor energy conversion
characteristics with potential applications in energy efficient biochips. This
project will be conducted at UT Austin and UT Health Science Center. Life
scientists, engineering researchers, graduate and undergraduate students at both
campuses will be trained in three key emerging areas of biomedical engineering,
including biomedical microelectromechanical systems, nanomaterials and
interventional cardiology.