* 1128818
* EAGER: Probing Deformation Mechanism Transition of Metals at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Jun Lou, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2014
* USD 208,291.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The research goal of this EAGER project is to probe one of
the most important problems on the mechanical behavior of metals at the
nanoscale, namely experimental verification of the existence of a mechanism of
plasticity involving the transition from a dislocation interaction controlled
regime to a surface dislocation nucleation dominated regime. The specific
technical objectives are to integrate recently developed in situ micro-
mechanical nanoindentation stages in both the SEM and TEM. These will be used
for systematic high-resolution quantitative investigations of the deformation of
high-quality single crystalline Au, Ag, Cu and Ni nanowires with well-controlled
dimensions. In addition to geometrical size effects, the roles of strain rate
and temperature will also be investigated.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The study of deformation mechanisms in metals has been of
paramount importance in developing the field of metallurgy. With the recent
emergence of nanotechnology and the advancement of experimental techniques,
investigating the deformation mechanism of metals at the nanoscale has become
both technologically relevant and scientifically important. The successful
implementation of the proposed work will help elucidate the important
transitions from dislocation-interaction-controlled-plasticity to surface-
dislocation-nucleation-controlled plasticity in metals. The studies carried out
at different loading rates and temperatures will provide valuable information on
kinetic aspects of metal plasticity at the nanoscale. The educational goal of
this EAGER proposal is to inspire students to pursue successful careers in
science and engineering fields. This will be done by integrating the proposed
research work with a number of educational and outreach efforts, including
creating innovative lab modules for undergraduate students at Rice, mentoring
under-representative undergraduate students and local high school teachers and
students for summer research experiences.