* 1128156
* Scientific Advances and Accomplishments of the US GLOBEC Program -  A Meeting of Experts
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Susan Roberts, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2014
* USD 178,643.00

The National Research Council will host a one-time meeting of experts of the
U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program, and others to
highlight the scientific contributions of GLOBEC and identify future research
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. GLOBEC is a component of the U.S. Global
Change Research Program. The U.S. GLOBEC program was designed to explore the
effects of global change on marine ecosystems. The research involved scientists
from multiple disciplines including oceanography, marine ecology, and fishery
science. The program interfaces with researchers in other nations through the
International GLOBEC program. Support from NSF (lead), NOAA, and NASA were
instrumental to the success of this 20-year research program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stated objective of the U.S. GLOBEC program is "to
understand how climate change and variability will translate into changes in the
structure and dynamics of marine ecosystems and in fishery production."
Recognizing both the ecological and economic importance of fisheries, the U.S.
has been moving towards incorporating ecosystem-based approaches into fisheries
management. A key component of ensuring sustainable levels of fish harvest is to
understand and anticipate the effects of climate and global change on fish
populations, as well as on their predators and prey. In response to atmospheric
warming, rising ocean water temperatures, and melting sea ice, these new climate
conditions are anticipated to affect oceanographic features such as currents,
depth of the mixed layer, and upwelling zones - all features that can affect the
productivity and localized abundance of fish populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. GLOBEC research strategy combined process and
observational studies with retrospective analysis of previously collected data
sets to develop and refine models using both physical and biological parameters.
The U.S. GLOBEC program selected study sites to represent ecosystems under
different physical regimes: retentive circulation at an offshore shoal (Georges
Bank), coastal upwelling (Oregon and Northern California); coastal downwelling,
affected by winds and freshwater inputs (Coastal Gulf of Alaska); and shelf
circulation and sea ice (the West Antarctic Peninsula region).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to scientific knowledge, U.S. GLOBEC has
established a legacy of datasets, coupled models, and practical information for
ecosystem-based management of living marine resources. Three grand synthesis
themes have been identified: Climate impacts on ecosystems, population dynamics
in an ecosystem context, and ecosystem dynamics and food webs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve bringing invited experts
together to discuss the scientific contributions of the U.S. GLOBEC program, and
identify promising avenues for future research programs. The audience will
include staff from the sponsoring agency (NSF), other agencies involved in the
U.S. GLOBEC program (predominantly NASA and NOAA), the scientific research
community, congressional staff, nongovernmental organizations, and science
journalists. The meeting will be an opportunity to synthesize and summarize
research findings and advances in understanding that for the legacy of the U.S.
GLOBEC program.