* 1128322
* Strategic Shoppers and Price Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Anil Kashyap, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2017
* USD 422,850.00

Economists have struggled with the question of whether and how to incorporate
intermittent price discounts, or ``sales'', into models of price setting and
into price index construction. Since episodic sales occur quite frequently in
some sectors, price series that ignore sale prices display infrequent price
changes, while price series that contain sales prices display very frequent
price changes. Ignoring sales, prices tend to look sticky. Including them,
prices tend to look flexible. Because of this, there is a brewing debate among
macroeconomists regarding whether to consider sales when measuring price levels
and price flexibility. These observations suggest that the measurement of
inflation, which has numerous public policy ramifications, can be sensitive to
the treatment of sales. Furthermore, the effects of monetary policy depend
importantly on the extent to which prices are flexible. Understanding how to
interpret frequent temporary sales can thus improve our knowledge of monetary
policy effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a a variant of a
standard model form industrial organization in which sales are a price
discrimination tool. The prediction of the model and the supporting empirical
evidence generated using both price and quantity data challenges the view that
sales can be ignored as the majority of transactions in some of the product
categories studied take place at sale prices. The project also demonstrates the
usefulness of a construct of the "best" price in tracking the prices that
consumers actually pay across goods in a category. The project also demonstrates
that this hypothetical "best price" facilitates construction of appropriate
price measures where quantity data is unavailable. A significant contribution of
this project is to compare the substitution patterns found in the data to those
implied by the BLS's price index construction methodology. The evidence suggests
that the BLS assumptions about consumer behavior may be incorrect for some
categories of goods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to expand the above
results in several ways. First, the project seeks to embed the microeconomic
model into a model of monetary transmission. Second, the project seeks to
empirically examine the ways in which prices - including the frequency and depth
of sales - respond to macroeconomic shocks. The project also addresses the
relationship between consumer demographics and their propensity to buy at the
"best" price, and examines how these factors change over the business cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the consolidation of the retailing sector over the
last decades and the rapid decline in IT costs suggest that retailer usage of
data-driven price discrimination schemes is likely to continue to expand. Thus,
price measurement methodologies and estimates of monetary transmission that
don't take these schemes into account are likely to become less, rather than
more, accurate in the future. The project explores several avenues for marrying
these very microeconomics-motivated retailing strategies into an understanding
of macroeconomic dynamics.