* 1128157
* Tunable Micro-Optofluidic Ring Resonator Arrays as Micro Gas Chromatograph Detectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Xudong Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop arrays of nanoparticle-coated
microfabricated opto-fluidic ring resonator sensors with unprecedented
capabilities to discriminate among different volatile organic compounds, to use
such an array as the detector in a gas chromatographic microsystem, and to
demonstrate the quantitative analysis of targeted compounds in arbitrarily
complex mixtures. The approach entails micromachining high-aspect-ratio
resonators with wave confinement contours, demonstrating enhanced vapor
discrimination by use of vapor-sorptive interface layers comprising thiolate-
monolayer-protected gold nanoparticles, and integrating arrays of such micro-
resonators into the microsystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;This research entails a new approach to vapor sensor array design,
which will lead to the first microfabricated optofluidic ring resonator
detectors made using scalable, precision microfabrication techniques. The
proposed device structures promise inherently greater vapor sensitivity. Since
vapor induced changes in refractive index will vary with the nanoparticle size,
thiolate-ligand functionality, and probing wavelength, arrays of such devices
promise response diversity inherently greater than that produced by current
sensor arrays, which will enhance vapor
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The successful
project will fill a need for small, inexpensive, turn-key instrumentation for
the determination of multiple vapors at trace levels in complex mixtures, with
direct application to the detection of disease biomarkers, explosives, and
airborne toxicants. Dissemination of project results to representatives of
technology-oriented companies and leading microsystem research centers
throughout the world will be facilitated through extant affiliations of the
investigators. This will promote the commercialization of the developed
technologies and expand the scope of training provided to the students on the
project.