* 1128383
* New Methods of Fault Simulation and Location for Smart Grids Based on Synchronized Measurements
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Hanoch Lev-Ari, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches

The objective of this research is to develop an accurate and computationally
efficient technique in order to locate and identify faults in power systems
using synchronized measurements. The approach is to capture the arrival times of
the fault-initiated traveling waves using a few synchronized sensors and
triangulating the location of the fault based on the recorded arrival times of
these waves.

Intellectual Merit

The intellectual merit of the proposal is the utilization of synchronized
voltage samples recorded by sparsely placed sensors in order to accurately
determine the location of faults in power systems. Current utilization of these
sensors is confined to synchronized phasors. This project will utilize for the
first time the point-on-wave samples which are synchronized throughout the
entire power system. This will be transformative leading to new applications
that can exploit information related to traveling waves on power lines.

Broader Impacts

This project will expand the application areas for synchronized measurements
which are rapidly being deployed in increasing numbers in smart grids. This will
have an impact on the new investments on system protection and quality of
service for all major utilities in the country. Two graduate students will be
trained in the area of electric grids, crucial to designing nation's future
energy system. Furthermore, project's results will be incorporated into the
curriculum through lab exercises. Also, students from underrepresented groups
will be targeted through the university's STEMteams, NUPrime (multi-cultural
engineering) and WIE (women in engineering) programs and supported by REU
supplements.