* 1128614
* ERC-Small Business: Virtual Coach for Home-based Neuro-robotic Therapy
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Daniel Siewiorek, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 195,600.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;1128614&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;Sieworek&lt;br/&gt; This effort is a collaboration between
the Quality of Life Technology (QoLT) Center, an NSF Engineering Research Center
(ERC) since 2006, and Myomo, a small business partner of the ERC. Myomo has been
developing and testing neuro-robotic devices in leading US hospitals. The
Quality of Life Technology (QoLT) Center has been developing a technology called
Virtual Coach to coach exercises, to encourage general physical activity, and to
ensure proper use of assistive technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the proposed collaboration is to enable therapists to provide support to their
patients in a virtual context, i.e., without actually being present, through the
use of computer-based surrogates. This Virtual Coach will complement another
promising approach, neuro-robotic therapy, that helps patients re-learn how to
move partially paralyzed (hemi-paretic) arms using their own muscle signals.
This project has two objectives. The translational research objective is to
specialize QoLT Virtual Coach technology to realize a neuro-robotic therapy
monitoring and reporting capability. Myomo will commercialize the resulting
Virtual Coach prototype, thereby broadening its product line to include valued
companion software for its new line of mPower hardware devices. The exploratory
research objective is to make the Virtual Coach more autonomous, i.e., to have
it behave more like a human therapist through functions like self-adjusting the
therapeutic regimen and responding to non-verbal cues from the patient during
exercise sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses the significant challenge in
computer-based coaching of devising algorithms that affect human behavior in an
intended way. It is difficult to predict how people will react to commands,
instructions, prompts and rewards. Some people respond well to nurturing, while
others respond better to commands. In addition a particular individual may
respond differently from day-to-day. To be a viable, pervasive solution, Virtual
Coach devices will need to tune themselves to the psychology of the people they
serve. The research also addresses the challenge of designing interactions
between humans and sophisticated technologies for users who themselves may not
be technologically inclined. This is particularly relevant for products that
would most benefit older adults, who are generally among the least versed in,
and sometimes intimidated by, computers, the Internet, smartphones, etc
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stroke occurs in 2.9%
of the US adult population and there are nearly 800,000 new or recurring cases
annually. Neuromuscular impairment is a common consequence that can be overcome
with appropriate therapy. The new product that will result form this project
will alleviate some of the need for face-to-face therapy sessions, will require
less time from qualified care providers, and potentially lower the total cost
for therapy for stroke victims.