* 1128021
* Silicon Nanowire High-Frequency Field-Effect Transistors - Novel Device Designs and Characterization Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,03/31/2015
* John Melngailis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 03/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will address the two important aspects of NW
FETs - device designs and characterization techniques, with a goal to
demonstrate the operation of SiNW FETs in the 1 ? 4 GHz range. Nanowire based HF
transistors operating in this range could have transformative impacts in the
fields of flexible/wearable/implantable electronics, medical
diagnostics/imaging, remote sensing, micro-RFID, etc. The adopted research
methodology is general enough to be relevant for different nanowire material
systems. This study for the first time would address the fundamental question ?
can we get high-speed devices using SiNWs grown by bottom-up methods? Similarly,
this study will investigate the effect of various novel NW device designs on
their HF performances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Successful
completion of this project will advance our understanding of the fundamental
high-frequency operating limits of SiNW transistors. The nature of the proposed
research is such that the knowledge gained from it can be readily incorporated
into graduate level curriculum. The PIs have planned to introduce two small
course modules: 1) Fabrication of Nanowire Transistors for the course ENEE 719A
-Advanced Topics in Microelectronics: Nanostructure Fabrication Technology and
2) Device Physics of Nanowire Transistors for the course ENEE 601 -Semiconductor
Devices &amp; Technology. These two modules will expose the students to the
latest research results in nanoscale semiconductor devices while broadly
disseminating the knowledge gained from the research.