* 1128297
* Correlate transport properties with edge structure in suspended graphene nanoribbon field effect transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Zhixian Zhou, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop a fundamental understanding of the
role of edge effects in&lt;br/&gt;the electronic and transport properties of
graphene nanoribbon field effect transistors (GNR FETs).&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This research will ascertain the significance of ideal, atomically smooth
edges for&lt;br/&gt;GNR FETs, and thus will help to establish their ultimate
intrinsic performance limit. A new approach&lt;br/&gt;will be used to carry out
combined electrical transport and scanning tunneling microscopy/
spectroscopy&lt;br/&gt;measurements in situ to understand the edge effects on
the electronic and transport properties of GNR FETs.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
devices will i) enable the identification and isolation of the effects of edges
and&lt;br/&gt;surface impurities on important device characteristics, such as
the carrier mobility and band gap; and ii)&lt;br/&gt;elucidate the correlation
between the detailed edge and electronic structures and device
characteristics&lt;br/&gt;in GNR FETs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As
the advance of GNR based nanoelectronics critically relies on the
detailed&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the edge effects, the prototype devices
developed in this project and the knowledge&lt;br/&gt;gained will help to pave
the way for the next generation of all carbon electronics. The project
tightly&lt;br/&gt;integrates research with graduate and undergraduate education
and community outreach. Graduate&lt;br/&gt;students will play a pivotal role in
this research, obtaining important training for their future
scientific&lt;br/&gt;and technical careers. A special program to enhance K-12
education in science and mathematics will be&lt;br/&gt;instituted to promote the
diversity of the future science and engineering workforce.