* 1128709
* Molding Optical Field Patterns for Highly Efficient Design of Strong-Confinement Photonic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Milos Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 06/30/2014
* USD 372,708.00

The objective of this program is to develop a family of microphotonic waveguides
and devices, based on insights in spatial mode interference, absorption and
scattering, that enable new degrees of freedom in photonic device design with
ultra-low optical loss. Low loss is achieved using a form of photonic collision
avoidance that keeps optical fields away from scatterers using controlled
interference. The program will investigate this phenomenon and employ it to
develop potentially transformative microphotonic waveguide and device
technology, including energy efficient planar waveguide crossing arrays,
modulators, and suspended light-force-actuated and thermooptic
photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research includes
the investigation of a newly discovered mode of propagation, low-loss
unidirectional Bloch waves, and the design of efficient photonic, electrooptic
and optomechanical devices based on their properties to circumvent limitations
in state-of-the-art technology. The research will produce a theoretical
framework for device design, simulation tools, and proof-of-concept experimental
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work will support
national efforts on leadership in science and technology. Proposed devices will
enable highly energy efficient optical interconnects uniquely compatible with
photonics integration directly with state-of-the-art, unmodified CMOS
electronics technology. This may contribute advances in microelectronics and
hybrid electronic-photonic technology for high-performance computing, supporting
the national interest in large-scale simulation including climate modeling,
aerodynamic design, bioengineering and drug design, and financial market
simulations. The program will expose undergraduate students to research, and
through local visits will excite high school students about engineering with
energy efficiency concepts from this research, and more broadly, including solar
vehicle racing.