* 1128883
* Oceans and Human Health: Gene-Environment Interactions in the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2013
* USD 799,998.00

The past two decades have seen a dramatic increase in economic repercussions and
public health concerns associated with toxic blooms of the diatom Pseudo-
nitzschia. These organisms can produce domoic acid (DA), a powerful neurotoxin
increasingly found in shellfish in ocean and estuary settings. Natural
communities of Pseudo-nitzschia are poorly defined and environmental factors can
simultaneously influence species composition and toxin production per cell, thus
complicating attempts to predict bloom dynamics and impacts.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a research team at the University of Washington will
determine the relation between water column characteristics and Pseudo-nitzschia
species distributions to determine the potential for human exposure. The study
area, Puget Sound, is home to at least 8 species of Pseudo-nitzschia and 13
harvested shellfish that act as potential vectors of toxin to humans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Puget Sound is also home to diverse communities of people,
including tribal nations and Asian and Pacific Islanders, who by consuming high
quantities of seafood. Using transgenic animal models, the team will employ in
vitro and in vivo assessment to identify key life-stages where greatest risks to
humans from DA exposures can occur. The types of genetic parameters considered
across the risk chain mirror one another regardless of organism: the genetics of
toxin production in diatoms will be examined with gene and protein expression
studies to identify potential biomarkers for toxin production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: An important outcome of the project will
be the training of a next generation of scientists (graduate student and
postdoctoral researchers and undergraduates) adept at understanding and shaping
the newly emerging field of "oceans and human health" that examines links
between ocean processes and human health and well-being. This unique trans-
disciplinary program brings together researchers with expertise in oceanography,
microbiology and environmental genomics to work with researchers with expertise
in public health, risk assessment, toxicology and neurobehavior.