* 1128041
* Collaborative Research:  Microbial Influences on Alexandrium Populations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2014
* USD 540,596.00

The harmful algal bloom (HAB) syndrome known as Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning
(PSP) is a significant and growing problem worldwide, with negative and
sometimes devastating economic and human health impacts. Dinoflagellates within
the genus Alexandrium are responsible for many of these PSP outbreaks. In the
northeastern US and Canada, Alexandrium blooms occur in two types of habitats --
one that is large and widespread, covering vast expanses of open coastal waters
and another that is small and localized, such as within salt ponds or kettle
holes on Cape Cod. Blooms in these latter systems exhibit strong "point source"
characteristics in which localized cyst germination inoculates the overlying
waters, leading to bloom development and eventual deposition of new cysts at
that location, and thus to recurrent, self-seeding blooms. Due to their small
geographic scale and limited connectivity with coastal populations, Cape Cod
salt ponds represent a unique natural laboratory for the investigation of many
important aspects of Alexandrium fundyense autoecology that are difficult to
study in open coastal waters, larger estuarine systems, or even in mesocosms.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and the Marine Biological Laboratory will conduct a
coordinated field and laboratory study of population and genetic dynamics of A.
fundyense in two Cape Cod salt ponds, coupled with an investigation of host-
parasite interactions, grazing losses, and bacterial associated dynamics,
examined within the context of local hydrodynamics. The project hypothesis is
that abrupt, short-term changes in Alexandrium population dynamics and structure
are associated with identifiable changes in abundance and community composition
of bacteria, parasites, and/or grazers. A comparative approach will be used to
reveal processes that are common to both sites, but that occur at different
times. Specific objectives are to: 1) Characterize Alexandrium population
abundance and structure in two isolated salt ponds, as well as the dynamics and
impacts of losses due to parasitism and grazing; 2) Generate and analyze
comparative high resolution microbial community structure data before, during,
and after Alexandrium blooms; and 3) Obtain high-resolution hydrodynamic data
within the study area and use that information to interpret microbial network
data and Alexandrium population structure in an environmental context. Having
worked together in the past as PIs in the Woods Hole Center for Ocean and Human
Health (WHCOHH), the investigators will share and synthesize data to identify
the major influences on A. fundyense populations, and use these insights to
inform an existing physical/biological model of A. fundyense bloom dynamics
within the NMS. These will also help us to refine our models of the offshore
blooms for the Gulf of Maine, for which forcing functions and loss terms are
difficult to isolate and quantify. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The
study site is a multi-user, high-value resource that includes parts of the Cape
Cod National Seashore (CACO). PSP has become a major concern to residents and
commercial shell fishermen due to the temporal and spatial increase in
harvesting closures over the last two decades. The data and analyses produced
will be of value in policy decisions about many issues in the system, including
sewage treatment, groundwater quality, aquaculture, shellfish propagation, and
harvesting closure policies. This project also lends itself to undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral training.