* 1128806
* Exploration of Multidirectional 3-D UV Lithography for Advanced Microfabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Yong-Kyu Yoon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2012
* USD 69,811.00

The objectives of this research are (1) to investigate the capability and
application of computer-controlled multidirectional three-dimensional
ultraviolet-lithography for advanced microfabrication, and (2) to establish a
predictive model for the final products from process parameters. The principal
investigator has developed an ultraviolet-lithography process incorporating a
computer-controlled dynamic stage with tilting and rotational functionalities.
The method will be utilized in precise three-dimensional microfabrication to
generate slanted, revolving, and combinational patterns up to one or two
millimeter height. Since the process employs a submicrometer wavelength light
source, its spatial resolution would be as small as one micrometer or less. The
fabrication process will be analyzed and a predictive structural model
constructed with ray tracing simulation, taking into account refraction and
diffraction effects, photochemical reaction, and the dynamic control of the
movable stage. As test vehicles, a microfluidic dispensing system and an
advanced air-lifted spiral antenna array will be demonstrated.

Successful outcome of the project will significantly impact implementation of
advanced lab-on-a-chip type systems in areas of biomedical, microfluidic, radio
frequency, microelectronic, and optical research. The inherent batch processing
capability of ultraviolet-lithography offers mass productivity and
manufacturability. Moreover, the inexpensive system and fabrication cost affords
its general laboratory usage with little budgetary constraints. On the
educational front, the developed technology will be disseminated in a graduate
laboratory course and an on-line course. The on-line educational approach is
expected to facilitate globalization in engineering education. Additionally, an
emphasis is placed on recruiting minorities and summer outreach programs for
junior students from the local area.