* 1128440
* STTR Phase II:  ERC - Small Business: Laser Vapor Deposition for Thin Film Functional Polymers and Nanocomposites and Mid-Infrared Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Hee Park, AppliFlex LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 11/30/2013
* USD 199,989.00

NSF invites funding requests from current Small Business Innovation Research and
Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) Phase II grantees to perform
collaborative research with an Engineering Research Center (ERC). The goals of
this collaborative effort are to provide a mutually beneficial research and
commercialization platform where SBIR/STTR Phase II grantees can perform
collaborative research with ERC faculty, researchers, and graduate students, to
strengthen the capacity of their firms, and/or speed the transition of ERC
advances to the marketplace.

In accordance with the NSF solicitation NSF 10-617, AppliFlex LLC has submitted
a request for additional funding. The sub-awardee identified in the supplemental
request is Princeton University. This proposal/request meets the requirements of
the solicitation NSF 10-023.

This collaboration program offers an excellent opportunity to test AppliFlex's
process in this unique mid-infrared wavelength by utilizing the capabilities and
expertise of the Engineering Research Center on Mid-InfraRed Technologies for
Health and the Environment (MIRTHE). Both AppliFlex and MIRTHE share the same
platform, mid-infrared light; AppliFlex focuses on mid-infrared laser materials
processing and MIRTHE focuses on mid-infrared laser diagnostics. Therefore, the
company and MIRTHE complement each other perfectly and together, they can
synergistically maximize transformational mid-infrared technologies.

AppliFlex LLC is a Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II company.
Vanderbilt University (Vanderbilt) is working with AppliFlex on the STTR grant.
AppliFlex is proposing to work with the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Engineering Research Center (ERC) Institute for Mid-Infrared Technologies for
Health and Environment (MIRTHE). MIRTHE is an active ERC headquartered at
Princeton University, (Princeton) with partners including the City College New
York, Johns Hopkins University, Rice, Texas A&M, and the University of Maryland
Baltimore County. AppliFlex is proposing to work with MIRTHE to develop a laser
vapor deposition (LVD) for depositing thin films and heterostructures of polymer
and functionalized nanoparticles. LVD utilizes mid-infrared laser to convert
organic materials to a gaseous plume for deposition on surfaces with minimal
photo-fragmentation. This collaboration between the small business and the
universities will speed up market entry and aid expansion into adjacent markets
for mid-infrared laser processing of materials. The research partners have
complimentary skill sets with the small business having expertise in resonant
excitation of organic and polymer materials with mid-infrared laser light, while
the core mission of MIRTHE is the resonant absorption and sensing of materials
with mid-infrared light. The innovation starts with the modeling and using
matrix assisted pulsed laser evaporation (MAPLE).

The ERC and the small business and its STTR partner will be developing
technologies that will potentially help the nation in detection of compounds
important to health and security. Additional applications are also envisioned
that will improve lives. Additionally, the research will be centered around
training for graduate students at the two partner universities furthering the
education of the workforce in science, engineering and math.