* 1128624
* Distributed Control and Coordination for Massively Integrated Multicore Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Radu Marculescu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2016
* USD 475,000.00

Continuous technology scaling allows tens or hundreds of processing cores
integrated on the same chip; this represents the multicore computing paradigm
which makes it possible to run multiple heterogeneous applications concurrently
on a single chip. In such multiprocessor systems, individual processing nodes
can communicate and coordinate via networks-on-chip (NoCs). Therefore, a major
challenge is to determine the mathematical techniques for designing and
optimizing such on-chip networks in a rigorous
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent multicore platforms (such as Intel Single
Chip Cloud Computer) benefit from the multiple voltage and frequency island
(VFI) design style with support for dynamic voltage and frequency scaling
(DVFS). In such systems, the voltage and frequency of each island can be set
independently of all other islands and adapt at run-time in response to temporal
variations in application characteristics. Spatio-temporal workload variations
result in various on-chip power and thermal gradients, which also raise major
concerns for lifetime reliability. On-chip power and thermal management has
therefore become a critical component of every step in the multicore design
flow, from physical design all the way up to micro-architecture and system-level
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting from these overarching ideas, this project
addresses the fundamental issue of designing effective and highly scalable
control algorithms for power and thermal management in VFI-based multicore
systems. Unlike much of the existing work in this area, the focus of this
research is on truly scalable system-level design methodologies that can take
advantage of the existing knobs at circuit-level (e.g., voltage, frequency) for
systems comprised of hundreds or thousands of cores. At the same time, the
proposed control techniques may be useful for regulating other on-chip shared
resources such as network bandwidth or off-chip
bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new design methodology enables the
development of a wide variety of energy-efficient multicore applications ranging
from gaming and entertainment platforms, to communication systems, data centers,
and vehicular traffic management. More broadly, the results of this project
impact significantly other research communities by improving the level of
understanding of networking concepts needed to design and control complex
systems.