* 1128950
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Bioarchaeological Analysis of Diet and Activity Patterns in the Nile Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Sarah Schrader, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 19,849.00

It is hypothesized that due to economic motivations for imperial expansion,
manual labor may have been manipulated by the Egyptian Empire in order to
increase tribute and support colonial outposts within Nubia. However, non-public
activities such as diet may have been a venue for local Nubian populations to
assert more traditional social identities. This research will examine the
dialogue between expansive social powers and peripheral zones in terms of
everyday activities. Specifically, the effects of the Egyptian Empire on local
Nubian communities during the transition from the Second Intermediate period (c.
1,650-1,550 BC) to the New Kingdom period (c. 1,550-1,069 BC) will be explored.
This was a pivotal time period in which Egypt expanded southward, conquering
traditional Nubian territories (what is now southern Egypt and northern Sudan).
However, the life and diet of native Nubians living under Egyptian domination
remain unclear. To address these questions, human skeletal remains will be
analyzed for indicators of activity and diet. Osteoarthritis, a degenerative
process that occurs within joint systems, and entheseal remodeling, skeletal
markers of tendon and ligament attachment sites, are correlated with repetitive
and physically demanding activity. These bioarchaeological techniques will be
used to discern diachronic alterations to Nubian manual labor and will elucidate
imperial demands applied to peripheral territories. Stable isotope analysis of
carbon and nitrogen will be conducted, which will inform what types of foods
Nubians were consuming during this time. A total of six archaeological sites
along the Nile River in Nubia will be examined to better conceptualize variation
within this peripheral zone. The project contributes to (1) training and
education for graduate women in science, (2) conservation of Sudanese/Nubian
cultural heritage, and (3) international research collaboration. Many
archaeological sites throughout Nubia are threatened by urban and agricultural
expansion, and immediate documentation of this material is important for the
prehistoric preservation of the region.

