* 1128381
* GPU-based matrix condensation with sparse matrix techniques for power system simulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Fangxing Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2015
* USD 263,254.00

GPU-based matrix condensation with sparse matrix techniques for power system
simulation

The objective of this research is to efficiently solve a fundamental linear
algebraic problem, Ax=b, using graphics processing unit (GPU) in combination
with matrix condensation (MC) and sparse matrix techniques for fundamental power
system analyses. The approach is based on the GPU architecture with the MC
method, which has a potential to achieve dimensionally higher performance
speedup than the conventional LU factorization method on the GPU architecture,
although MC is slower than LU factorization in sequential computing. Further,
sparse matrix techniques such as bus re-ordering will be explored in this
project and applied to power system simulation. The intellectual merit includes:
investigation of the GPU-based MC algorithm to solve a linear system Ax=b; re-
ordering techniques based on GPU and MC to address sparse matrices; combination
of GPU, MC and sparsity techniques to give a new solution to power system
simulation problems such as power flow, optimal power flow, and stability
analysis. The broader impacts may penetrate into numerous research communities
since the solution to Ax=b can be essential to almost every engineering and
science discipline. Also, the sparsity techniques combined with the GPU-based MC
algorithm can lead to practical applications for power system simulation with
significant speedup, such that faster-than-real-time simulation may be easily
achieved for post-fault real-time analysis. Thus, it can be highly possible to
develop real-time corrective controls with precision, and power systems can be
operated closer to security margins. This will provide significant technology
advancement towards a smarter power grid.