* 1128877
* Early Career: Acquisition of an Isotopic Liquid-Water Analyzer for Hydrology and Earth Science Research and Education at Syracuse University
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Gregory Hoke, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 88,098.00

Proposal Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Liquid water isotope analyzers are portable user-
friendly instruments that rely on near-infrared adsorption spectroscopy to
determine the isotopic composition of water samples. This technology is
commercially available and recent advances have made the instruments an
alternative to traditional stable isotope ratio mass spectrometers. The
instrument requires only a small sample volume, limited sample pre-processing,
and allows for rapid analyses with high precision, therefore opening the door
for a variety of research projects that require water isotope analyses. This
grant supports three early career scientists that specialize in the fields of
hydrology, tectonic geomorphology and aqueous geochemisty. The research that
will be supported by this instrument includes characterization of water isotopes
to investigate the sources of rainfall and soil water; the characterization of
how water's isotopic composition evolves as it moves through the hydrosphere and
is eventually incorporated into the rock record; the analyses of pore water in
marine sediments to track glacial melting events in Antarctica fjords; and the
use of water in ikaite minerals to reconstruct the composition of seawater on
thousand-year time intervals. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Water (H2O) can be
characterized by analyzing the isotopes of both H and O. The isotopic
composition of these two elements contains vast information on the sources of
the water and the nature of the climatic processes that have affected the water.
For instance, oxygen and hydrogen isotopes are used to determine how much
rainwater originated from ocean evaporation and how far the water has traveled
from the ocean to where it fell on the ground and feeds streams or groundwaters.
The instrument funded though this grant will allow early career researchers to
rapidly, precisely and economically analyze the water isotope composition of
samples collected from streams, groundwaters, and the ocean. Research projects
that will be facilitated by acquisition of this instrument include determining
the sources of ground waters, soil water and stream water, learning how the
isotopic composition of water is preserved in the rock record, characterizing
the water contribution to the Antarctic ocean from melting of glaciers, and
determining the composition of ancient sea water through analyses of water
trapped in minerals. These applications have implications for the Earth?s water
cycle, evolution of the Earth's topography, as well as the effects of climatic
change on the ocean water composition.