* 1128868
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rescaling Uneven Development: Examining Peri-Urban Landscape Change in Limpopo, South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Brent McCusker, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2012
* USD 11,969.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine peri-urban spaces,
which are spaces at the interface of urban and rural social, economic, and
biophysical processes, as an outcome of post-apartheid spatial planning, neo-
liberal economic policies, and uneven development in South Africa. Seeking to
gain insight into how government policies and programs affect livelihoods and
landscape patterns, this project will develop an uneven development framework to
decipher how post-apartheid spaces have been restructured to produce current
patterns of peri-urban areas within a capitalist economic system. The research
objective is to track and explain the physical and social changes in rapidly
peri-urbanizing areas of Limpopo, South Africa, an area that experienced acute
uneven development under racial capitalism and abrupt peri-urbanization under
neo-liberal capitalism. The research will examine areas around Polokwane,
Limpopo, through a combination of research methods including remotely sensing
land-cover change combined with GIS techniques, qualitative ethnographic
interviews, and historical archival research. Land-cover change detection will
be conducted using a supervised classification technique, through support vector
machines. Combining these concrete observed changes in the landscape with
qualitative ethnographic research based upon location will enhance comprehensive
understanding of the changes ongoing in post-apartheid spaces. Archival data
will be used to construct the historical uses of apartheid space, development
initiatives, and policies to provide a base for understanding current changes.
The expected outcomes of this research project are an evaluation of the attempts
to redress the inequalities of post-apartheid spaces and maps of peri-urban
expansion as well as detailed shifts in both race- and class-biased relocation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the literature on
manifestations of uneven development and provide a new approach to understanding
post-apartheid spaces. Research illustrating the uneven development of post-
apartheid spaces has yet to be incorporated into the geographical body of
knowledge. Similarly, the project will address the inequalities that continue to
persist in certain places of South Africa while providing a broader framework
for understanding how and why such places endure. This also will seek to advance
newer classification approaches, such as support vector machines, and contribute
to the body of knowledge of their strengths and shortcomings. Furthermore, this
project will help foster the growing relationship between geospatial
technologies as a physical manifestation of social processes. The project has
the potential to affect spatial planning policy in South Africa and other
developing countries, as well as to contribute to the evaluation of the policies
and programs initiated by the South African government. It will illustrate how
policy decisions have rescaled uneven development instead of eliminating it and
reveal how residents and communities are restructuring their livelihoods as a
result. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.