* 1128103
* COLLABORATIVE: EAGER: Seismic Survey of Lake Junin, Peru in Preparation for Deep Drilling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Donald Rodbell, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 61,868.00

This grant will generate critical site survey information for planned deep
drilling of Lake Junin (Peru). The team will carry out an airgun seismic survey
of Lake Junin in order to estimate the sediment thickness, and to provide the
spatial resolution needed for selection of the best deep drilling sites. The
work would be completed in a short (~two week) field season, with results made
available for an International Continental Drilling Program (ICDP) drilling
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;Lake Junin contains a sediment record that likely spans
multiple glacial cycles?perhaps covering many hundreds of thousands of years,
and it contains carbonates that can provide isotopic records of lake hydrology
and regional climate with sub-decadal resolution. Numerous faculty and students
spanning four decades have contributed to an extensive database on the lake and
its watershed. However, Lake Junin has never been cored in its most deep
sedimented areas, and has never been cored with a mechanical corer capable of
penetrating the thick sedimentary sequences that lie under the center of the
lake.&lt;br/&gt;The Scientific Advisory Group of the ICDP has agreed that Lake
Junin is indeed worthy of a deep drilling effort, and has funded up to US
$40,000 for an in-country workshop to develop a science team for a deep drilling
project. This workshop, which will be held in Peru, will bring together about
two dozen scientists from the U.S., Canada, Germany and other ICDP countries.
Although the Scientific Advisory Group of ICDP has expressed their enthusiasm
for potential deep drilling of Lake Junin, they have also noted that improved
seismic imaging of the Lake Junin basin is a prerequisite for ICDP drilling
approval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected results include a more complete
understanding of the thickness and distribution of lacustrine sediment and
intercalated glaciogenic sediment in the Junin basin, which will provide
essential guidance for selection of appropriate coring equipment and drilling
sites, and will enable estimates to be made of the length of sediment core that
will need to be processed for any future deep drilling project.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed work is grounded in the fact that an improved
seismic survey of Lake Junin is a prerequisite for deep drilling, which, in
turn, will yield sediment cores that can address several fundamental issues
regarding tropical climate change during the late Quaternary. These include: 1)
the degree of synchrony between the last several glacial cycles in the tropics
and those in higher latitude regions of both hemispheres, 2) the degree of
hydroclimatic stability that prevailed during interglacial and interstadial
intervals, 3) the long-term evolution of ENSO during interglacial intervals, and
4) the relative roles of temperature and precipitation in governing glacier mass
balances in the tropical Andes over multiple glacial, deglacial, and
interglacial intervals.&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of the proposed
research will depend on the successful development of a deep drilling project on
Lake Junin. Such a project would provide an ideal platform for training numerous
undergraduate and graduate students, and for promoting climate change research
by our Peruvian colleagues.