* 1128049
* Microwave imaging of dynamic dielectric environments: Application to breast cancer detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Susan Hagness, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 08/31/2015
* USD 359,990.00

The objective of this research is to develop and evaluate 3-D quantitative
microwave inverse scattering algorithms for dynamic dielectric environments,
such as occur with use of a contrast agent in breast cancer screening, hormonal
agents in cancer prevention, or various therapies in cancer treatment. The
approach is to combine scattered field data from multiple scans over time of a
dielectric environment into a single imaging problem through the use of spatial
and temporal basis functions. Sparsity-inducing regularizers are applied to the
basis coefficients to obtain high-resolution images of the changes in dielectric
properties. The algorithms are validated using computational studies with 3-D
MRI-derived numerical phantoms having a high level of anatomical realism and
experimental studies with heterogeneous anthropomorphic physical phantoms.

Intellectual Merit: Innovative microwave inverse scattering algorithms are
developed that exploit prior knowledge of the dynamic dielectric environment to
overcome the limitations of the single-scan inverse scattering problem.
Demonstration of these novel imaging algorithms using numerical and experimental
testbeds provides evidence of their effectiveness.

Broader Impacts: This project has a positive impact on the health of women
worldwide through development of improved breast imaging methods. The algorithms
are also applicable to nondestructive evaluation. Engineering-grand-challenges
case studies on breast cancer detection are developed for middle school and
first-year undergraduate students. The project's emphasis on women's health is
leveraged to recruit female students. Institutional programs are employed to
involve minorities and undergraduates in the project. All students involved in
the project receive interdisciplinary training at the interface of signal
processing, electromagnetics, and medicine.