* 1128821
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Nutritional ecology of Mexican black howler monkeys: The role of nutrient mixing, plant secondary metabolites, and behavioral flexibility
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Paul Garber, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 01/31/2013
* USD 11,749.00

Many primate species exploit low quality and difficult to process resources
year-round or as fallback foods during food-limited times of the year. In
addition to anatomical specializations, primates have developed behavioral and
cognitive solutions that serve to increase foraging efficiency or reduce
energetic requirements when exploiting low quality foods. Optimal Foraging
Theory has been used to explain foraging behavior in primates, and predicts that
individual food choice is best described in terms of maximization of energy
intake. However, according to recent nutritional ecology models, a nutrient
mixing framework may provide a stronger explanation of primate foraging
strategies. This study examines the nutritional ecology of Alouatta pigra, an
endangered primate that feeds on low quality resources and yet is characterized
by rapid growth rates and a high reproductive output compared to closely related
species. Specifically, by integrating nutritional, energetic, ecological, and
behavioral data, this research investigates how factors such as food and patch
choice, food intake rates, the nutritional composition of plant resources,
seasonal changes in food availability, the nutritional requirements of
reproduction, and within-group feeding competition affect male and female
foraging strategies in two neighboring groups of black howler monkeys living in
Southern Mexico. The explanatory power of three models will be tested using a
Geometric Framework for nutrition. This will be accomplished by detailed
behavioral observations of marked individuals; vegetation assessments and
determination of food availability in the groups' home ranges; and phytochemical
analyses of foods collected from feeding trees.

While there are data on howler monkey feeding ecology, the precise nutritional
factors affecting male and female food choices are poorly understood. By
constructing complete dietary profiles for each focal animal, and analyzing
individual foraging decisions using a nutritionally explicit model, this
research provides critical insight into the importance of nutrient balancing in
assessing primate food choice and decision-making. The project also will provide
valuable nutritional information for the management of captive primates,
strengthen partnerships between Mexican and US universities, and offer training
opportunities for Mexican undergraduates, including female students in science.