* 1128586
* GOALI:  Developing Uncooled Microbolometer Arrays Based on Thin Films of Hole Doped Rare Earth Perovskite Manganite Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Rajeswari Kolagani, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The proposed work is a collaborative effort between Towson University and the
industrial partner Triton Services Inc. towards developing uncooled
microbolometer arrays based on thin films of hole-doped rare earth perovskite
manganite materials. Epitaxial manganite thin films will be developed on
Silicon, employing lattice engineering schemes, and the properties of these
films will be optimized for bolometer operation at or close to room temperature.
Single test bolometers and microbolometer arrays will be fabricated and device
performance will be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Manganite
materials hold potential for superior performance in terms of sensitivity,
stability and robustness compared to other bolometer materials currently
employed for uncooled IR imaging. Successful demonstration and evaluation of
manganite microbolometer arrays will lead to the assimilation of this technology
by the IR imaging industry. The proposed effort will generate a knowledge base
related to materials manipulation, silicon-integration and device fabrication,
which will be useful for other technological applications of the manganites. The
materials physics involved in the hetero-epitaxial lattice engineering will
contribute to the understanding of oxide hetero-structures and
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: the proposed effort will enhance the
educational experience of the students at Towson University through the
industry-university interaction. Graduate students of the recently started
professional science masters program will be involved in the proposed work. The
industry-university collaboration and student involvement in applied research
will serve as a model for other professional science masters programs. Content
related to the proposed project will also be incorporated in K-12 STEM outreach
activities at Towson University.