* 1128799
* GeoSoilEnviroCARS: A National Resource for Earth, Planetary, Soil and Environmental Science Research at the APS
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,01/31/2018
* Mark Rivers, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2018
* USD 13,400,271.00

This award will provide operational support for GeoSoilEnviroCARS (GSECARS), a
national multi-user facility for frontier research in the earth sciences using
synchrotron radiation at the Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National
Laboratory. GSECARS provides earth scientists with access to the high-brilliance
hard x-rays from this third-generation synchrotron light source. All principal
synchrotron-based analytical techniques in demand by earth scientists are being
brought to bear on earth science problems: (1) high-pressure/high-temperature
crystallography and spectroscopy using the diamond anvil cell; (2) high-
pressure/high-temperature crystallography and imaging using the large-volume
press; (3) powder, single crystal and interface diffraction; (4) inelastic x-ray
scattering; (5) x-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy; (6) x-ray
fluorescence microprobe analysis; and (7) microtomography. Research at GSECARS
has resulted in over 800 publications in the APS database (360 since 2006),
including PhD and Masters theses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research conducted
at GSECARS will continue to advance our knowledge of the composition, structure
and properties of earth materials, the processes that produce them and the
processes they control. The unique capabilities of the APS and GSECARS will
continue to allow groundbreaking experiments to be conducted in research areas
relevant to the NSF-Earth Sciences program including (1) high pressure mineral
physics and chemistry, (2) non-crystalline and nano-crystalline materials at
high pressure, (3) igneous petrology, (4) hydrothermal fluid chemistry, (5)
mineral-water interface reactions, (6) biogeochemistry, (7) flow dynamics of
fluids and solids, and (8) cosmochemical studies of extraterrestrial materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research enabled by the GSECARS facility has broad
impacts for society because it addresses quality-of-life issues such as carbon
sequestration, environmental remediation, properties of nano-materials, and
earthquake generation. The primary mission of GSECARS is to continue to provide
a research environment where users receive expert assistance in planning and
conducting experiments and in analyzing data. This collaborative mode of
operation, which allows the facility to be accessible to students and
synchrotron radiation novices, relies on our staff of highly qualified beamline
scientists and technical personnel. GSECARS develops advanced hardware and
software that benefits many accelerator facilities worldwide. GSECARS is the
world's foremost synchrotron-based facility dedicated to serving the needs of
the earth sciences community.