* 1128083
* RAPID: Detectability of Changes in the Walker Circulation in Response to Global Warming
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2011,01/31/2012
* Pedro Di Nezio, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2012
* USD 29,951.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Walker circulation is an
east-west overturning circulation that spans the equatorial Pacific Ocean,
associated with low sea level pressure (SLP) over the western Pacific and the
Maritime Continent and higher SLP in the eastern equatorial Pacific. Variability
of the strength of the Walker cell is a dominant form of climate variability in
the tropics, associated with large-scale fluctuations in rainfall and other
climatic variables, and secular change in the Walker cell forced by global
warming would likely have the same consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work
performed here examines the response of the Walker circulation to global warming
in 20th century climate simulations performed for the AR5, and compares model
simulations with available observations. Previous work has shown that model
simulations are generally consistent with the observed small reduction of the
east-west sea level pressure (SLP) gradient across the equatorial pacific over
the 20th century, which indicates a slight weakening of the Walker circulation.
But several issues remain to be addressed: 1) the weakening of the Walker
circulation depends on the sensitivity of global mean precipitation to warming,
for which there is no agreement between climate models and observations over the
recent past; 2) it is not clear whether the signature of the observed warming is
El Nino-like or La Nina-like, which has implications for the east-west
equatorial SLP trend; 3) it is possible that the observed changes in the SLP
gradient are a spurious trend associated with the strong low frequency
variability of the Pacific basin. To address these issues, the PI would conduct
a model-observation comparison of linear trends in the following variables
during the 20th century: the east-west SLP gradient, tropical-mean
precipitation, tropical-mean water vapor content, the east-west sea surface
temperature gradient, the tilt of the thermocline, and the thermal
stratification of the equatorial Pacific Ocean. Where possible, multiple
simulations from the same model would be used to assess the potential
contribution of natural variability to the 20th-century
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project lies in its
support of the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide information on climate
change and its consequences to decision makers worldwide. Walker cell
variability plays a dominant role in the variability of tropical climate,
affecting the distribution of rainfall and other climatic variables over heavily
populated and climatically sensitive regions worldwide. Changes in the Walker
cell due to global warming would likely have the same effects. Research
conducted here regarding the extent to which the observed changes in the Walker
cell constitute natural variability or warming-induced change, and the extent to
which climate model simulations can accurately portray the fundamental
mechanisms producing the changes, could thus have important implications for
decision makers concerned with the implications of tropical climate change.