* 1128548
* ERC - Small Business: Commercialization of Furanic-Based Biorenewable Chemicals
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Peter Keeling, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;1128548&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;Shanks&lt;br/&gt;Research and development at the NSF
Engineering Research Center for Biorenewable Chemicals (CBiRC) has identified a
method for the selective dehydration of glucose and starch to produce furan
derivatives such as 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF). HMF is a potentially valuable
platform chemical that cannot be made cost effectively. This new process
provides a cost-effective way of making HMF, opening the way to other valuable
chemical intermediates that could replace key petroleum-based building blocks
used in production of plastics, fine chemicals, diesel fuel and fuel additives.
This new glucan-based method is more commercially viable than those previously
developed because it uses glucose or starch to yield a high concentration of
HMF. CBiRC is collaborating in this effort with a small business partner,
GlucanBio, which has a licensing agreement with the University of Wisconsin, and
the Grow Iowa Values Fund, which has provided some initial start-up funding.
This effort will modify the initial research at the University of Wisconsin to
provide a different precursor chemical feedstock. Combining these two has the
potential to create chemicals that have great commercial
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this project is to explore the technical issues surrounding the processing
conditions for HMF production. This will permit a techno-commercial feasibility
study of scale-up production of HMF from glucose and starch. Key deliverables
will be a full commercialization analysis of HMF from biomass. This will be used
to support the development of a more complete business plan and
commercialization proposal for HMF production. Specific objectives are: (i)
Comparison of glucose and starch versus fructose catalysis with solvent
extraction per Dumesic methods, (ii) Kinetics understood and optimized for the
conversion of glucose to HMF in a batch reactor system, (iii) Kinetics
understood and optimized for the conversion of glucose to HMF in a flow reactor
system, (iv) Demonstration of a solid acid catalyst for the conversion of
monosaccharides and oligosaccharides to HMF, (v) Evaluation of techno-commercial
potential by estimating costs of production in optimized system, and (vi) Build
the business case for a $10m investment in a pilot
plant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
trains graduate and undergraduate students in targeted research affiliated with
a startup entity. The effort will identify a path to a cost-effective production
of HMF, which has massive potential to create a bio-based resource for resins,
fuels, fuel additives, polymers, alkanes and solvents. Thus the project is
primarily focused on addressing HMF production from glucose, starch and
cellulose as the cheapest bio-based source. Based on a techno-commercial
analysis of HMF production from fructose, HMF can be produced from glucose or
starch at a minimum selling price of $3-4 per gallon. Further cost improvements
are likely through other process improvements. Building upon this least-cost
source of biomass using a known catalytic process means that a low-cost-of-
production HMF can then be used to directly create an interesting array of
molecules from the parent species. Thus it becomes possible to conceive of a
commercially viable path to an array of valuable bio-based products.