* 1128849
* Sponsoring Early Career Researchers for Penrose Conference: Deformation Localization in Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Dyanna Czeck, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2012
* USD 26,306.00

This proposal provides support for early-career scientists from USA to
participate in the international field conference "Deformation Localization in
Rocks: new advances," to take place in Cap de Creus, Spain, in June-July 2011.
The meeting, sponsored by the Geological Society of America as a Penrose Field
Conference, features new theoretical, analytical, geospatial, and visualization
methods developed for study of shear zones, examined with the natural world
context of the diverse exemplary structures that exist in the superb three-
dimensional exposures of Cap de Creus. The study of shear zones is important
because these features accommodate deep deformation in the earth's lithosphere
caused by tectonic plate interactions. Without a thorough understanding of the
dynamics of these specific features, we cannot begin to predict the dynamics of
the earth's lithosphere during tectonic plate interactions, which are
responsible for major earth phenomena like faulting and earthquakes. This
conference represents a singular opportunity for early-career investigators from
the United States to present their own research results within a small
international gathering, to interact with international and U.S. scientists who
are conducting innovative research on shear zones, and to participate in
conversations about future research directions that are grounded in the
observation of diverse shear zone structures in the natural setting at Cap de
Creus. The objective of our proposal is to provide eight young investigators
with: exposure to cutting edge intellectual approaches; practical skills and
analytical tools; professional mentors; and an international peer network
focused on shear zones research. The experience will enhance the researchers'
ability to be competitive for scientific grants and to establish new research
programs in USA.