* 1128768
* CCSS:Collaborative Research: Stochastic Modeling and Optimization for Cognitive Radio Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Pan Li, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 160,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop network protocols and
optimization&lt;br/&gt;techniques to efficiently utilize the spectrum white
spaces for cognitive radio networks.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach is based on
a novel cognitive radio network (CRN) network&lt;br/&gt;architecture under which
effective design methodologies can be developed to take
better&lt;br/&gt;advantage of cognitive radio technologies in harvesting and
managing unutilized&lt;br/&gt;spectrum for better service
provisioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will first study the proposed CRN
architecture to enable collective spectrum&lt;br/&gt;sensing and let the
secondary service provider manage the harvested spectrum for
better&lt;br/&gt;spectral efficiency while shifting the design complexity from
the user side to the system&lt;br/&gt;side. They will then investigate how to
split traffic over harvested spectral bands to&lt;br/&gt;balance the risk and
reward, how to optimally utilize the spectral resource by
jointly&lt;br/&gt;designing frequency allocation and routing while supporting
traffic demands, and how to&lt;br/&gt;maximize the throughput by joint link
scheduling and routing. The proposed research&lt;br/&gt;outcome will lay the
solid foundation for practical implementation of CRNs, which could
&lt;br/&gt;potentially revolutionizes the way how cognitive radios should be
more effectively used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research outcome will
significantly advance the state of the art in CRNs, opening a&lt;br/&gt;new
avenue to designing smart living environments for public safety, disaster
rescue,&lt;br/&gt;mobile healthcare and online social networks to improve
peoples quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;Research findings will be disseminated
through publications and talks, and in classroom&lt;br/&gt;teaching. This
project will also actively recruit and train minority students for
future&lt;br/&gt;workforce and mentor junior faculty.