* 1128420
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Civil Society and Environmental Governance in Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Leah VanWey, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 8,000.00

SES - 1128420 Leah VanWey (PI) Peter Klein (co-PI) Brown University

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Civil Society and Environmental Governance in
Brazil

Abstract This project investigates how small cities balance global environmental
concerns with local needs for economic growth. It seeks to answer three main
questions: 1) What are the differences in the ways federal governments and local
governments talk about environmental problems and sustainable development
solutions? 2) How are programs developed by international non-governmental
organizations that seek to foster sustainable development adopted or transformed
at the local level? 3) What role does participatory democracy on environmental
issues play in shaping the success of such sustainable development programs?

The Brazilian Amazon is one of the most critical places to examine this issue
due to the adverse impacts deforestation can have on climate change as well as
the subsequent consequences of global warming on the rich biodiversity of the
area. Thus, this project investigates timely and politically sensitive issue in
an empirically useful location. The study employs an explicitly comparative
approach and involves ethnographic fieldwork in a mid-size city in the Brazilian
Amazon, as well as in Brasilia, the capital of Brazil.

Broader Impacts Addressing global environmental degradation as well as economic
development needs simultaneously has emerged as perhaps the most pressing
challenge for the 21st century. Research on the local implementation of
transnational sustainable development initiatives can inform policy makers and
may provide insights useful to local, state, and transnational entities
interested in developing effective and efficient policies. In addition, the
international fieldwork component will help enhance collaboration between
academic institutions across national and disciplinary boundaries.