* 1128798
* GSE/DIF Crafting Successful Living-Learning Programs for Women in STEM: Building Blocks for the Future
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Karen Inkelas, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 04/30/2013
* USD 82,991.00

Intellectual Merit: The primary goal of this project is to promote the success
of undergraduate women in STEM by making available ready-to-implement findings
and recommendations from The National Study of Living Learning Programs (NSLLP)
(HRD-GSE 0521762) to directors of living-learning (L/L) programs catering to
women in STEM fields. Specifically, the findings and recommendations to be
publicized focus on the L/L environments and practices that facilitate the
success of undergraduate women in STEM in relation to their transition to
college; academic, professional, and overall self-confidence; perceived
intellectual growth; sense of belonging; retention in STEM majors; and
educational and career plans after college graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This diffusion effort has two components: a) the
development of an interactive practice-oriented manual detailing successful L/L
programming for women in STEM, distributed to directors of L/L programs that
cater directly to women in STEM majors either through a women-only format (e.g.,
WIMSE programs) or through a co-educational STEM-based format, and b) a workshop
for 50 L/L program directors taking place in conjunction with the 2009 Living-
Learning Programs Conference. Through the practice-oriented manual and
accompanying workshop, the project aims to provide L/L faculty and staff with
recommendations based on findings from the NSLLP for creating, implementing, and
continuously improving L/L practice. By introducing the workshop participants to
one another, this diffusion effort will also leave a legacy of quality
improvement by creating a network of women in STEM allies in L/L.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed manual and workshop
publicizing the findings of the NSLLP have the power to transform the
undergraduate educational experience of women in STEM. This diffusion project
thus represents the optimal marriage of the communication of rigorous research
results with a high-impact, cost-efficient intervention and outreach for
increasing gender equity for women in STEM. Importantly, the twin projects of
the practice-oriented manual and workshop have the potential to reach a broad
audience--perhaps the entire population of WISE L/L directors--and create a
network of professionals whose legacy will be the improvement of the
undergraduate experience for women in STEM.