* 1128726
* SBIR Phase II:  ERC-Small Business: Long-Range Wireless Smart Sensor Labels
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Navid Yazdi, Evigia Systems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 199,943.00

SBIR/STTR ERC Collaborative Proposal: #1128726

SBIR PI: Navid Yazdi (Evigia Systems, Inc); Phase II Proposal #0956908; SBIR PD:
Murali Nair

ERC: Wireless Integrated Microsystems (WIMS) Engineering Research Center;
University of Michigan; Yogesh Gianchandani, Director

NSF invites funding requests from current Small Business Innovation Research and
Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) Phase II grantees to perform
collaborative research with an Engineering Research Center (ERC). The goals of
this collaborative effort are to provide a mutually beneficial research and
commercialization platform where SBIR/STTR Phase II grantees can perform
collaborative research with ERC faculty, researchers, and graduate students, to
strengthen the capacity of their firms, and/or speed the transition of ERC
advances to the marketplace.

In accordance with the NSF solicitation NSF 10-617, Evigia Systems, Inc has
submitted a request for additional funding. The sub-awardee identified in the
funding request is the University of Michigan. This proposal meets the
requirements of the solicitation NSF 10-617.

In attempting to use record environmental changes by scavenging the energy
associated with such changes, the proposed collaborative work explores important
fundamental concepts for microsystems. The project brings together the long-
range ultra-low energy wireless circuits developed at the University of Michigan
Engineering Research Center for Wireless Integrated Microsystems (WIMS) with
Evigia's batteryless sensor labels with embedded non-volatile memory. The
development of such Microsystems is synergistic with research now being pursued
in WIMS. The ultra-low power wireless circuit technologies developed at ERC if
not combined with low-power sensing and electronics will not provide the wide
advantage over competing technologies. The ultra-low power batteryless sensing,
digital memory and electronics technologies developed by Evigia will meet the
initial demands of the market as these circuit blocks dominate the power
consumption in batteryless operation, yet cannot hold the market position over
time without maintaining a longer-range operation over competing technologies
and solutions that will be introduced over time.

Long range unpowered wireless sensors have clear and compelling uses. There is
an identified market and need, from object tracking to environmental and
infrastructure monitoring. The proposal to store the small amount of energy
needed to run the chip for a short while on a MEMS isolated on-chip capacitor
is, if not entirely novel, a good design choice. The suggestion of using a
Walton voltage multiplier to gather energy from even weak RF radiation fields
over time is an excellent reuse of an existent concept in a novel application.
This proposal rests solidly on developed engineering.

The proposal has the potential to give consumers and industrial users an
improved sensor. This sensor can store and report the health of the product,
thereby reducing waste and improving the logistics of the delivery system.
Students and faculty members will gain valuable experience by interaction with
an SBIR company. Students will gain important experience from using actual
industrial processes that will make them able to contribute to a multi-
discipline team as soon as they graduate.