* 1128597
* Hybrid organic-inorganic metal-semiconductor nanoparticles for highly efficient solar cell concentrators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Leuenberger, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 320,191.00

Research Objectives and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to investigate theoretically the down-conversion of light in hybrid organic-
inorganic metal-semiconductor nanoparticles, containing organic chromophores
attached to semiconductor nanocrystals with metallic structures. The approach is
to use time-dependent density-functional theory and finite-difference time
domain techniques, with main purpose to identify, engineer, and model highly
efficient luminescent solar cell concentrators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to
understand thoroughly the physical mechanism of the down-conversion process in
hybrid nanoparticles, which is essential for the optimal solar energy
concentration. The reason for including metallic structures is to make use of
the giant local electric field enhancement through plasmonic resonances of
metallic nanostructures to increase the down conversion rate and therefore also
the solar power gain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activity will provide outreach programs through all educational levels,
ranging from K-12 to undergraduate and graduate programs. For example, outreach
to K-12 will be accomplished through regular participation at the Orlando
Science Center. Being diverse will be a priority effort through encouraging
women and underrepresented minority groups to participate in the proposed
research and education programs.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research
activity is to at least triple the concentration efficiency of existing
luminescent solar energy concentrators, thereby reducing the costs of
photovoltaic cells significantly, which will encourage many more people to
install photovoltaic systems in their own homes, making US less dependent on
foreign oil and at the same time supporting the environment and nature through a
clean energy source.