* 1128158
* Graphene-based Sensing Platform for Chemicals and Microorganisms in Water
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2014
* USD 216,000.00

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Center for Water Equipment and
Policy (WEP) located at THE University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Funding Requests
for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF
10-601. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of
industry-defined fundamental research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to explore a novel, generic, and low-cost, and reliable grapheme based sensing
platform to detect various chemicals (e.g., nitrate, lead) and microorganisms
(e.g., E. coli) in water. The platform is based on hybrid structures of
thermally-reduced graphene oxide (TRGO) decorated with probe-functionalized gold
nanoparticles (Au NPs). The electrical detection of target agents that bind to
probes is accomplished by measuring changes in electrical characteristics of the
device. The proposed project will be carried out through close collaboration
between UWM and WEP members (Badger Meter, A. O. Smith, and Pentair). The UWM
team will be responsible for laboratory development and understanding of the
novel graphene-based water sensing platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
results will lead to inexpensive, ultrasensitive, rapid, and specific sensors
for detecting aqueous chemicals and microorganisms and provide additional
technological benefits to WEP members. The new water sensor will enable water
quality monitoring not only at the water distribution center but also along
water distribution lines and at the point of use. The proposed research will be
extensively integrated into educational goals to promote interdisciplinary
engineering education to attract more underrepresented students and to broadly
disseminate findings. Special efforts to inspire underrepresented pre-college
students include taking nanosensor technology into high school classrooms
through collaboration with Lakeview Technology Academy, offering "Science
Saturdays on Water Sensing Technology", and mentoring students on science
projects. Additional outreach through posting the course module on a high-
impact, NSF-sponsored National Center for Learning and Teaching Web site, a
nanosensor technology exhibit in conjunction with the Milwaukee discovery World
Museum, and regional science fairs, will effectively disseminate nanosensor
technology to a wide range of audiences.