* 1128861
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Macro- and Microanatomy of Primate Volar Surfaces
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Susan Larson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 17,385.00

The goal of this research is to examine the variation in morphology of the soft
tissue surfaces of the hands of prosimian primates. These morphologies will be
compared with locomotion, diets, body size, etc. in these animals to understand
relationships between finger composition and adaptations. The histological data
collected as part of this study will be made freely available to other
researchers. Since many of the subject primate species are endangered in the
wild, creating a comprehensive database of primate skin samples that
investigators may access, add to, and utilize as part of their own research will
reduce the need for further sampling of this limited resource. This research
also promotes training and education of the co-principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The soft tissue surfaces of a primate's hands
and feet are its primary interface with the environment during both locomotion
and tactile exploration. As such, the variation observed in the morphology of
these volar surfaces in different primates likely reflects functional variation
in the nature of this interaction. In particular, the fat pads within volar
surfaces are thought to assist in attenuating reaction forces generated during
locomotion, and to act as a viscoelastic structures increasing the coefficient
of friction between the pads and substrate. In addition, since the density and
arrangement of tactile sensory receptors within volar skin can be related to
over-all tactile sensitivity, it has been suggested that variation in these
characteristics can be related to differences in diet and substrate preferences.
Nonetheless, despite intuitive links between morphology and behavior, there has
been little formal analysis demonstrating connections between particular aspects
of volar skin, pads and tactile organs and specific functional attributes. The
overarching goal of this dissertation research is to explore the functional
correlates of variation in morphological characteristics of the volar surfaces
in a select group of prosimian primates. The size and shape of the volar pads
will be assessed using 3D morphometric analysis, and tactile organs within volar
skin will be investigated using histological staining and stereo-light
microscopy. Once described, proposed relationships of the volar morphology to
dietary preferences, locomotor regimes, substrate use, body size, and bony
morphology will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.