* 1128660
* Development of an Electron Tunneling Based Nanochannel System for DNA Sequencing
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Steve Tung, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 09/30/2016
* USD 359,717.00

The objective of this program is to design and fabricate a silicon nanochannel
system with embedded nanoelectrodes for DNA sequencing. The sequencing principle
is based on detecting the electron tunneling property of individual nucleotides
of a single-stranded DNA as it translocates through a nanochannel. The
nanochannel will be fabricated based on MEMS microfabrication and AFM
nanolithography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the program is
the integration of the latest DNA sensing principle with advanced AFM techniques
in realizing a label-free sequencing device that can provide fast and specific
detection. The development of this rapid DNA sequencing technique is
transformative. The proposed project will explore several novel areas such as
AFM machining of nanofluidic channels, optimization of DNA electron tunneling
sensitivity, and specificity of functionalized nanoelectrodes towards DNA bases.
Results of the proposed project are expected to impact future designs of
nanofluidic based nanomedicine systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the program are the advancement of the knowledge of bionanotechnology
and the development of an important tool for both biomedical research and
clinical diagnostics. Additionally, the proposed research will also generate
diversified learning experience for students involved in the project, who will
have a rare opportunity to be cross-trained in nanofabrication and DNA
processing. The fabrication techniques and recipes developed by the project are
expected to greatly enhance the core capability of the multi-user cleanroom
facility at the University of Arkansas in areas such as MEMS, BioMEMS, and NEMS.