* 1128010
* WORKSHOP: How We Know What We Know: Research Methods in HCI2
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Judith Olson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2013
* USD 22,047.00

The Human Computer Interaction Consortium (HCIC) is a collection of members of
the human-computer interaction (HCI) community from 23 member organizations, who
convene once a year to exchange research results with each other. The Consortium
was created over 20 years ago in order to counter the typical conference short
paper presentations with no follow-on discussion. The HCIC has become a
marvelous place that is both intellectually and socially rich; this year the
group is moving to a new, larger venue, which will allow them to open up
membership to a larger set of people without reducing the quality of the
interaction. Last year HCIC attendees voted to break with tradition and include
tutorials on the variety of methods in HCI, which range from ethnographies to
laboratory studies to analyses of masses of data captured on the Web. The idea
was to teach the audience how to be knowledgeable in the methods with which they
did not have deep experience, enough so that they could judge whether a research
paper using that method was done well or not. The attendees rated most of these
tutorials as excellent, and urged the organizers to find a way to make their
content available to more people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is funding to
support the video recording and distribution of five of these tutorials on the
topics of "Design Research," "Large Data Set Analysis," "Ethnography," "Content
and Conversation Analysis," and "Crowdsourcing." Three of these tutorials have
been accepted for presentation at the ACM 2011 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI 2011), which will be held May 7-12 in Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (The annual CHI conference is the leading international forum
for the presentation and discussion of HCI research and practice, and is
attended by approximately 2,500 HCI professionals from around the world; more
information about the conference is available at http://www.chi2011.org.) The
other two will be recorded at the speakers' home institutions. NSF funding will
cover the cost of sending a videographer to these venues to record and later
edit the videos, which will then be made available to the general public online.
In addition, the talks will be professionally transcribed to serve as first
drafts of chapters in a timely and much-needed book tentatively entitled
"Handbook of Methods for HCI."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This effort
will expose a substantial number of people to new and sophisticated methods for
investigating how people interact with computing. The video tutorials on the Web
and the book to follow will enable researchers and students everywhere to learn
some of the latest, state-of-the-art methods, which they can then exploit in
their research.