* 1128145
* Genomics of the Zygotic Transition in Rice
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Scott Russell, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,748,568.00

PI: Venkatesan Sundaresan (University of California-
Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Scott D. Russell (University of Oklahoma-
Norman)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Clarence Hedge (Langston
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants reproduce through pollination and
fertilization, resulting in the fusion of an egg cell and a sperm cell to
generate a single cell called a zygote. The zygote divides and grows to form an
embryo inside the seed, which after germination gives rise to the entire adult
plant. Thus, the zygote is a totipotent cell, with the capacity to regenerate
all the tissues and organs of a plant. The growth of the zygote and the early
embryo is initially dependent upon maternal factors provided by the egg cell. As
the embryo develops, it later becomes independent of these maternal factors and
relies only upon embryonically synthesized RNAs and proteins. The transition
from the fertilized egg, reliant on maternal gene products, to independent
growth controlled by embryonic genes and gene products, is called the Zygotic
transition. During this transition, extensive changes occur to the zygotic
genome: the DNA in the chromosomes is re-packaged, genes are activated in the
zygotic nucleus, and the maternally-supplied RNA is removed. The Zygotic
transition is therefore a landmark event in the life-cycle of a plant. Due to
the small size and inaccessibility of the plant zygote, very little is currently
known about this fundamental transition. This project will address the problem
by utilizing recent advances in genomics to exploit advantageous features of
rice plants. In rice, the time from pollination to fertilization is one of the
shortest of all flowering plants, and dissection of zygotes at precisely defined
stages of development is feasible. The project will determine on a genome scale
the changes in gene expression as the zygote progresses from fertilized egg to
the first embryonic division, and gain insights into gene networks that underlie
this transition. It is known that expression of many genes during seed
development depends upon the parent-of-origin, i.e. expression of maternally-
inherited and paternally-inherited genes are different, due to modifications of
the DNA or its packaging called epigenetic changes. The project will evaluate
individual contributions of the paternal and maternal genomes of the zygote in
crosses between two different rice strains, to determine the extent of parent-
of-origin effects on zygotic transcription, and genes that show such effects
will be characterized for the nature of their epigenetic modifications. The
zygote is a critical transition in the plant life cycle, when the genome is
reprogrammed for the initiation of a new diploid generation that arises from
this one cell. This project will therefore be addressing a significant gap in
the understanding of plant reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of
the zygotic transition in embryos has agricultural applications for increased
seed yields, for regeneration of plants from tissue culture, and for improved
methods of breeding hybrids. The project will focus on rice, one of the most
important food crops in the world, and also a major crop in many states of the
USA. The project findings should also be applicable to other crops, especially
cereals. For this purpose, the data generated by the project will be made
available for wide access through public databases such as GenBank and Gramene,
and the analysis through a publicly-accessible project website at the University
of California-Davis. Additionally, the project will provide training in plant
genomics to students and faculty from Langston University, a historically
African-American institution, through summer internships at the University of
Oklahoma, and at the University of California-Davis. The project will also
provide training for undergraduate students and graduate students at University
of Oklahoma, and for undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows at the University of California-Davis.