* 1128817
* Convex optimization methods for system identification and graphical  modeling of time series
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Lieven Vandenberghe, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 378,761.00

Objectives

The project aims at developing new methods for dynamical system modeling, based
on convex optimization formulations and recent algorithms for large-scale non-
smooth optimization. A first component of the project addresses the estimation
and topology selection of graphical models of time series. A graphical model
provides a graph representation of relations between random variables, for
example, conditional dependence. These relations can be translated into sparsity
constraints on the parameters of the model. A fundamental challenge in the
estimation of a graphical model is the selection of a sparse graph topology from
observed data. The project aims at developing methods for sparse topology
selection via non-smooth convex regularizations. The main application that
motivates this work is connectivity analysis from functional magnetic resonance
imaging time series. A second part is concerned with new methods for system
identification based on convex algorithms for low-rank approximation of
structured matrices. This work requires the formulation of system identification
problems as constrained rank optimization problems and the development of large-
scale algorithms for convex relaxations of the rank optimization problems.

Intellectual Merit

The project combines techniques from optimization, system theory, and machine
learning to address fundamental problems in the modeling of dynamical systems.
Graphical models, an important topic in machine learning, are not widely studied
in system identification. Conversely, system identification can provide tools
for modeling dynamical aspects in machine learning problems. The use of convex
formulations and fast first-order algorithms will enable an efficient solution
of large instances in practical applications.

Broader Impacts

Software implementations of the algorithms developed in the project will be made
freely available. The outcomes will be integrated in the graduate optimization
sequence in the Electrical Engineering Department at UCLA, in particular an
advanced course on large-scale optimization. Research opportunities will be
offered to students via individual study courses and summer internships.