* 1128478
* Power-aware sensor interfacing and signal processing using nonlinear analog techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kofi Odame, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2015
* USD 321,405.00

The objective of this research is to discover a new class of ultra low power
sensors. The approach is to develop nonlinear adaptive schemes that circumvent
the tradeoffs faced by linear, time-invariant systems. This research aims at
facilitating applications like mobile health, which rely on sensors with a
limited power budget. In particular, this research will enable the brain-
controlled cochlear implant - a next generation neural prosthetic that addresses
the long-standing problem of speech intelligibility in a noisy
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Nonlinear analysis can
identify those regions of sensor data that are critical for an application's
computations and state changes. Further, an adaptive system can adjust its
parameters and resource consumption to specifically accommodate such
computationally-relevant data, while discarding the remaining, less relevant
data. These nonlinear and adaptive schemes result in very power-efficient
sensors, and the proposed project will realize them by methodically harnessing
the inherent nonlinear dynamics of analog components. In this way, the project
aims to advance the field of low power sensor
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The mobile health devices that
this project enables will promote a preventative, decentralized model of health-
care delivery. This could allay the rising cost of health care. The project will
integrate nonlinear systems thinking into engineering teaching through outreach
programs and interdisciplinary workshops that are already thriving at Dartmouth
College. The project's health applications will demonstrate that engineering is
a human-focused occupation. This is relevant to women and minorities who, it has
been suggested, avoid engineering because of its perceived disconnect with
direct human concerns.