* 1128871
* EPAS/AIS Collaborative Research: Adaptive Design for Controllability of a System of Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Wei-Jen Lee, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 271,688.00

The objective of this research is to develop a method for integrating design and
power management of a regional system for deployment of plug-in electric vehicle
charging stations, each of which obtains power from wind, solar and the grid.
The method embodies a two-stage algorithm, the first stage handles system
design, and the second stage handles dynamic control under uncertainty. The
second stage control problem is embedded within the first stage design problem,
thus enabling design for controllability. The solution procedure uses a new,
statistically parsimonious algorithm to reduce the computational demands that
have previously made this problem intractable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research is foundational
to energy system development, an area of critical national need. Success in
addressing the foundational issues will demonstrate the efficacy of the method
for the design and deployment of realistic systems and help identify questions
worthy of further investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This work has the potential of improving the penetration level
of renewable energy and ease or delay the need for infrastructure improvement.
Design for controllability is critical for many other complex systems in energy,
transportation, telecommunications, sustainability, manufacturing, health care,
etc. The team has a track record of educating members of under-represented
groups and will continue to do so. Research results will be disseminated via
standard academic means and will be shared with Vision North Texas, a public-
private partnership seeking a more sustainable future for North Central Texas.