* 1128370
* ULTRA-Ex:   Understanding the Dynamic Connections Among Stewardship, Land Cover, and Ecosystem Services in New York City's Urban Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 12/31/2010,02/28/2013
* Dana Fisher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 176,384.00

This project will integrate recent advances into an interdisciplinary human
ecosystem framework to advance understanding of urban social and ecological
systems, focusing specifically on the dynamic factors that cross social and
ecological boundaries. The project will test hypotheses regarding the
relationships between actions of managers and stewards who maintain the urban
forest in New York City, the ecological processes that govern its abundance,
diversity and suitability as habitat, and a key societal service it provides,
temperature regulation of the urban microclimate. These hypotheses will be
tested using multiscale and multitemporal analyses of stewardship group
activities and evolution of this urban forest over the past 25 years. The
analyses will use satellite derived land cover maps, social surveys and
interviews, and vegetation and faunal data. The objective is to understand links
between stewardship, ecological processes and ecosystem services in ways that
directly inform stakeholders, managers and policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban green space provides a number of societal
benefits in addition to habitat for plants and animals. These include regulation
of local temperature, cleaning of air and water, reduction in storm water runoff
and associated sewage system overflows, and physical and psychological benefits
to humans of being close to and interacting with nature. The primary goal of
this project is to study the links between the efforts and goals of stewardship
organizations, development of green space and its associated flora and fauna,
and temperature regulation. A secondary goal is to provide a set of analytical
methods that can be used to study other services and other cities. New York City
has an unparalleled supply of preexisting data, a comprehensive survey of
environmental stewardship organizations, a dense and diverse human population,
and a variety of city led tree planting efforts. This research will increase
general understanding of the dynamic connections among stewardship, land cover,
and ecosystem services, and also inform the management of the natural resources
in the city. &lt;br/&gt;