* 1128541
* ERC - Small Business: Walking Robot Based Ground Penetrating Radar Sensor for Mine and IED Detection
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Jose Martinez-Lorenzo, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This effort is a collaboration between the Gordon Center for Subsurface Sensing
and Imaging Systems (CenSSIS), an NSF Engineering Research Center (ERC) at
Northwestern University since 2000, and Square One, a small business partner of
the ERC. Square One has been developing a walking robot and research at the
CenSSIS ERC has developed ground penetrating radar systems (GPR). This effort
integrates the GPR systems of CenSSIS into the walking robot of Square One.
Square One's walking robot has been specifically designed to step over obstacles
and move efficiently across rugged terrain. CenSSIS's GPR will be adapted for
the robot with the radar antennae on the robot?s legs to put them in close
contact with the ground and eliminate ground clutter interference. The system
should be able to detect all land mines including the plastic mines having no
metal and thus invisible to conventional magnetic mine detectors. Deployment of
the system will eliminate thousands of land mines worldwide, with the ensuing
reduction of death and personal injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this joint effort will be to develop and test a high
resolution, self-propelled GPR unit.&lt;br/&gt;CenSSIS will computationally
model the electromagnetic wave propagation and scattering characteristics of
candidate GPR configurations, optimize radar signal performance relative to the
configuration of the robot, and design geometry-specific algorithms for
subsurface image reconstruction. Square One will create an application-specific
version of the robot geometrically optimized for GPR use and integrated with
impulse radar hardware and antennae. Additionally, Square One will draw on its
ongoing SBIR Phase II effort to equip the robot with essential navigational
software and sensors. The project will conclude with a series of comparative
field tests aimed at conclusively establishing the superior performance of the
combined system. The intellectual merit lies in the adaptation and integration
of known engineering sciences to form a new system with a wide variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.
State Department estimates that more than 200 million mines are in place
throughout the world. These mines are a constant threat in many parts of the
developing world. Military units, non-governmental agencies and commercial
contractors work together to ameliorate the threat posed by landmines and other
unexploded ordnance. However, the technique of using hand-held detectors to
locate mines is essentially unchanged since World War II and demining operations
remain slow and exceedingly dangerous. Given the vast areas of land that remain
to be cleared, faster and safer methods of locating and neutralizing mines must
be introduced. This effort addresses both the safety, cost and speed of mine
detection. At Northeastern University several civil engineering undergraduates
will continue to pursue interdisciplinary research on radar sensing; and a
graduate IGERT student will direct her current electromagnetic modeling research
toward the specific mine detection application. While demining operations will
continue to be the main commercial market for the robot, numerous other markets
will be attracted to the technology. In addition to the Department of Defense,
demining contractors, oil companies, and construction firms have interests in
ensuring safe terrain.