* 1128889
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling coastal oxygen production and carbon sequestration
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2016
* Samantha Siedlecki, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2016
* USD 27,851.00

A numerical modeling study of ocean circulation and biogeochemical oxygen and
carbon dynamics in an upwelling coastal margin will be conducted. Model
simulations combined with chemical and physical observations along the Oregon
coast will provide new insights into coastal ocean circulation and
biogeochemistry, with particular focus on the processes that govern cross-shelf
exchange, and the factors that lead to hypoxia and enhanced ocean
acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed research
will address critical unresolved scientific issues in physical and
biogeochemical coastal ocean processes. The cycles of oxygen and carbon in
coastal waters are globally significant, and locally determine conditions of
hypoxia and ocean acidification, but neither is well understood. High-resolution
circulation modeling has progressed sufficiently to provide a useful context in
which to explore these biogeochemical dynamics. At the same time, physical
circulation models are far from perfect, and the coupled physical-biogeochemical
simulations proposed here will provide a framework in which to explore the
combined system uncertainties that arise from poorly known or represented
physical parameters and processes, and to identify the areas in which
improvements to the representation of the physical circulation will be essential
to future advances in understanding the coupled system. The proposed research
will specifically focus on modeling the conditions of the Oregon shelf during
the upwelling seasons of 2001, 2006 and 2009, for which high-quality
biogeochemical and physical data are available, and which have demonstrated
extreme low oxygen, high CO2 conditions. For 2001, the physical circulation has
been well modeled in previous work, providing a starting point for the coupled
modeling. For 2006 and 2009, the physical circulation modeling will be novel,
providing a new comparison with physical data and an opportunity to explore
basic inter-annual variability in the shelf circulation. A novel, simplified
biogeochemical module containing one nutrient, two particle classes, and
dissolved oxygen has been formulated and will be implemented in the circulation
model. Simulations will include idealized explorations of the behavior of the
biogeochemical module and the coupled system, and realistic cases based on best-
estimate physical circulation simulations for 2001, 2006 and 2009. In all of
these simulations, the choice of the highly simplified biogeochemical module is
intended to facilitate the multiple simulations and parameter-value choices, in
order to explore sensitivities and characterize
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This project addresses fundamental
scientific issues involving both the high-human-impact coastal zone and the role
of coastal processes in the global biogeochemical balances associated with
climate change. As part of his training, a postdoctoral investigator will
develop a broad background spanning both physical and chemical coastal
oceanography, and be prepared to formulate and address cutting-edge science
questions in the critical area of coastal physical-biogeochemical interactions.
The proposal will also provide partial support to a second female postdoctoral
investigator, through collaboration with UW/JISAO that will develop and
encourage inter-institutional as well as interdisciplinary research
collaboration. Results of the proposed research will be disseminated through
publications in peer-reviewed research journals and presentations at national
and international scientific meetings, and through continuation and extension of
existing outreach and general education activities. The proposed research is
relevant to the coastal component of the NSF Ocean Observatories Initiative.