* 1128312
* Collaborative Research: Self-Sustainable Networking of Survivability-Heterogeneous Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Wensheng Zhang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 06/30/2015
* USD 191,125.00

The objective of this research is to study network issues critical for building
self-sustainable outdoors sensor networks. The proposed approach is to introduce
environmental survivability-heterogeneity to sensor networks, and to exploit it
to holistically and efficiently deal with hazardous environmental conditions
that are hard to predict. The approach is motivated by the genetic phenomenon,
by which an offspring from a large gene pool can improve its survival in light
of environmental threats. The main research thrusts include: designing
environmental survivability-aware duty-cycle scheduling, routing, MAC and
tasking algorithms to sustainable network, designing schemes to improve network
fault tolerance by leveraging environmentally robust nodes, and establishing
models to characterize environmental conditions and nodes of different
modalities and to provide guidelines for network planning. The proposed
methodology will be validated through a combination of simulation, analysis, and
prototype implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in an
extensive understanding of the conjoining of sensor networks and the physical
world, in a new approach of incorporating the heterogeneity in environmental
survivability to construct robust sensor networks, in theoretical and practical
advances in network planning, duty-cycle scheduling, and fault-tolerance in
sensor networks, and in a new set of environmental survivability-aware MAC,
routing, and tasking algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected
to promote the adoption and application of sensor networks through enhancing
their survivability in the outdoors environment and, thus, providing better
solutions for disaster rescue missions, military surveillance, and intelligent
transportation systems. The project will offer an excellent opportunity to
broaden the participation of under-represented groups, to boost the
effectiveness of networking education, and to engage high-school, undergraduate
and graduate students.