* 1128954
* UBM-Group: Collaborative Research on the Arthropod Way of Life (CRAWL): Interdisciplinary Training in Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Darrell Moore, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 229,000.00

This project at East Tennessee State University provides opportunities for
Students to gain skills in biology and math through full participation in the
research process. A major component of the Collaborative Research on the
Arthropod Way of Life CRAWL program is long-term immersion in a research
project, involving each student in every stage of the scientific process. Major
emphases are on: (1) the hypothetico-deductive approach to problem-solving, (2)
rigorous experimental design developed by the entire team, thus ensuring a truly
integrative approach, (3) introduction to critical thinking and the application
of mathematical and biological skills via workshops, (4) "on-the-job" learning
of critical skills for data collection, data management, statistical analyses,
and mathematical modeling, (5) dissemination of results at both the local and
national levels, (6) undergoing the publication process, including creation of
publication-quality graphs &amp; tables, scientific writing, and responding to
reviewer critiques. The PIs of the project have developed projects that address
fundamental questions in the areas of spatiotemporal dynamics of intraspecific
interactions (aggression in spiders and flies, communication in honey bees) and
the neurohormonal underpinnings and ecological implications of these behaviors.
Analytical approaches include time-series analyses, spatial analyses, agent-
based modeling, graph theoretic analyses, logistic regression modeling, and
diffusion-based mathematical models. With its inter-connected biological and
mathematical themes, joint mentorship, and team approach, CRAWL is a model for
efficiently integrating undergraduates into established research programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Undergraduate Biomathematics Program supported by NSF
at the East Tennessee State Unvisersity provides opportunities to engage
undergraduates in meaningful interdisciplinary research experiences. The CRAWL
program aims to generate a research culture in biology and math at ETSU by
building an infrastructure that will ensure its sustainability. Critical to its
success, the excitement of the discovery process must be translated into
classroom and teaching laboratory experiences for students not directly
supported by the program. The CRAWL program is intended to have a synergistic
effect on the overall curriculum at ETSU as projects and results are
incorporated as modules into upper division math and biology courses. In
addition, several of the research projects may be adapted as teaching
laboratories. CRAWL students have the opportunity to impact other
underrepresented students at the university by providing guest lectures and
presentations in both introductory and upper level courses. CRAWL students are
selected and recruited from under-represented groups in the Southern Appalachian
region.