* 1128147
* Decision making under coupled multi-timescale uncertainty: Advanced electric power systems planning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Mort Webster, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2014
* USD 330,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop improved tools for planning for
electric power systems. The approach of this research is to combine analysis at
hourly and annual timescales so that constraints on how electricity generators
operate are accounted for in long-term investment planning for generation
technologies. Such constraints are particularly important with increasing use of
renewables, storage, and responsive demand. The project will apply approximate
dynamic programming and traditional integer optimization techniques to explore
decisions under uncertainty in both time scales. The structure of the operations
and investment sub-problems will be exploited to develop efficient methods for
optimizing the full system, accounting for uncertainty in demand, renewable
generation, fuel prices, and possible environmental regulations.

Intellectual Merit This project will develop new methods for optimizing large
engineering systems under uncertainty by developing new algorithms and data
structure designs. It will also advance the state-of-the art for multi-timescale
decision models where the smaller timescale is computationally expensive.

Broader Impacts This work will significantly improve planning for advanced
electric power systems that combine renewables and other advanced technologies
to meet environmental and energy requirements, and will identify system designs
with lower costs and greater resiliency. The methods developed will be usable by
power companies, independent system operators, and variety of governmental and
non-governmental agencies that are in the process of designing the next-
generation power system. This project will also provide education and training
to undergraduate and graduate students, including women and underrepresented
minorities, in operations research and power systems modeling.