* 1128754
* Experimental Study of Two-Phase Suspended Sediment Transport in  Breaking Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Francis Ting, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 406,463.00

This project is to investigate the structure of large-scale turbulence in
breaking waves and the interaction of these large eddies with an erodible bed.
Laboratory experiments will be carried out in a 25 m-long, 0.9 m-wide and 0.75
m-deep tilting flume equipped with a programmable wave generator. A flat bed of
sediment particles will be placed in a recess in the flume floor. A volumetric
three-component velocimetry (V3V) system will be used to measure sediment
particle velocities, sediment particle locations, and fluid velocities
simultaneously in a three-dimensional (3-D) flow volume above the erodible bed
under spilling and plunging wave conditions. The two-phase flow measurements
will be used to understand the topology of large eddies, and the role of large
eddies in the sediment pickup process at the bed and the distribution of
suspended sediment over the water column.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project will build on prior work of the principal investigator (PI).
It will address several aspects of breaking waves that are still poorly
understood and are critical to the development of successful numerical schemes
for predicting sediment transport in the surf zone and beach transformation.
Measurement of three-component fluid velocities in a 3-D flow volume will enable
thestudy the evolution of large eddies and how they are convected from the upper
layer to the bottom. In conjunction with flow visualization using a high-speed
digital movie camera, the measurements will shed light on the generation
mechanisms of large eddies and the effect on their structure of non-uniform wave
breaking along the wave crest. The volumetric fluid velocity measurements will
also allow the investigator to examine the impingement of large eddies on the
bottom. This process is transient and three-dimensional, characterized by large
instantaneous turbulent kinetic energy and shear stresses in the impingement
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simultaneous measurement of particle location,
particle velocity, and fluid velocity over an erodible bed using a V3V system is
innovative and will allow the project's investigator to address three
fundamental problems in sediment transport in breaking waves. The first problem
relates to the appropriate bottom boundary conditions for suspended sediment
transport; specifically, how to parameterize the effect of breaking wave
turbulence on the sediment pick-up rate. The second problem concerns the
interaction between large eddies and suspended particles. The proposed research
will answer questions such as: How closely do the instantaneous velocities of
sediment particles follow those of fluid particles? Is there a direct link
between suspended sediment transport and turbulence transport? Can the sediment
distribution process be modeled as a diffusion process? The third problem
concerns the effect of breaker types on sediment transport. The investigator
will address the following questions: How do the quantities and direction of
suspended load transport in the outer surf zone relate to the wave
characteristics at incipient breaking? How important is this mode of transport
compared to other mechanisms such as sheet-flow
transport?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide a
high quality data set to test and improve detailed models of breaking waves and
sediment transport in the surf zone. Such models will advance understanding of
how breaking waves erode or deposit sediments and impact water-front property.
Advances in two-phase flow measurements using V3V will also stimulate their
development and application in other research fields. Researchers will be able
to download the measured data from PI's research
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train the next generation of
researchers by engaging both undergraduate and graduate students in experimental
investigation. Acquisition of the proposed V3V system will provide students with
a state-of-the-art measurement apparatus to conduct experimental investigation
in fluid mechanics. Two new experiments using V3V will be developed for both an
undergraduate and a graduate class to enhance student learning of fluid
mechanics principles. The PI will also use the equipment to conduct live
demonstrations of fluid flow phenomena in workshops involving K-12 students. The
outcomes of these activities will be to attract more high school students
(including Native American students) to pursue a college degree in science and
engineering, to provide research experiences to undergraduate students, to build
a nationally competitive graduate program by supporting capable students to
conduct basic research, and to maintain a modern fluid mechanics laboratory for
continued research and education.