* 1128864
* Community Workshop on Ground Based Solar Research
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Michael Thompson, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Craig B. Foltz
* 04/30/2012
* USD 40,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;AST 1128864&lt;br/&gt;PI: William S.
Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists at HAO and NSO, like their counterparts at
many FFRDCs, have the dual responsibility to provide scientific leadership and
support to the university and scientific community. Community support is
provided in a variety of ways; through scientific collaboration, facility
operation, instrument development, numerical model development, data analysis
tool development, undergraduate and graduate student mentoring, and scientific
visitor programs, to name a few. Scientific leadership in the form of cutting
edge research and instrument development has been demonstrated by the staff of
these organizations throughout their histories. This record of achievement is
extensively documented in scientific publications and recognized through invited
presentations in national and international venues as well as awards for
distinguished scientific achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSO and HAO intend to
sponsor a community-based workshop on their multidisciplinary activities in the
post-construction ATST era. The agenda will begin with over-arching science
questions, followed by a discussion of how NSO and HAO support, and can further
contribute to, the community in making progress toward answering these
questions. We expect that the workshop discussion will naturally include the
role of the NSF in supporting community-based solar research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of this workshop include providing input for a
possible future solar science initiative within the NSF that would benefit NSO,
HAO, and the research community. The workshop would involve community members
from a wide range of disciplines and stakeholders in ground based solar
research. The aim of the workshop is to include representation from all
university departments having a significant program of solar research. The
product of the workshop would be a report provided to the NSF for planning
purposes and to the Decadal Survey for Solar and Space Physics.