* 1128024
* RAPID:  Evaluation of Climate Models in the Southeast Pacific Marine Stratocumulus Region
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Anita Rapp, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2013
* USD 29,996.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine stratocumulus (mSc)
clouds occur in subtropical oceanic regions off the west sides of continents,
and have a cooling effect on the earth's climate because of their strong
reflection of incoming solar radiation. Regions dominated by mSc clouds have
been shown to be an important driver of the large uncertainties in tropical
cloud feedbacks in climate models, and are responsible for the large differences
between model simulations and observations. Research conducted under this grant
considers mSc properties in model simulations, and compares them with cloud
properties found in recent observations from satellite instruments including the
CloudSat Profiling Radar. The response of shortwave cloud radiative forcing to
changes in sea surface temperature is examined, and model cloud diagnostic
variables are compared to satellite observations to determine the underlying
processes responsible for uncertainties in low-cloud feeback.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project lies in its support of
the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide information on climate change and its
consequences to decision makers worldwide. Cloud feedbacks could play an
important role in determining how much global warming comes from the expected
increases in greenhouse gas concentrations, so research leading to better
understanding of cloud feedbacks and better representation of clouds in climate
models would be beneficial for understanding the likely severity of
anthropogenic climate change.