* 1128975
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Molecular phylogeny and phylogeography of nocturnal primates (Galagoides spp) in Eastern Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Todd Disotell, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 18,221.00

This project will contribute to a better understanding of the cryptic diversity
within dwarf galagos in Eastern Africa, integrating genetic, morphological and
bio-acoustic data. This study will strive to 1) describe the genetic
relationship within and among currently recognized dwarf galago species and, 2)
test the importance of vocal communication in maintaining reproductive isolation
between cryptic species. The project will yield the most comprehensive molecular
assessment of galagid evolutionary relationships undertaken to date and will
help elucidate likely causes of diversification and speciation among cryptic
primates. From a conservation perspective, it will contribute to understand the
diversity of nocturnal galagids in Eastern Africa, which is crucial for
developing effective conservation and management programs. The study also
promotes international collaboration at many
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and describing biological diversity
is one of the main goals for biologists. This task, however, is particularly
challenging when speciation is not always accompanied by noticeable
morphological change. An appreciation of such cryptic species is not only
important for better understanding biological diversity, but it may also affect
our ability to explore models and patterns of speciation. Nocturnal dwarf
galagos (Galagoides) are among the most morphologically cryptic of all primates
and their evolutionary history is one of the most longstanding problems in
primatology. Given the lack of morphological differentiation, galago species
have been mostly described based on their advertisement calls. Within galagids,
acoustic communication plays a critical role and vocal signals are used to
maintain contact with other members of the same species and to attract mates.
Species cohesiveness is therefore likely to be maintained by non-visual
recognition systems, and advertisement calls have been suggested to play a
critical role in reproductive isolation. The lack of genetic data, however, has
not allowed testing of whether specific differences in vocal signals can really
contribute to species cohesion, and whether "vocal species" are actually
genetically distinct.