* 1128989
* Collaborative Project: Teaching Strategic, Operational, and Defensive Cybersecurity to the Next Generation from Sea to Shining Sea
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Barbara Endicott-Popovsky, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2014
* USD 99,130.00

This is a collaborative project involving George Washington University (NSF
Award No. 1129398), the University of Washington (NSF Award No. 1128989), and
the University of Hawaii (NSF Award No. 1129567).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
2003, George Washington University has offered students in its Cyber Corps
(Scholarship for Service) program a seminar in which Federal and industry
experts deliver guest lectures. This project is making that seminar available
through videos, notes, and instructor guides to two partner institutions (the
University of Washington and the University of Hawaii) and, ultimately, to the
entire Cyber Corps community, so that students in SFS programs outside the DC
area can benefit from the experiences and leadership skills of on-the-ground
Federal leaders. The two partner institutions are adding lectures by Federal
government and industry leaders from their respective regions who have made
significant contributions to the advancement of cybersecurity. For example, the
University of Washington is contributing lectures from industry leaders
developing secure cloud environments, and the University of Hawaii is
contributing lectures from the original ALOHAnet
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing a "Cybersecurity
Library of Content," based on a concept inventory, which is consistent, cutting-
edge, and part of a comprehensive approach to the teaching of strategic,
operational, and defensive cybersecurity. At all of the participating
universities, this program effectively augments faculty by providing speakers
either in person or by video. In addition, instructors are able to use material
developed by the project, including an instructor's guide, laboratory exercises,
examination questions and answers, learning objectives, and links to related
artifacts (e.g., PowerPoint presentations, reading lists), where
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is also creating links with the
broader SFS program and with community colleges that are starting to teach
cybersecurity. It is helping the participating institutions transform their
programs into ones that better serve their students by making previously
unavailable content available to them. Students are trained in many current
policies so that they can hit the ground running. When they arrive at their
internship or job in the government, they are prepared not only with knowledge
of traditional cybersecurity and information assurance mechanisms but also with
an appreciation of government-related issues obtained from up-to-date lectures
by individuals with current or recent first-hand experience in Federal
government cybersecurity and information assurance.