* 1128008
* RAPID: Citizen Use of Social Media in the Egyptian Uprising
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Gloria Mark, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The purpose of this RAPID proposal is to investigate questions surrounding the
use of social media during the current political crisis in Egypt. From a
research perspective, the case of Egypt is unique in the unprecedented scale,
role, and rapidity in which media is being used in organizing and reporting on
events. This project will develop software that will perform ongoing data
collection of information about the Egyptian uprising and use a combination of
quantitative and qualitative techniques to analyze the data. Because events in
Egypt are transpiring rapidly, it is imperative to capture data relevant to
current events immediately. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though studies have examined
social media use in crisis settings, this research setting is distinctive in
several ways. First, the scale and rapidity of mobilization in the current
Egyptian setting in conjunction with the role of social media is unique and may
be indicative of the future role of social media. Second, most studies focus on
a single type of media, such as blogs or Internet forums, and this study will
examine different social media and will try to understand what function each had
in the current setting. Third, it will study how information was globally
communicated despite the fact that the Egyptian government installed a "virtual
curfew" on the Internet and satellite phones. This research will focus not only
on technical features of the applications but also on social and cultural issues
involved in social media use in crisis settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. By understanding how social media is used for mobilization and
communication during a major disruption in society, the project will contribute
knowledge about the role and potential of social media. By examining how such
information can spread outside of a "blocked" society, it has strong
implications for understanding the role of social media in promoting democratic
voices in a society. Though the proposed data collection infrastructure is
geared towards events related to Egypt it can be applied to numerous other
countries and events, ranging from political crises to natural disasters, to
national elections, and more. The project will provide infrastructure that will
allow people from all over the world to view the data, gain firsthand reports on
what is happening in another country and provide commentary and discussion. It
will be a valuable teaching device to expose young people to current events in
other countries.