* 1128490
* Symposium: Prof. John Chato Memorial Symposium on Progress and Challenges in Biotransport at 2011 Summer Bioengineering Conference in Farmington, Pennsylvania - June 22-25, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,11/30/2011
* Ram Devireddy, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 11/30/2011
* USD 9,000.00

Proposal ID: 1128490&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ram V. Devireddy, Louisiana State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed symposium to be held in Farmington,
Pennsylvania as part of the 2011 Summer Bioengineering conference, will provide
a venue for researchers, educators and graduate students to identify challenges
and opportunities pertaining to biotransport. This symposium will highlight and
honor the contributions of Prof. John Chato to the field of bioheat transfer and
his mentoring of young researchers over his long and fruitful career. Topics for
the symposium include but are not limited to: (1) bioheat transfer models, (2)
biomaterial thermophysical property measurements and (3) optimizing thermal
therapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides support for approximately 2 keynote speakers and 10 students to
attend the workshop. The agenda will include technical presentations and panel
sessions culminating in archival review article identifying specific scientific
and engineering challenges pertaining to biotransport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop topic
has broad application to a wide array of biological transport problems. Since,
transport processes impact biology and medicine at every stage of life, their
analysis will serve to innovate and optimize diagnostic and therapeutic
interventions. The broad impacts of the grant are in enabling the participation
of students and early career scientists in the symposium, thereby providing the
education and training opportunities for next generation scientists.