* 1128439
* Electric Field Control of Spin Dynamics in Metal Spintronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Geoffrey Beach, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2014
* USD 348,000.00

The objective of the proposed program is to realize electric field control of
the magnetic state in novel metal spintronic device structures. The approach
exploits new and largely unexplored magnetoelectric effects in ultrathin
metallic ferromagnetic films. Experiments focus on materials and
heterostructures in which the magnetic behavior is dictated by broken symmetries
at the surface or interface. Strong electric fields will be used to induce spin-
dependent surface charge layers to influence the surface electronic structure
and modulate key magnetic parameters (magnetic anisotropy, magnetization, spin
polarization and spin-transport characteristics) at surfaces and interfaces. The
program will (1) provide fundamental insight, via a systematic experimental
dataset, of the mechanisms enabling electric field manipulation of surface
magnetism and spin transport and (2) examine specific model devices in which
electric fields can excite and control spin dynamics and large-angle magnetic
switching. The work addresses the pressing need for efficient modes of operation
in advanced spin-based electronics, and avoids key limitations in existing
approaches. If successful, these fundamental studies will enable revolutionary
new memory and logic device capabilities, offering enhanced performance and
durability with ultralow power consumption requirements. The proposed research
provides a platform for and will be tightly integrated with educational
development at the undergraduate and graduate student level, as well as through
involvement of local high school teachers.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research addresses key fundamental issues in
nanoscale magnetism and spin-electronics. Electrical manipulation of the
electron spin degree of freedom is one of the forefront areas of nanoscience
research today. This program explores new means to electrically manipulate the
magnetic state, and will give key fundamental insights on the roles of
interfacial electronic structure in the behavior of ultrathin (down to single
atomic layer) magnetic materials. Materials systems are chosen such that key
parameters (i.e., band level filling) can be continuously tuned in model
systems, together with new heterostructures in which novel and heretofore
unobserved electric field effects are anticipated. Geometrically-constrained
micro- and nano-structures will be fabricated and characterized experimentally
and through extensive micromagnetic simulations in order to understand how
controlled modulation of magnetic surface anisotropy can be used to drive
magnetization dynamics and magnetic switching of spin configurations such as
magnetic vortices and magnetic domain walls.

Broader Impacts: If successful, the proposed fundamental research could have
broad technological impacts by bringing about new classes of ?spintronic?
devices for ultra low-power, high-performance computation and mass data storage,
significantly impacting mobile computing and global energy efficiency. The
research will train undergraduate and graduate students in key areas in
nanotechnology including advanced thin-film growth and characterization,
nanofabrication, and spintronics. The program will support an international
collaboration between the early-career PI and colleagues at the Max Planck
Institute in Halle, Germany, and will offer international scientific training
and experience to the supported graduate student. The program integrates
research and education by teaming undergraduates with graduate students through
the MIT Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program, and through development of
course materials and instructional laboratory modules. The PI will make use of
the outreach infrastructure of MIT?s Center for Material Science and Engineering
(CMSE), and NSF MRSEC, to host high school teachers through the NSF-RET program,
and local underrepresented community college students through the CMSE community
college program.