* 1128581
* Collaborative Research: Efficient and Robust Underwater Acoustic Sensor Networks: An Integrated Coding Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Shengli Zhou, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 195,000.00

The objective of this research is to address one of the greatest challenges that
hinder the development of underwater sensor networks into practical systems: How
to ensure data reliability and delivery efficiency over unreliable acoustic
links with large error rates, low available bandwidth, and long propagation
delays. The project proposes an integrated coding approach, seamlessly combining
digital fountain, and network and channel coding schemes with complementary
strengths, across the application, network, and physical layers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
rigorous study of the underwater network limits and a systematic design of
powerful fountain and network coding schemes to address the challenging issues
facing underwater sensor networks. The project outcomes will include physical
layer network coding theoretical results, novel non-binary fountain codes,
sparse linear network codes, and physical-layer network coding schemes for
underwater channels, as well as networking protocols for underwater unicast
scenarios. The theoretical results, coding, and protocol designs will be
evaluated through real world experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this project is reflected in two aspects. First, this project is
expected to accelerate the development of emerging underwater sensor networks,
which will have major impact on scientific communities, national security, and
the society as a whole. Second, this project will expose graduate students to
new challenging research problems, fostering them to become leading experts in
the fast-growing field of underwater acoustic networks. It will also support
undergraduates, women and other under-represented groups, allowing them to
participate in advanced research and its practical applications.