* 1128570
* Exploring controlled drug release from magneto-liposomes by alternating and pulsed magnetic fields
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Viktor Chikan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 333,810.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposal is to explore controlled
disruption of the outer membranes of unilamellar lipsomes by using the
mechanical rotation of superparamagnetic Fe/Fe3O4 nanorods, which will act as
nano stir bars. The mechanical rotation of the nanoparticles will be driven by
both continuous and pulsed magnetic fields. The hypothesis is that the
unilamellar bilayers of the liposomes will be disrupted by the magnetic field
induced motion of the nano stir bars, resulting in the quick release of the
hydrophilic payload without a significant increase in temperature. This approach
will permit the delivery of thermosensitive drugs (e.g. anticancer drugs) to
their biological targets.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposed research is
to improve the basic understanding of how mechanical movement of magnetic
nanoparticles can trigger biologically relevant processes in order to optimize
magneto-liposomes for pharmaceutical delivery. Experimental plans to generate
strong and pulsed magnetic fields are presented in this proposal. In situ
dynamic light scattering of liposomes treated with continuous alternating
magnetic fields will be used to monitor the size and phase stability of the
liposomes. In situ Faraday rotation and time-resolved fluorescence experiments
will help obtain dynamical information of the inner viscosities of core- and
membrane-regions, as well as dissolution-reconstruction of supramolecular lipid
bilayer/magnetic nanoparticle assemblies upon exposure to short pulsed magnetic
fields. The proposed drug delivery by mechanically triggered liposomes will be
able to deliver virtually any drug to any position of the body.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The results from the project
could potentially lead to a new physical method to produce controlled release of
drugs by magnetic fields. In addition, the project will provide quantitative
data how the membrane fluidity is affected by the mechanical motion of magnetic
nanoparticles. The Department of Chemistry at Kansas State University will
create one block course for the duration of one week in order to enhance their
students? perspective on biophysical chemistry and nanomedicine: The PI and Co-
PI will develop and teach a block course entitled ?Nanoparticles as Payloads and
Triggers for Release in Cancer Therapy? during the spring semester as a part of
the ?Material Chemistry Course?. This course will be open to all graduate and
undergraduate students in veterinary medicine, chemistry, biochemistry, biology
and physics. The research will help extend this research to ongoing
collaborative efforts on magnetic hyperthermia at Kansas State University. The
research will also create opportunities to incoming REU (Research Experience of
Undergraduates), SUROP (Summer Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program) and
DSP (Developing Scholars? Program) students at Kansas State University. The
proposed instrumental development of a pulsed magnetic field system will create
a unique facility in the Midwestern United States, which will be open to
collaborations with other universities and research institutions.