* 1128164
* RAPID:  Initial Assessment of IPCC AR5 Multi-model Ensembles for Hydroclimatic Features at Global and Regional Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Venkatesh Merwade, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2013
* USD 29,999.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.

This project examines changes in hydroclimate in model simulations prepared for
the AR5, using observational datasets to evaluate model performance in variables
including precipitation, evapotranspiration, soil moisture, and runoff. A key
issue to be addressed is the effect of land use and land cover change (LULC),
which is expected to be significant for the hydrological cycle on regional
spatial scales. Between 1700 and 2000, the global extent of natural vegetation
decreased by 45%, and agricultural land area increased by 500%. In addition, a
number of LULCC impacts have been found in model sensitivity studies, including
radiative cooling of global and regional climate as a result of increase in
surface albedo, regional warming due to decrease in evapotranspiration, and
global warming due to CO2 emission from land cover change. The simulation
ensemble prepared for the AR5 is the first of its kind to include simulations of
the response to LULC alone, so that the climatic impact of this potentially
important forcing can be assessed through comparisons of model simulations
forced by LULC, greenhouse gas increases, and other forcing factors. Thus, work
under this grant will explore both the ability of climate models to simulate
important hydroclimate variables and the extent to which these variables are
affected by LULC.

The broader impact of the project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is
intended to provide information on climate change and its consequences to
decision makers worldwide. Decision makers will benefit from an assessment of
the quality of the climate models used to project climate changes due to global
warming, as well as an evaluation of the impact of LULC on climate (particularly
the hydrological cycle) at regional and global scales.