* 1128209
* CCSS: An Architecture for Joint Integration of Inter and Intrasession Network Coding in Lossy Wireless Multihop Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 06/30/2013
* USD 329,163.00

The objective of this research is to improve the capacity and energy efficiency
of different lossy wireless networks with different processing capabilities. The
proposed approach is to synergistically and systematically combine two types of
coding in wireless networks: intra and intersession network coding. The first
one resolves bottlenecks by coding the packets of different flows, while the
second one provides robustness to the link failures by coding the packets of the
same flow together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research has
three major thrusts. The first thrust investigates the characterization and the
fundamental limits of the proposed approach in lossy wireless networks under
different settings. The settings include the unicast and multicast cases, the
use of coding over multihops, and the use of coding with other traffic
engineering techniques. The second thrust involves the design of distributed
network protocols based on the insights drawn from the characterization. The
designed protocols are ensured to be compatible with the current Internet and
computer network standards. The final thrust deals with deploying the proposed
protocols in different application settings and developing a simulator that
captures the actual behavior of the protocols in different wireless networking
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research has the potential
to increase the role of coding in wireless networks, as it will tackle the
fundamental characterization of coding in these networks. Research results will
be integrated into the community mesh network of the city of Philadelphia. The
protocols developed will also impact the broader community through programs at
Temple University.