* 1128095
* Hydroclimatic variability in southwestern North America
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* David Gutzler, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2013
* USD 29,976.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.

Analysis conducted in this project examines the veracity and robustness of the
climate change simulations for the AR5 as part of the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5), particularly with respect to
projected hydroclimatic changes in the water limited region of southwestern
North America. Warming trends are already particularly pronounced in this region
in the spring season, which is a critical issue for surface hydrology due to the
sensitivity of snowpack to spring warming, and the relative lack of
precipitation during this season. Therefore climate change at this time of year
has a potentially dramatic effects on snow-fed rivers and on soil moisture
during the start of the growing season. The projected hydrologic changes
associated with these trends are one of the most pronounced and significant
signals that appeared in an earlier generation of climate model simulations
prepared for the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (AR4), so it is important to
examine CMIP5 simulations carefully to examine the hydroclimatic processes
simulated in current model. The research also examines the simulation of summer
rainfall in the region, and in this season simulations used for AR4 were not
consistent from one model to another. Thus, the extent to which the new
generation of models produces a consistent response of summertime rainfall in
the southwest to greenhouse gas increases is considered. Model outputs to be
examined include maximum and minimum temperature, focusing on the spring and
summer seasons, surface fluxes in the spring and summer seasons, soil moisture,
snowfall in mountainous regions in the winter and spring seasons, and
pecipitation from winter through summer.

The broader impact of the project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is
intended to provide information on climate change and its consequences to
decision makers worldwide. The hydroclimate of southwestern North America is of
great societal interest given the large population and population growth in the
region, as well as the importance of the region for agriculture and the
sensitive ecosystems contained within it.