* 1128797
* The Quality of Life Technology Model for Graduating and Transitioning Postsecondary Students with Disabilities in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Rory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2014
* USD 199,849.00

The Quality of Life Technology Enrichment (QuOTE) Project was awarded to The
University of Pittsburg's Quality of Life Technology Engineering Research Center
(QoLT ERC). The NSF-funded QoLT is a unique partnership between Carnegie Mellon
University and the University of Pittsburgh whose mission is to transform lives
in a large and growing segment of the population: people with reduced functional
capabilities due to aging or disability. The PI and her team will focus their
efforts on building a model to transition students with disabilities across two
critical academic junctures in post-secondary STEM education. They will create
and evaluate a model that involves the cyber infrastructure development and that
can be easily replicated and adapted by other post-secondary institutions. The
specific objectives of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Create a university-wide
data collection system on students with disabilities;&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop an
infrastructure to support an online learning community for faculty and students
with disabilities in STEM fields (the ConnectAbility portal);&lt;br/&gt;3. Pilot
and evaluate the model and the components of the model. &lt;br/&gt;The
ConnectAbility portal will include web-based faculty and mentor training
modules; a two-course series, one for Freshmen and one for Junior and Senior
students related to transition issues; and an e-mentoring program that uses the
two-course series to facilitate communication and interaction between mentors
and mentees. The ConnectAbility portal will be designed to allow easy
replication and adaptation by other institutions and serve as a one-stop gateway
for all program staff and participants. The project will ensure the
accessibility of the portal and comply with current accessibility standards and
guidelines (e.g., the WCAG 2.0 and the Section 508 standards). &lt;br/&gt;The
evaluation plan for this project will use educational process and outcome
measures that address program effectiveness in (1) gathering and analyzing data
and (2) developing, piloting, and evaluating interventions. Results from this
project have the potential to inform and influence post-secondary STEM education
for students with disabilities by building and evaluating a replicable model for
the delivery of practices the promote success for students with disabilities in
STEM post-secondary education and employment-related programs.