* 1128992
* Collaborative Research: Micromachined In-Plane Resonator Arrays with Integrated Temperature Modulation: A Systems Approach to Liquid-Phase Chemical Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Fabien Josse, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

RE: Proposal ECCS?1128992&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Micromachined In-
Plane Resonator Arrays with Integrated Temperature Modulation: A Systems
Approach to Liquid-Phase Chemical Sensing &lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop a highly sensitive and selective
liquid-phase, array-based chemical-sensing system of individually
functionalized, micromachined resonators vibrating in an in-plane mode.
Prismatic cantilevers, hammerheads and trampoline devices will be investigated,
with the most promising being selected for detailed design and fabrication. A
novel system-level approach will be explored to address the selectivity
challenge by utilizing the temperature-dependence of individual polymer-coated
sensor elements. This will allow the use of signal transients that are affected
by the sorption kinetics of analytes into polymers, thus providing additional
information for analyte quantification. The array-based device will be
implemented in an integrated fluidics package for ease of operation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in the development of a
liquid-phase, array-based chemical-sensing system having improved discriminatory
power. The theoretical models and selective array system approach will
ultimately guide the design of more efficient microresonant sensors operating in
any environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact stems from the
availability of the improved microresonator-based array sensing platform for
liquid-phase (bio)chemical sensing and as an educational tool coupling state-of-
the-art microfabrication, sensor technology and systems engineering with
(bio)chemical and medical applications. The proposed microresonators are ideally
suited as an educational tool for graduate and undergraduate students and for
K-12 outreach programs. They will also impact sensing system technology through
their improved analyte discrimination. Utilizing additional features of coated
devices rather than developing new sensing films could be truly transformative,
enabling the development of new sensing systems for applications ranging from
environmental monitoring to medical diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;