* 1128384
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Evolution of Cercopithecoid Locomotion: A Morphometric, Phylogenetic, and Character Mapping Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Erik Seiffert, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 14,156.00

The results of this dissertation will provide a new hypothesis for the process
by which locomotion evolved in Old World Monkeys. The dataset to be collected is
extensive and includes four postcranial elements of 49 species. Data will be
made accessible online to other researchers after completion of the
dissertation. An online database will allow access to people who may not have
the resources to collect such data on their own, such as undergraduates at small
institutions or students in developing countries. The research also incorporates
undergraduates and is training a female scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Old
World monkeys (OWMs)- monkeys that are distributed in Africa and Asia - are
unique among primates for having several ground-dwelling, or terrestrial,
species across many lineages. Even extant lineages that are almost strictly
tree-dwelling, or arboreal, have highly terrestrial members in their fossil
record. Therefore, the ancestor of OWMs is most commonly thought to have been at
least partly terrestrial, with many groups secondarily evolving arboreal
behavior. Support for this conclusion has been identified in the fossil species
Victoriapithecus, a close relative of living OWMs that exhibits many traits
thought to be adaptive for terrestriality. However, the process by which OWM
locomotion evolved (i.e. the timing and number of locomotor transitions) remains
unclear. Thus, the aim of this dissertation is to test the hypothesis that OWMs
are ancestrally terrestrial, and to determine when and how many times locomotor
transitions occurred. To accomplish this goal, measurements will be taken on
four postcranial elements, the humerus, femur, astragalus, and calcaneus, of a
diverse sample of living and fossil OWMs at several domestic and international
museums. Statistical methods used will seek to discriminate arboreal and
terrestrial species based on differences in their postcranial elements. The
benefit of such an analysis is that fossil species, for which the locomotor mode
is unknown, can be assigned to a group by the analysis providing the most likely
locomotor behavior of the fossil. Measurements will then be mapped onto a
phylogeny, a tree of proposed relationships among species, of living and fossil
species to determine the most likely locomotor mode of the ancestor of OWMs.