* 1128436
* Collaborative: Gesture Recognition Challenge
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Isabelle Guyon, Clopinet
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2012
* USD 49,800.00

The objective of this research is both to advance the field of video data
processing (more particularly gesture recognition) and to illustrate the power
of deep learning architectures and transfer learning. The approach is to
organize a challenge culminating in a life evaluation at the site of a
conference. Intellectual merit: Much of the recent research in Adaptive and
Intelligent Systems (AIS) has sacrificed the grand goal of designing systems
ever approaching human intelligence for solving data mining tasks of practical
interest with more immediate reward. This project gives an opportunity to deep
learning architectures inspired by neural networks to demonstrate their ability
to address more complex problems requiring to transfer knowledge from task to
task (transfer learning), leveraging the availability of video data not directly
related to the target task of gesture recognition. The participants will also be
involved in a data exchange to grow an unprecedented large and diverse database
of gestures. Broader Impact: Challenges have proved to be a great stimulus of
research. For a long lasting impact, the challenge platform and the data and
software repositories will remain open beyond the term of the NSF funded
project. The educational components of the project include engaging students in
the contest, providing material directly usable in teaching curricula, and
demonstrating gesture recognition to high school students to expose them to
computer vision research and sign language communication. Our connections with
the deaf community will allow us to gear the product of this research to advance
assistive technology.