* 1128040
* 3rd Collaborative Research Network Program (CRN3)
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2020
* Marcella Ohira, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/29/2020
* USD 9,843,496.00

The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) is an
international treaty organization, created to coordinate and promote scientific
research related to global change in the Americas. The Institute has an evolving
Science Agenda identifying particular areas for research that have been defined
by the scientific community of the Americas. The Science Agenda is complementary
to the research priorities of the US Global Change Research Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the US contribution to the third round
of the IAI Collaborative Research Program (CRN3). The program support 10-12
regional research networks addressing global change issues of regional relevance
that advance the understanding of global change phenomena and their socio-
economic impacts. All projects are highly interdisciplinary. Each network
involves Principal Investigators and Co-Investigators from institutions in at
least four IAI member countries (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica,
Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Ecuador, Jamaica, Mexico,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, USA and Venezuela). The networks were selected
on the basis of submitted proposals evaluated for technical merit using a peer-
review system. Results from this research will be available to the US scientific
community, as a condition of US funding, through an electronic data and
information system. The IAI receives additional support for its activities from
the other Parties. This additional support takes the form of direct
contributions to the IAI Budget, in-kind contributions, or in-kind contribution
pledges made at the time of proposal submission in the form of investigator
salaries, ship-time, computer time, logistical support, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is integrative, involving the natural and the
social sciences in a collaborative way and seeking to provide sound scientific
understanding of global change issues in support of sustainable development in
the region. CRN3 promotes applied science with a focus on emerging issues and
themes that have not been dealt with under previous IAI programs or that are not
yet (fully) explored. The CRN program brings together multinational and
multidisciplinary teams of researchers to carry out regional-level research
projects that no one country or institution could carry out individually. The
collective research capacity of the participating institutions is huge, making
possible an entirely new structure for participation in multinational and
multidisciplinary projects focused on global change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of the individual projects contribute to the development and
strengthening of regional capacity to deal with global change. The program
provides a scientific basis for documenting, understanding and projecting
changes in the Earth system, and specifically to facilitate the full use of
scientific information in policy and decision making. CRN3 includes a strong
capacity building component in terms of graduate and post-graduate education and
enhancement of institutional infrastructure, and also promotes the participation
of scientists from countries with less developed global change research
communities. The first and second rounds of CRN showed that the multinational
component of the projects provides an excellent opportunity for dialogue and
exchanges among top researchers, students, decision makers and institutions from
across the Americas, which in many cases led to partnerships that lasted and
evolved far beyond the end of the individual CRN1 and CRN2 projects. CRN3 also
promotes partnerships with other regional and/or international projects and
programs. Under the first rounds of CRN, those linkages were very effective not
only in terms of coordination of associated efforts, but also as a medium to
distribute the results of CRN science to a very broad audience. The synthesis of
CRN3 will be done through a technical synthesis for the scientific community and
a non-technical synthesis for policy and decisions makers. This second synthesis
is part of the IAI's strategy of communicating scientific information, models,
and conclusions to and among researchers, educators, students, resource and
industrial managers, policy makers and the public.