* 1129659
* The effects of chemical structure on hydrolysis/uptake of small peptides in the marine environment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Zhanfei Liu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2015
* USD 333,290.00

An understanding of the cycling of carbon and nitrogen in the surface ocean is
necessary for many reasons, including understanding the impacts of marine and
other environmental changes in a changing climate. Much of the research focus
has been on inorganic forms of carbon and nitrogen and, in particular, little is
known about the cycling of dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) compounds in the
surface ocean and their impact. Researchers at the University of Texas at Austin
will investigate peptides and proteins, one class or organic nitrogen compounds
released from marine biota. These compounds can be taken up and incorporated if
they have sufficiently small molecular weight and/or recycled back to inorganic
nitrogen by bacteria, potentially supporting primary production. Conversion,
primarily by extracellular enzymatic hydrolysis, produces small peptides or free
amino acids that can be assimilated by microbes. The proposed research will
investigate the mechanisms of peptide hydrolysis, their importance in the
overall breakdown and/or preservation of DON in ocean waters, and the role of
chemical structure in influencing the reaction pathways. The study will use
novel and innovative techniques which are a substantial advancement over
currently used approaches, to examine these processes. These approaches include
the use of isotopically labeled compounds as well as specific compounds
(peptides and related compounds) manufactured in the laboratory. The study
should provide significant advancements in our understanding of DON dynamics in
the marine nitrogen cycle. The project will involve students at the graduate,
undergraduate and high school level and will have a significant outreach
component. Interactions will include summer undergraduate programs, public
seminars and related activities and Science and the Sea, a syndicated radio
program.