* 1129278
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Interracial Conduct in an Integrated Neighborhood
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Sarah Mayorga, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2012
* USD 7,952.00

SES-1129278&lt;br/&gt;Eduardo Bonnila-Silva&lt;br/&gt;Sarah
Mayorga&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to observe and analyze social interaction between and within three racial and
ethnic groups in an integrated neighborhood. By focusing on social relationships
in an integrated neighborhood, we move beyond traditional studies of segregation
research that use segregation indices, such as the dissimilarity index.
Additionally, this study examines how the concept of social distance, which
highlights social interaction between groups, may explain the quantity and
quality of encounters between black, white, and Latino residents. This project
will assess the social environment of an integrated neighborhood by documenting
and questioning the attitudes, behaviors, and relationships of neighborhood
residents. These data will be collected through neighborhood observations, in-
depth interviews with residents, and a neighborhood-wide survey. Lastly, data
will be analyzed using modified grounded theory, a process that uses data and
existing theory to develop concepts and new theories (Charmaz 2006).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed analysis addresses two major limitations of
segregation research: two group comparisons (e.g. black-white) and Census data-
based analyses (Ellen 1998). By studying neighborhood life in an integrated
neighborhood through the proposed research design, this study highlights an
element absent from cross-city comparisons: people. Furthermore, since this
research is taking place in a new destination for Latino migration, it
emphasizes the experience of recently migrated Latinos (Parrado and Flippen
2005). How Latino residents are incorporated and understood by their neighbors,
as well as how migrants understand their own experiences inside this
neighborhood are of particular interest. The recent arrival of Latin American
migrants provides an opportunity to see how an area with an existing racial
dynamic adjusts to the introduction of a new group (Kim 1999).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, Durham's population shifts from a biracial
to a multi-ethnic city parallel demographic changes in other growing American
cities. Studying this experience is essential to understanding the future of
immigration and segregation in this country (Hirschman and Massey 2008:3).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lastly, Federal programs like HOPE VI, a Public and Indian
Housing program promoting mixed-income communities, follow in the tradition of
sociological research on integration (US Department of Housing and Urban
Development's Home and Communities; Wilson 1987) and may benefit from the
proposed project's findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This project
will provide new and policy-relevant information on social life in an integrated
neighborhood.