* 1129741
* Statistical Modeling and Contact Analysis of Fractal Topography for Radio-Frequency (RF)-MEMS
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Vijaya Chalivendra, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 269,383.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a multi-scale fractal
topography model for contact analysis in RF-MEMS (Radio Frequency MEMS) to
improve the reliability in its design and manufacturing. Topography of mating
surfaces and contact mechanics determines the performance quality of RF-MEMS.
Topography is a random field and has scale-dependent regular and self-affine
fractal signal features over several orders of magnitude, ranging from 1nm to
100Ã¬m. In this award, a novel and widely-applicable methodology for
characterizing and modeling multi-scale fractal topography will be developed
that will then be incorporated into contact analysis for RF-MEMS performance and
reliability improvement. The four key research objectives are: the development
of a rigorous statistical methodology for micro/nano topography acquisition,
characterization, and modeling in the face of multi-scale, fractal, and random
surface structures; 2) development of a statistical regular-fractal topography
model that has a high fidelity and correlation to real topography; 3) creation
of a micro/nano-contact simulation that takes into account elasto-plastic
deformation, multi-scale hierarchical asperity, and statistical topography; and
4) generation of new knowledge on failure mechanisms obtained from the
correlation among topography, contact simulation, and experimental
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research would lead to
a new model for surface topography and its associated contact mechanics for use
in micro-electro-mechanical systems. The creation of a new computational
infrastructure will be quite impactful. The results of the study can be used
directly in MEMS industries for measuring, characterizing, and quantifying the
distribution and evolution of charge and wear of surfaces in MEMS switches over
time and for studying consistency and variability of surfaces, enhancing both
design and manufacturing. The results of this award will disseminated widely via
professional academic and industrial collaborative networks, journal
publications, and conferences. Under-represented graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in this research and will receive valuable exposure to
the challenges of information extraction, statistical modeling and metrological
techniques used in data acquisition. Some of the results from the research will
be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses, benefiting all the
engineering students at the university. The results of this study will also be
shared to incoming freshmen through the Freshmen Summer Institute (FSI) program.