* 1129802
* Fabrication of Large-Area and Large-Bandgap Semiconducting Graphene Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Arnold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 426,299.00

The overarching goal of this project is to learn how to open up a
technologically relevant bandgap in graphene via top-down nanopatterning and
nanomanufacturing approaches that can be scaled to large-areas. Our specific
objectives are to: (1) tailor and reduce nanopattern- size and shape to achieve
larger bandgaps > 0.5 eV; (2) learn how to scale to ~5x5 cm2 or larger ?wafers?
of semiconducting graphene; (3) control the atomic functionalization of graphene
edges which become increasingly important as feature-size is reduced; and (4)
demonstrate proof-of-principal wafer-wide arrays of semiconducting graphene
electronic devices. Our approach for nanomanufacturing large bandgap graphene in
a scalable fashion will be to employ self-directed lithographic templates. The
templates will be based on block copolymers and small molecules that will be
tailored to self-assemble on graphene with unprecedented patterning resolution
and will be used in conjunction with controlled top-down patterning to control
the electronic behaviors of graphene. Broader significant and importance:
Graphene has received substantial attention recently because of its exceptional
electronic, optical, mechanical, and thermal properties. While unpatterned
graphene is not a semiconductor, nanopatterned graphene acts like one, meaning
that its electrical conductivity can be switched ?ON? and ?OFF?. This has
spurred excitement for semiconducting graphene in electronics, infrared
optoelectronics and photonics, biosensing, and solar energy harvesting in hopes
of exploiting graphene?s exceptional properties for these applications. The
proposed research will culminate in novel nanomanufacturing processes that will
enable the fabrication of large-area ?wafers? of technologically relevant
semiconducting graphene. The semiconducting graphene ?wafers? will be
transformative and powerful materials platforms for launching a wide range of
next-generation applications based on carbon nanotechnology. The principal
investigators will also mentor undergraduate and under-represented students in
research and participate in a course at UW-Madison designed to allow bench
scientists and science communicators to develop and use effective strategies for
communicating with the general public about science and technology, particularly
about nanotechnology.