* 1129166
* LINKING VARIATION IN METABOLIC PROCESSES AS A KEY TO PREDICTION
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Blaine Griffen, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 575,963.00

A major goal of biological and ecological sciences is to understand natural
systems well enough to predict how species and populations will respond to a
rapidly changing world (i.e., climate change, habitat loss, etc.). A population
under any conditions will grow, shrink, or disappear altogether depending on how
efficiently individuals consume resources (food), utilize that food
metabolically, and eventually reproduce. However, making accurate predictions
based on these metabolic processes is complicated by the realities that each
species has different resource requirements and that no two individuals within a
species are exactly alike. Rather, individuals vary and this variation, both
within and across species, is central to many ecological and evolutionary
processes. Developing the ability to predict responses of biological systems to
a changing world therefore requires a mechanistic understanding of variation.
The goal of this project is to improve this mechanistic understanding by
examining variation within a metabolic context across a range of species that
have a spectrum of commonly-seen resource requirements. Further, the work
capitalizes on a unique biological characteristic of this group of species that
allows control and manipulation of individual reproduction, facilitating
experimental study of the mechanistic links between variation in individual
consumption, metabolism, and reproduction. The foundation this research is a
combination of field measurements and laboratory experiments using both well-
established and newly-developed techniques to quantify these links. The result
will be a quantitative framework to predict how individuals will respond
reproductively to changes in resource use. Because of the close link between
individual reproduction and population dynamics, this research will contribute
substantially to predictions in population dynamics under realistic conditions
where individuals use more than a single resource, and improve the prediction of
responses to current and future ecological changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will make broad
contributions to society in three ways. (1) The development of K-12 lesson plans
to enhance science education, contributing to the broader goal of enhancing
early STEM education in the United States. This aspect of the project brings
together local grade school teachers, undergraduate students in elementary
education from the University of South Carolina (USC), and experts from the USC
Center for Science Education to develop a series of lesson plans based on the
proposed scientific investigations. (2) Improve commonly used chemical tool
(stable isotopes) used in assessing food web links in ecological systems. (3)
Improve understanding of species of management concern. Several of the study
species are of management concern because they are either problematic invaders
in many areas globally, are currently increasing in abundance as a result of
reduced consumer pressure because of overfishing, or are dominant yet
understudied consumers in their respective habitats. This study will provide
important information on the impacts of these species, as well as on their
reproductive potential.