* 1129072
* Collaborative research: Water stratigraphy of the oceanic lithosphere using mantle xenoliths from Hawaii
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Anne Peslier, Jacobs Technology Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 47,750.00

The funded project provides the first set of measurements of the H2O content of
the oceanic mantle and involves collaboration between an academic institution
and a private sector firm that has a unique capability to measure H2O in igneous
minerals (high-resolution FTIR). The importance of this work lies in the fact
that small differences in mantle H2O content can have profound effects on mantle
rheology and seismic structure, both of which can impact magma generation and
crustal movement and have implications for our understanding and prediction of
geohazards. Because the mantle is not directly accessible, the investigators
implemented a clever approach in which H2O will be measured in minerals coming
from pieces of mantle rock (i.e., xenoliths) that were ripped up during the
eruption and upward migration of magma of Hawaiian volcanoes. Using
compositional relations of mineral pairs that indicate the depth at which the
minerals formed, the depth of origin of the various xenoliths that are to be
studied can be determined. Using these, the H2O content of the minerals will be
examined by Fourier Transform Infra Red (FTIR) spectroscopy. Xenoliths
distributed over 300 km along the Hawaiian Island chain and mantle depths to up
to 100 km will be analyzed. Broader impacts of the work are robust and
multifaceted. A major impact of the project is the provision of essential data
that is needed to better interpret the seismic structure of the ocean crust,
which will impact our ability to better model the source areas of geohazards
like volcanoes and subduction zone earthquakes. The work also supports
collaboration between a public university in an EPSCoR state and private
industry. It also has a significant component of in-service teacher training
where high school teachers in South Carolina work in the laboratory of the lead
PI during the summer, getting a chance to engage in frontline research with
academic scientist. The teacher?s research will form the basis for classroom and
K-12 instructional materials. Workforce training will be carried through the
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art
geochemical analytical techniques. The Program notes that the graduate student
is from a group under-represented in the science.