* 1129101
* Collaborative Research: An Ultra-High Resolution Holocene Climate Record from a Varved Sediment Sequence from the Adelie Coast, Antarctica (IODP Exp 318)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Robert Dunbar, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2014
* USD 221,408.00

A key region for analysis of long- and short-term behavior of the East Antarctic
Ice Sheet (EAIS) is the eastern sector of the Wilkes Land margin, located at the
seaward termination of the largest subglacial basin in East Antarctica, the
Wilkes subglacial basin. The Wilkes subglacial basin may in fact respond to
climate variability in a fashion similar to the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.
Additionally, a significant portion of all Antarctic Bottom Water may originate
from this part of the Antarctic coast, making this region a key player in
oceanic circulation patterns. The Integrated Ocean Drilling Program Expedition
318 to Wilkes Land recently obtained nearly 3,000 meters of sedimentary cores.
Drill site U1357, obtained a unique ultra-high accumulation rate sedimentary
sequence from the Adelie Basin that extends from the latest glacial interval
through the Holocene. These seasonally laminated deposits constitute one of the
world's most expanded archives of environmental change during the Holocene. The
sediments contain a near annual-resolution record of when and how the ice sheet
margin retreated from the shelf ~12,000 kyr B.P. They also contain a record of
past changes in water temperature, water mass reservoir age, stratification,
productivity, sea ice extent, and possibly bottom water production throughout
the Holocene. In this collaborative proposal, the P.I.'s request funding for
morphometric, stable isotopic, and geochemical analyses of foraminifera
recovered from the sediment column. These will be used to produce the first
high-resolution (sub-decadal to decadal) foraminiferal isotopic and chemical
climate time series from the Antarctic margin.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit -
The results from this project will provide, for the first time, the requisite
data at subdecadal to decadal resolution to address a number of questions
related to oceanographic and climatic changes that occurred on and around
Antarctica during the Holocene, including: 1) How does the style and timing of
deglaciation along the East Antarctic Margin compare with other parts of the
Antarctic Margin? 2) What were the responses of the East Antarctic Margin
glacial system to deglaciation as well as global and regional Holocene climate
fluctuations? 3) How did oceanic circulation and bottom water production vary
during the Holocene? As part of our post-expedition educational outreach, we
will organize two additional interactive webcasts targeting science museums and
secondary schools during the course of this research. At Stanford, we will
continue to disseminate the results of this work to secondary schools via a
funded NASA project wherein he is meeting regularly with science teachers from
around the SF Bay Area. Additionally, we are engaging up to 8 undergraduate
students at Queens College and Stanford University in the project as interns and
will guide them through the process of envisioning