* 1129538
* Conference Support to Send US Participants to the Twelfth Pan-American Congress of Applied Mechanics (PACAM XII); Port of Spain, Trinidad; January 2-6, 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Adrian Lew, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 09/30/2012
* USD 34,500.00

The goal of this proposal is to foster the establishment of new scientific links
between North, Central and South America among the next generation of scientific
leaders in Applied Mechanics. This will be accomplished by awarding travel
fellowships to young scientists from the United States to the Twelfth Pan-
American Congress of Applied Mechanics, to take place in Port of Spain,
Trinidad, on January 3-6, 2012. This group of young scientist will be graduate
students, postdoctoral researchers and early career professors, selected by
members of the organizing committee of the conference upon revision and ranking
of the submitted abstract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The economic growth of some
South American countries is now beginning to be reflected in their research
portfolio. The conference will strengthen scientific relations between the
United States and South and Central America. Additionally, a selection of papers
submitted to the conference will be included in the collection "Applied
Mechanics in the Americas 2012," which will be distributed to attendees and made
available in an archival website. The authors of the most meritorious
presentations will also be invited to contribute a paper to a special issue of
the Journal of Applied Mechanics. Finally, a comprehensive website for the
conference will be created as the conference approaches, and will remain there
for at least two years after the conference, until the next PACAM. The website
can be found at http://www.pacamxii.org, and it is being progressively enriched
with information as it comes along. The entire program of the conference will be
displayed there, including the submitted abstracts.