* 1129782
* Collaborative Research: Tasmanian Tidal Dissipation Experiment (T-TIDE)
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Jonathan Nash, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 679,394.00

Intellectual Merit

Tidal mixing of the deep ocean does not necessarily occur where energy is lost
from the barotropic tide, but rather where the low-mode baroclinic tide
dissipates, perhaps thousands of kilometers away. Ocean general circulation
models are sensitive to the magnitude and geography of deep mixing, but very few
observations of this process exist. Understanding the location and mechanisms of
tidal dissipation is necessary for their continued improvement. The Tasmanian
Tidal Dissipation Experiment?s (T-TIDE) hypothesis is that significant tidal
dissipation takes place where propagating low-mode internal tides impinge on
steep continental slopes. Slope geometry affects wave reflection, transmission,
scattering, and breaking, which in turn determine the spatial distribution of
mixing. Important breaking mechanisms may include lee effects at small-scale
bathymetry and nonlinear bore formation near critical slopes. We propose a
coordinated observational/modeling effort to understand the physics geometry,
and magnitude of dissipation and mixing. The goals are to 1) identify where
mixing occurs on the continental slope, 2) determine the dominant dissipative
processes, 3) assess the amount of energy transmitted onto the shelf and
reflected back into the deep sea to be dissipated elsewhere, and 4) generalize
these results as a parameterization of topographic scattering and dissipation in
numerical models, which ideally depends on the topography, stratification, and
the barotropic and/or low-mode baroclinic tides. The three main components to
the experimental plan are 1) intensive 2D and 3D modeling before and after the
fieldwork to plan and contextualize the measurements; 2) a glider based Scout
Experiment to identify dynamic processes, evaluate models, and finalize mooring
sites; and 3) a comprehensive Process Experiment using ships, gliders, and
moorings with the time and space resolution to address T-TIDEs hypothesis and
achieve its goals. An array of profiling and fixed-sensor moorings will be
combined with gliders acting as virtual moorings. Tidally-resolving or higher-
frequency observations will measure internal wave motions, energy fluxes, and
dissipation and mixing either directly or via finescale parameterizations. An
altimetric analysis of internal-tide sea surface height will assess mesoscale
refraction of the incident internal tide along with Australian gliders, which
will monitor hydrography and internal tidal displacements in the Tasman Sea.

Broader Impacts

The proposed work will provide global insights on the dissipation of tidal
energy. Specifically, inclusion of tidal dissipation on continental slopes may
be an important component of the next generation of mixing parameterizations in
climate models. Graduate students will be trained as part of the experiment. In
addition to its scientific import, T-TIDE will sponsor and participate in two
training seminars with high school science teachers who are charged with
delivering the earth science program in San Diego Unified School District. This
effort will be performed in conjunction with the Birch Aquarium at Scripps.
Finally, an essential element of the project is the development of strong
collaboration and resource sharing with Australian and Canadian scientists.