* 1129644
* Collaborative Research: An Inverse and Forward Global Modeling Synthesis of Noble Gases to Better Quantify Biogeochemical Cycles
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Rachel Stanley, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 392,175.00

The noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon) are dissolved in the ocean
at concentrations near equilibrium with the atmosphere, have known physical
properties, and are abiotic which makes them excellent tracers of the physical
processes that cycle gases in the ocean. In addition, each of the gases has
unique properties making them sensitive to different physical processes. For
this reason, scientists from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Lamont-
Doherty Earth Observatory will use inverse and forward modeling of noble gases
to improve our knowledge of the physical processes that control the cycle of
gases such as carbon dioxide, oxygen, and nitrogen in the ocean. Specifically,
they would address the following three processes: (1) parameterize bubble
mediated air-sea gas fluxes from breaking waves; (2) identify the background
ocean accumulation of dissolved nitrogen gas from biologically mediated
denitrification in the deep ocean; and (3) evaluate the strength of the
solubility pump using three ocean models. To accomplish their goal, the
researchers plan to compile all available noble gas observations prior to
constraining gas cycling via simulations performed using three state-of-the-art
ocean circulation estimates based on the Community Earth System Model, the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory Coupled Climate Model, and the Estimating
the Circulation and Climate of the Ocean data assimilated model. From this
modeling effort, the researchers will be able to interpret upper ocean oxygen
measurements from autonomous sensors, constrain deep ocean denitrification, and
evaluate the solubility pump which is needed to assess the anthropogenic uptake
of carbon dioxide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, the
scientists will create a version of the transport matrix method for use in
graduate student courses. The database of noble gas observations along with data
standards and metadata will be made available to the science community, as well
as the transport matrices from the Community Earth System Model and Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory Couple Climate Model 2.1. One postdoc from Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) will be supported by this project. It is
anticipated that an undergraduate students will be involved in the study and
supported via the WHOI Summer Fellowship Program.