* 1129665
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The AIDS Movement in China 1989-2009
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Yan Long, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 9,650.00

SES-1129665&lt;br/&gt;Elizabeth Armstong&lt;br/&gt;Yan Long&lt;br/&gt;University
of Michigan Ann Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research:
Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;THE AIDS MOVEMENT IN CHINA
1989-2009&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging transnational institutions are playing
an increasingly significant role in governing public health at the national and
local levels. While states continue to be key actors, the new form of health
governance involves a broader range of non-state actors and activism. However,
some large economies, such as China, are resistant to the enlarged influence of
global governance. This project combines comparative historical and ethnography
methods to study whether, how, and with what consequences global institutions
affect domestic collective action in strong states. Focusing on China, the
world's largest authoritarian regime, this project is guided by two research
questions: 1) How and why did transitional health institutions promote the rise
and proliferation of an AIDS movement in China, despite the growth of domestic
political repression during this period? 2) Why did the same process of
increasing international engagement for the Chinese AIDS movement result in the
expansion of some groups and demobilization of others?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
impact of international institutions on domestic politics is of major
theoretical interests to many academic fields, such as sociology, political
science, international relations, and law. This research project speaks directly
to this question, and will make conceptual contribution to both social movement
studies specifically, and to globalization and contentious politics literature
in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Policy-makers,
activists, and scholars have expressed urgency for evaluating current changes in
international governance systems. Research on the authoritarian Chinese regime
will identify factors that contribute to local political mobilization and the
spread of democracy. This project will also help bridge both public dialog and
critical academic studies by providing a valid analysis of the political, social
and cultural consequences of new institutional arrangements at the global level.
In today's world of changing health risks and opportunities, the development of
a broader public health governance opens up participation to grassroots groups.
This study's findings will make an important intervention in the field of global
AIDS by providing insight to funding agencies and health care program designers.