* 1129561
* SFS: An Information and Systems Assurance Scholarship Program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Stephen Yau, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,529,703.00

Ira A. Fulton School of Engineering at Arizona State University is supporting
three cohorts of undergraduate and graduate students in Information Assurance
(IA) via a Federal Cyber Service: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University has developed a strong
cybersecurity curriculum with ten IA courses in computer science and engineering
(CSE) and an additional six courses in other disciplines, including electrical
engineering, industrial engineering, mathematics, and information systems in
ASU's Business School. ASU's IA Research Center has been designated as a
National Center of Academic Excellence in both Information Assurance Education
(CAEIAE) and Research (CAE-R) by the National Security Agency and the Department
of Homeland Security. Its main educational and research programs focus on
trustworthy information systems and the quality of information being stored,
processed or transmitted. The main strengths of this project include: (a) SFS
students are provided with effective mentoring and support to successfully place
them in Federal jobs. (b) In addition to a rigorous academic program emphasizing
both theory and practice, all SFS students participate in IA research as part of
their capstone projects, theses or dissertations. (c) The program promotes
leadership, collaboration and communication skills of SFS scholarship recipients
through their participation in community service, student organizations,
collaborative projects, IA workshops and IA seminars. (d) Students gain hands-on
experiences with various IA areas through ISU's state-of-the-art IA
Instructional Laboratory, cloud-based virtualized IA laboratory, and IA research
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is having an immediate impact on
the Information Assurance and Computer Security capabilities of the federal
workforce by providing highly qualified information technology and engineering
professionals trained in information assurance. In order to help increase the
diversity of IA professionals in the Federal workforce, this scholarship program
is placing special emphasis on recruiting and graduating outstanding female
students and members of other underrepresented groups.