* 1129668
* Collaborative Research:  Linking Propulsive Morphology, Swimming Behavior and Sensory Perception by Marine Planktonic Protists to their Trophic Roles within Marine Food Webs
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Edward Buskey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2015
* USD 214,908.00

One of the central issues in biological oceanography is to understand the
processes that regulate the biomass and distribution of phytoplankton in the
ocean. The fate of most phytoplankton is to be consumed by grazers, and it is
now generally accepted that marine planktonic protists are the most important
grazers on phytoplankton, and that grazing by protists can fundamentally affect
phytoplankton biomass and distribution in the ocean. Protists can become
temporarily very abundant (up to tens of thousands per liter) and can grow
nearly as rapidly as phytoplankton do, which gives them great potential to
regulate phytoplankton populations. Adaptations by protists to feed selectively
on the fastest growing species of phytoplankton and to reduce predation by
metazoan zooplankton should enhance the coupling between phytoplankton growth
and grazing, and therefore promote planktonic ecosystem stability. Compared to
larger metazoan zooplankton such as copepods, relatively little is known about
the morphological and behavioral adaptations in protists for selective feeding
and predator avoidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will study details of
selective feeding behavior and predator avoidance behavior of free-swimming
planktonic protists in 3-dimension using high-speed video. Under the same
conditions, they will measure flow fields imposed by individual free-swimming
protists using a time-resolving stereo micro-particle image velocimetry
(microPIV) system. To gain a mechanistic understanding, they will also conduct
empirical data-driven, reality-reproducing computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
simulations of the protist-imposed flow fields. The results will be used to test
the hypothesis that diversity and flexibility in propulsive morphology
facilitates protists to achieve sophisticated swimming behaviors and sensory
perception capabilities that adapt them for selective feeding and predator
avoidance. These capabilities may also serve as important driving forces for
protistan biodiversity, represented by various sizes, shapes, propulsive
morphologies and motility patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate students
will participate in this project and will receive training in plankton ecology
and marine biology; in theoretical/computational/experimental plankton fluid
mechanics; and in setting up and using sophisticated optical systems. Conducting
research in the field of small-scale biological-physical interactions in
plankton ecology requires interdisciplinary knowledge, and this training will
benefit their preparation for conducting interdisciplinary research. The PIs
will construct an easily-followed and interactive online learning module based
on their results, and will make video clips of protistan behavior available to
educators and the public at large through their web sites.