* 1129611
* Mesenchymal Stem Cells and the Synthetic Microenvironment: An Integrated Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Jianping Fu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

The research objective of this award is to use microfabrication, live cell
imaging, and genetic and molecular tools to investigate the physical effects of
the cell microenvironment on the osteogenic (or bone) differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). The osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs is
sensitive to the mechanical properties (such as matrix stiffness) of the
surrounding cellular microenvironment. In this project, we will use
microfabrication to establish a novel library of elastomeric micropost arrays,
where by modulating the geometrical factors of these micropost arrays, we can
precisely change the stiffness of the micropost array and thus the innate
contractile or mechanical state of hMSCs lying on the microposts. We propose to
use these elastomeric micropost arrays coupled with different genetic and
molecular tools to investigate the functional crosstalk between substrate
stiffness and intracellular cytoskeletal contractility of hMSCs and their
crucial involvements in the mechanoresponsive hMSC osteogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;hMSCs
are adult stem cells that form and heal nearly all of the mechanical tissues in
humans, including bone. Thus, understanding the mechanical regulation of hMSC
osteogenesis may provide insights into hMSC biology and further improve hMSC
osteogenesis in vitro for regenerative therapeutics. The educational activities
of this award will have broad impacts on students from different educational
levels and genders and ethnicities. The technologies developed in the context of
this award will be used as vehicles for outreach activities to K-12 students and
other underrepresented female and minority students in the Michigan Ann Arbor
and Ypsilanti school districts. The outreach activities will reveal to K-12
students the exciting challenges in science and engineering and their close
relevance to our society, thus motivating them to pursue science and engineering
curricula.