* 1129918
* Design and Modeling Framework for Managing Variability in Silicon Interposers for 3D Integration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Madhavan Swaminathan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 387,415.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a design framework that
enables the modeling of multi-physics variability in 2.5D and 3D integrated
micro-systems with a focus on silicon vias (TSVs), by accounting for both local
and global variations across the system. Using this framework, methods will be
developed for localized parametric optimization across the thermal-electrical-
mechanical multi-physics domains for minimizing variability and maximizing
performance. The difficulty in modeling these multi-physics interactions between
the three domains is complicated due to the multi-scale dimensions of the
structures involved and manufacturing variations. In addition, use of
technologies such as micro-fluidics for cooling such systems further complicates
the domains that need to be modeled. The deliverables include the development of
a modeling framework for simultaneous analysis of the thermal, electrical and
mechanical equations across a 2.5D/3D sub-system or system containing TSVs, and
a means to enable the capture of the interaction between the domains and
parameterization in critical areas for the cross domain optimization of the
thermal, electrical and mechanical behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will lead to a design and modeling framework that
could address the problems being faced by the semiconductor industry for the
design of 3D integrated systems. The results of this research will be
disseminated to the design community and also used to develop curriculum
material for 3D system integration to benefit both undergraduate and graduate
students. High school students and teachers will also be educated through this
award by creating awareness amongst them on the issues and challenges being
faced by the semiconductor and electronics industry for miniaturizing electronic
systems.