* 1129682
* Soft Skills - Hard Science: Teaching Soft Skills to Enhance Employment Outcomes for STEM Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Michael Lawler, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2015
* USD 414,812.00

"Soft Skills - Hard Science: A Study of the Impact of Soft Skills Development on
Employment Outcomes for STEM Students with Disabilities" is based on the Social-
Relational Model of Disability, an extension of the Social Model of Disability.
The PI and his team hypothesize that direct intervention of soft skills
development among individuals with disabilities will lead to greater rates of
employment, thus increasing the number of STEM professionals with disabilities.
Thus the hypotheses of this study are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H1: Post-secondary
students with disabilities who receive soft skills training will have higher
rates of success in obtaining employment in STEM-related professions or being
accepted into a related graduate program than those who do not receive such
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H2: Post-secondary students with disabilities who
receive soft skills training in combination with work-based learning and use of
a mentor will be perceived by employers as more prepared for the demands of
competitive employment in STEM-related professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses two research questions:&lt;br/&gt;RQ 1. Does direct training
in "soft skills" increase employment rates of college graduates in STEM-related
professions?&lt;br/&gt;RQ 2. Does participation in a formal mentor-protégé
relationship prior to college graduation increase employers' perceptions of
individuals' soft skills?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A quasi-experimental design is
used to investigate the effect of the intervention, which has three parts:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Disability-specific job seeking/ preparation learning modules
addressing critical thinking, interpersonal effectiveness, work personality and
social networking;&lt;br/&gt;2. Experiential learning through co-op/internship
experience with a STEM employer; and&lt;br/&gt;3. Assignment of a STEM-employed
mentor with a disability who will provide guidance and feedback to participants
throughout their senior year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A sample of 80 STEM students
with disabilities who attend University of Wisconsin-Stout are participating in
the study. Data collected included soft skills development, placement rates and
employment outcomes. Independent variables are: participants' awareness of the
specific soft skills needed for successful employment, as measured by The Soft
Skills Assessment Survey (SSAS), and personal appraisal of appropriate use of
identified soft skills based on "expert" feedback, a self-report measure. The
Career Services Department at UW-Stout facilitates tracking employment and
placement data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissemination plan includes the
Association on Higher Education and Disability as a key player in disseminating
to the audience of college disability service professionals and others who
support students with disabilities. All documents, including how-to replication
manuals, created through this project are available on the project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is evaluated by an external evaluator
who has a separate award to conduct evaluation for RDE-funded research projects.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Individuals with disabilities continue to be
underrepresented in STEM professions. Past efforts to increase workforce
participation in STEM fields have largely excluded recognition of bio-
psychosocial factors and intrapersonal skills building to obtain and maintain
employment. The project is contributing to the knowledge base related successful
transition to the STEM workforce and success in STEM employment.