* 1129582
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Contributions of Citizen Science, Including Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI), to Development Evaluation in Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Douglas Grane, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

The goal of this research is to examine the role citizens play or could play in
measuring the effectiveness of international aid projects for which they are the
intended beneficiaries and the role of geographic mapping in evaluating
international aid policies, programs, and projects. Recent international
agreements on principles for measuring the effectiveness of aid to developing
countries have exposed knowledge gaps in the scholarship on development aid.
These include a deficit in our understanding of the contributions of citizens of
developing countries toward measuring the effectiveness of aid as well as a lack
of evidence about the potential contribution of geographic mapping to improving
the measurement of aid outcomes. Ongoing Kenyan government project monitoring
systems as they are applied to international aid projects in the educational
sector will be compared with citizen led efforts to monitor and map the results
of these projects. In particular, the research will focus on the evaluation of
free education programs in Kenya for which the government tracks indicators such
as the number of new enrollments in community schools. The research will examine
the efforts of citizens through a project called Uwezo (Kiswahili for capacity)
who are mapping communities across Kenya to determine where the most vulnerable
children reside. This study will examine both government monitoring activities
and citizen projects like Uwezo. Qualitative interviews and focus group
interviews will capture the experiences of stakeholders and beneficiaries of
government and citizen led monitoring activities. Qualitative analysis software
will assist in analyzing the content of these interviews. Statistical methods
will be used to analyze data from both government and citizen led monitoring
activities. The results of traditional project monitoring methods will be
compared with citizen led mapping exercises.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study
will enhance scientific understanding about the utility of citizen knowledge and
mapping for evaluating development projects. The findings from this study of
citizen volunteered geographic information will add knowledge about human and
scientific resources available to better evaluate investments in international
development aid. This study in Kenya might have direct application for foreign
aid policies and international development scholarship and practice beyond aid
investments in Kenya alone. Because this project is a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award will also provide support for building a
strong independent research career centered on important scientific and public
policy concerns.