* 1129658
* Collaborative Research: Defect Modeling and Process Optimization for Nanowire Growth towards Improved Nanodevice Reliability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Haitao Liao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 168,000.00

The objective of this award is to optimize the growth process of semiconductor
nanowires (NWs) by modeling the interrelationship between their growth process
variables, structural defects, and mechanical properties, so that reliable NW-
based devices with fewer defects can be produced. A double-loop framework will
be investigated in this research, which links NW defects and the reliability of
NW-based devices for the first time. The fundamental questions to be answered
are: (1) How to systematically establish the relationship between the process
variables, the generation rates of different NW defects, and the reliability of
NW-based devices? (2) How to expedite the reliability prediction for NW-based
devices and use the achieved reliability information to perform the application-
centric defect reduction through the manipulation of the NW growth process?
Specifically, we will (1) model the stochastic generation process of NW defects
that link the generation of different types of defects to the NW growth-process
variables; (2) develop a statistical fracture model for NWs with various defects
under mechanical loading; (3) explore an advanced accelerated testing
methodology and optimize the NW growth process by the optimal experimental
design methods; and (4) conduct validation studies based on the proposed
methodology by developing benchmark NW-based nanodevices, and demonstrate their
desired reliability performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will facilitate today's fast-paced technological advancements that are
continually faced with increasing needs for cost-effective product-development
technologies. It will result in an appealing practice that helps resolve common
fabrication problems in a wide spectrum of nanomaterials/device development
processes. It is expected that a systematic process optimization approach for
the development of highly reliable NW-based devices, instead of trial-and-error
approaches that are currently used in the field of nanomanufacturing, will be
achieved. Moreover, the educational initiatives will strengthen the related
programs at the two collaborative institutions, which will impact a large number
of on-campus and nationwide distance students. The research result will also be
broadly disseminated through technical publications, workshops, short courses,
and K-12 outreach program.