* 1129009
* Stress Corrosion Micro-Cracking or Static Fatigue:  The Principal Cause of Rate Effects and "Aging" in Sand
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Radoslaw Michalowski, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 354,072.00

Time and rate effects in sands affect both the short- and long-term behavior of
earth structures, yet understanding of the causes of that behavior is lacking. A
hypothesis is suggested that makes use of the process of micro-fracturing of the
microscopic morphological features on grain surfaces to explain the nature of
time effects in sand. The new approach this research is taking makes it
potentially transformative. Experimental observation techniques based on
Scanning Electron Microscopy and Atomic Force Microscopy will be employed to
produce visual evidence for time-delayed micro-fracturing of asperities on grain
surfaces (static fatigue), whereas micro- and macro-loading tests will be used
to gain quantitative evidence. The scientific merit of this research is in its
creative and original concept exploiting the multi-scale approach to explain the
puzzling time-related effects in sand. The engineering relevance of this
research is that the time-dependent behavior of soils can have important
consequences on design and long-term behavior of earth structures and on soil-
structure interaction (for instance, the load on retaining structures can
increase in time as a result of the time-dependent nature of sand behavior).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research will affect areas beyond
geotechnical engineering, e.g., space exploration missions, which require
predictions of surface mobility, planning of drilling operations, and processing
of the Lunar/Martian regolith. Due to the absence of water and atmosphere, Lunar
regolith grains have a rich surface morphology, a characteristic central to the
hypothesis in this research. This research promotes a new concept, advances
discovery, and promotes learning.