* 1129419
* DYNamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation / Analysis of subsurface fluxes with coupled large-eddy simulation models
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* William Smyth, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2015
* USD 595,739.00

DYNAMO is a US research program designed to identify atmospheric and oceanic
processes that are important during the initiation phase of the Madden-Julian
Oscillation (MJO). Data will be collected across the tropical Indian Ocean and
used with model experiments to accelerate our understanding MJO formation and
evolution. As part of DYNAMO, we propose a coupled modeling study of small scale
mixing processes that govern SST and atmospheric convection in the equatorial
Indian Ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This proposal focuses on
the upper ocean component of this effort with the aim of using detailed process
simulations to better understand how measured heat fluxes are controlled in the
ocean boundary layer and how these fluxes interact with atmospheric convection.
Results will also help guide measurement strategies during the field program.
Understanding ocean mixed layer processes is a critical step in determining the
role of the ocean as a heat and moisture source for atmospheric convection that
drives the MJO. The objectives will be reached by performing sets of oceanic and
atmospheric Large Eddy Simulation (LES) numerical experiments, including
coupling with an ocean mixed layer model, to examine air-sea and ocean mixed
layer fluxes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: MJO events can have a
significant impact on tropical populations via frequent tropical storms and
heavy rain events. The proposed work will provide further knowledge of the role
of the ocean in driving convection associated with MJO formation and evolution,
and will thus lead to better MJO forecasts. This project will support and train
a graduate student and provide a valuable research experience for a post doc
researcher. As part of this effort, a user-friendly version of our upgraded KPP
model will be made available from our department website. We plan to include a
graphical interface and sample cases for ocean conditions in the tropical Indian
and Pacific oceans for use in research and teaching.