* 1129894
* IDR/Collaborative Research:  Experimental and Computational Foundations for Nonlinear Pattern Formation in the Deposition of Elastic Rods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Pedro Miguel Reis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 419,984.00

The goal of this research grant is to elucidate the mechanism and predictively
understand the physics of coiling patterns obtained when thin flexible elastic
filaments (rods) are deposited onto rigid substrates. The investigation requires
the complementary interplay between high-precision model experiments and
computational geometric mechanics codes. An important aspect of the project is
the porting of techniques from the field of computer graphics as predictive
engineering tools. The first stage of research examines the base configuration,
in which a rod is injected onto a static or moving conveyor belt, generating a
series of coiling patterns. The transitions between coiling phases are mapped
and rationalized through mathematical modeling. The second stage of research
examines more complicated forms of loading of the thin rod including (a) torsion
as a control parameter to precisely generate the coiling patterns, (b)
aerodynamic drag of the hanging filament, and (c) adhesion onto the substrate.
The third stage studies coiling over non-flat complex topographies, seeking to
develop a generalized statistical description of the resulting coiling
trajectories.

The construction of more predictive models for the motion of flexible filaments
will help addressing engineering problems spanning a wide range of physical
scales: from micro-fabrication of electronic components using the coiling of
nanotubes, serpentine interconnects for stretchable electronics, and 3D-printing
technologies, to the laying down of transoceanic cable and pipelines onto the
seabed in a more efficient and resilient manner. A mathematical, physical and
scalable understanding of the deformation of filaments is also a step towards
addressing the fundamental question of how geometry governs the mechanics of
thin structures; a topic that is currently receiving interest from both the
physics and mechanics communities. The computational codes developed in this
project will be broadly disseminated. These, together with the gained
fundamental understanding, will serve as new design tools for engineers and
physicists who deal with slender filaments in diverse fields including
automotive-, aerospace-, biomedical-, civil-, environmental-, geological-, and
mechanical-engineering.