* 1129065
* Novel Magnetic Shape Memory Alloy Thin Films for Sensor and Actuator Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Xinghang Zhang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 267,090.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate novel magnetic shape
memory alloy thin films and use these films as the backbone of sensors and
actuators. In particular, a class of novel Ni-based Heusler alloy films, which
is capable of delivering high frequency response as well as high actuation
strain due to Zeeman energy induced phase transformations, will be used as a
model system and tested for real applications. This objective will be achieved
by using the following scientific approaches: (1) investigate the influence of
phase segregation on phase transformations; (2) explore and tailor residual
stress in films to tune phase transformations; (3) understand the size effect on
field induced strain and reversible phase transformations; (4) demonstrate the
concept of magnetic field sensing via bilayer films; and (5) fabricate actuators
via membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this
research will include elucidation of fundamental magneto-microstructural
mechanisms of field-induced shape change across multiple length scales, and a
new class of magnetic shape memory alloy films for sensor and actuator
applications. The project will significantly improve the design of active
sensing systems capable of fast and reversible deformation, damping and passive
power generation. Second, it will promote a local learning environment focusing
on magnetic thin films. Activities will include creation of teaching modules of
active materials, involvement of underrepresented groups through the ?Pathway to
Ph.D.? fellowship program at Texas A&amp;M University, laboratory demonstration
models in nanomaterials for grades 7-12, and involvement of undergraduate
researchers. Third, collaborations with scientists at the Center for Integrated
Nanotechnologies, at Los Alamos National Laboratory and Sandia National
Laboratory through the existing user project will provide graduate student
opportunities to work at these advanced research centers and laboratories.