* 1129780
* Workshop: Phenomes - Beyond Genomes; April 1-2, 2011; St. Louis, MO
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Robert Last, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/29/2012
* USD 21,427.00

Intellectual Merit: A two-day workshop to be held on April 1 and 2, 2011 in St.
Louis, Missouri will bring 20-25 invited scholars from diverse fields to address
how investments in genome resource development (genome sequencing and
annotation, genetic and physical mapping, gene expression datasets, mutant
collections, proteomic and various other "omics") can be leveraged and further
developed in the emerging field of "Phenomics", the study of phenotypes. Four
keynote speakers will deliver presentations on the broad topic of Phenomics to
set the tone of the meeting and catalyze discussion. All participants will have
ample opportunity for conversation on key questions and issues in brainstorming
sessions immediately following each keynote talk, through breakout groups
specifically oriented to the identification of grand challenges, and through
participation in the production of a White Paper as a recorded, published
outcome of the workshop. The fundamental purpose of the workshop is to encourage
substantive and timely cross-disciplinary dialog such that new formulations of
priorities for Federal funding may emerge. The workshop will include
participation from researchers using "top-down" (phenotype to genotype) and
"bottom-up" (genotype to phenotype) approaches. These scientists represent areas
of research ranging from relatively simple single species studies through
complex multi-organism systems. Participants were invited from a diverse set of
fields using a range of systems and organisms, including plant breeding,
microbiololgy, metagenomics, bioinformatics and systems biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The White Paper from the workshop will
outline grand challenges that lie ahead in integrating phenotypic with genomic
information in a tractable and productive manner. The Paper will articulate what
benefits could arise from increased integration and coordination; identify
current gaps in knowledge, infrastructure, and disciplinary interactions; and
recommend directions in research and funding. Clarification and enumeration of
short- and long-term goals will be of benefit to researchers and government
agencies spanning a range of interests and expertise from computer science to
agriculture. It is expected that the White Paper will seed cross-disciplinary
dialog and collaborations to establish Phenomics as a vibrant discipline
encompassing the full range of genotype by environment interactions that
underpin phenotypic variation. Additionally, the workshop will include scholars
from diverse career stages, institutional types, geographical locations, gender
and ethnic backgrounds.