* 1129612
* Reproductive and Geographic Evidence for Source-Sink Dynamics in Deep-Sea Benthic Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Michael Rex, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 145,637.00

Many hypotheses have been proposed to explain deep-sea species diversity
including competition, predation, physical disturbance, patch mosaics, coarse-
grained environmental heterogeneity, metapopulation dynamics mediated by
dispersal, and a host of abiotic factors. Evidence supporting these ideas comes
largely from spatio-temporal patterns of alpha- (local) diversity. This
investigator and collaborators proposed an alternative explanation based on
species depth ranges. Abyssal populations of mollusks do not comprise a unique
assemblage, but are mainly deeper attenuated range extensions of bathyal
populations. Densities of many abyssal populations are so extraordinarily low,
especially for minute organisms with low mobility and separate sexes, that it is
implausible they could be reproductively viable. Most have larval dispersal
ability. This suggested that many abyssal populations are maintained by source-
sink dynamics. They suffer chronic local extinction from vulnerabilities to
Allee effects, and persist through continued immigration from more abundant
bathyal source populations. Source-sink dynamics provides a broad synthetic
framework within which other potential causes of diversity (above) can act. It
also resolves the long-standing paradox of how abyssal diversity could be shaped
by interactions when density is so low. The theory does not require that abyssal
communities be ecologically structured. They may be mostly a passive consequence
of dispersal.

This project will apply two tests for source-sink dynamics: 1. The investigators
will perform a direct test by examining reproductive patterns in molluscan
species whose bathymetric ranges span the lower bathyal zone and the abyss.
Since rare abyssal populations are predicted not to be reproductively viable,
they should show diminished gamete production, and no evidence of mating. 2.
They will conduct an extensive new synthesis of geographic evidence for source-
sink dynamics. Geographic patterns, are currently the primary evidence available
on very large spatial scales, and are invaluable for identifying taxonomic and
geographical scenarios for future reproductive studies. Recent advances in
nested analysis allow us to determine statistically whether abyssal communities
are nested subsets of bathyal communities as predicted by source-sink theory.
Newly available large datasets include Pan Atlantic distributions of gastropods,
bivalves, and cumaceans from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution's Benthic
Sampling Program; mollusks, asteroids and holothurians from Southampton
Oceanography Centre's sampling program in the Porcupine Seabight and Abyssal
Plains, and macrofaunal taxa from Texas A&M's Deep Gulf of Mexico Benthic
Program. The investigator makes specific predictions about which groups should
show geographic evidence of source-sink dynamics based on their natural history
and the productivity regime. This synthesis will also contribute significantly
to documenting and understanding beta diversity, the most important remaining
challenge in deep-sea community ecology.

Intellectual Merit. The source-sink hypothesis has the potential to unify and
synthesize the large number of disparate theories of community structure in the
deep-sea benthos. The research will also dramatically increase the number of
computerized datasets on biogeographic distributions. The single greatest
obstacle to expanding our understanding of macroecology in the deep sea is the
near absence of data on species ranges. This also has vital implications for
conservation and sustainable development of the deep-sea ecosystem. Without much
more information on geographic ranges, it is currently impossible to gauge the
extinction potential of deep-sea species.

Broader Impacts. At UMass-Boston, students and faculty have outstanding
opportunities to be directly involved in science education and public outreach
at all levels. Currently, the Biology Department has an NSF-Research Experience
for Undergraduates Grant, an NIH-Initiative to Maximize Student Diversity Grant,
and a NIH-Bridges to Baccalaureate Grant (with Bunker Hill and Roxbury Community
Colleges). The campus has an NSF GK-12 Watershed Integrated Science Partnership
2(WISP2) Grant to upgrade high school science curricula, a McNair Grant, and a
Lewis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation Grant, all oriented toward
assisting underrepresented minorities. Undergraduates, graduate students and
teachers will be recruited into this research program, and topics in deep-sea
biology will be incorporated into university and high school curricula.