* 1129348
* Coastal Ocean Reynolds Stresses:  Using New Methods with Long-Term Observations to Investigate Exchange and Evaluate Model Closures
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Anthony Kirincich, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 178,045.00

Over the continental shelf, turbulence plays a primary role in distributing
momentum through the water column. In the inner shelf, where surface and bottom
boundary layers overlap, the magnitude and vertical structure of turbulent
momentum flux (Reynolds stress) is thought to have a controlling influence on
the circulation and exchange. The vertical structure of Reynolds stress in the
coastal ocean is not well known, due in part to the difficulty in making
unbiased estimates of stress in wavy environments. Recently developed analysis
techniques have documented ways to account for wave-induced biases, allowing
direct observations of coastal ocean stresses using the velocity profiles of
commonly-deployed acoustic Doppler current profilers (ADCPs). This work proposes
to use these methods to estimate the stresses present in a more than 10 year-
long record of velocity profiles from the Martha's Vineyard Coastal Observatory
(MVCO). Estimated stresses will be utilized, along with velocity, hydrographic,
and wind observations, to examine how inner-shelf processes interact to
determine the across-shelf exchange due to along-shelf winds, across-shelf
winds, and surface gravity waves and relate variations in momentum transfer due
to these processes to variations in across-shelf exchange. These estimates will
be compared to predictions using common turbulence closure models for similar
forcing conditions in both simple one- and two-dimensional or complex three-
dimensional numerical model simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: In situ observations of turbulent stress profiles, traditionally the
least accessible term in the momentum equations, are central to our ability to
explain and predict coastal ocean dynamics. Using the long-term dataset, this
work will separate the incremental effects of wind or wave forcing on Reynolds
stresses, examining the dependence of the across-shelf circulation on the
stress. Comparing these observations to predictions from numerical models will
provide a powerful new tool to evaluate closure methods, enabling more accurate
predictions of how stress-causing processes interact to drive circulation when
such measurements are not available. The primary data product of the analysis,
stress profiles estimated from MVCO's long-term velocity dataset, will be
archived and served on the Observatory's website, and therefore available as a
community data product for future research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The mechanisms that control the across-shelf exchange of water masses
and nutrients control the productivity of the coastal ocean as well as the
dispersal or retention of planktonic larvae and pollutants. The additional
knowledge of turbulent stresses and their use in evaluating model
parameterizations offer, potentially, a more precise understanding of the
dynamics of the inner shelf and across-shelf exchange then has previously been
possible, allowing exchange-dependent processes to be studied and modeled with
increased accuracy. Results will be disseminated directly into the classroom via
teaching and ongoing outreach programs.