* 1129553
* Understanding microbial manganese-oxidizing communities and physiological mechanisms in metal oxide-rich hydrothermal sediments using a metagenomic and  metatranscriptomic approach
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Bradley Tebo, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2015
* USD 799,339.00

Hydrothermal systems are important sources of dissolved Mn to the oceans. Upon
oxidation of Mn(II), Mn(III,IV) oxides are deposited at the sea floor as crusts,
nodules and sediments both near and far from the sources. Microbial activity has
long been recognized as being important to the fate of Mn in these hydrothermal
systems, yet we know very little about the organisms that catalyze Mn oxidation,
the mechanisms by which Mn is oxidized or the physiological function that Mn
oxidation serves. The overarching goals of this project are to reveal the
organisms and mechanism(s) underlying Mn(II) oxidation, to evaluate whether
hydrothermal Mn oxidizers may obtain energy from Mn oxidation, and test whether
thermophilic Mn oxidizers exist. Specifically, the project will: 1) evaluate
whether we can identify certain genomic sequences that correlate to the
presence/concentration of Mn oxides (and hence Mn(II)- oxidizing bacteria) by
comparing the metagenomes of ferromanganese (containing both Mn and Fe oxides)
microbial mats with ferruginous (Fe oxide only) mats from Lau Basin and Loihi
Seamount; 2) use peptide probes bound to magnetic particles for selectively
binding and capturing Mn oxide particles and characterizing the particles using
phylogenetic and functional gene (PCR and FISH) and transcriptomic analysis; 3)
assess the main pathways of carbon fixation in ferromanganese microbial mats as
compared to ferruginous mats as a possible indicator of Mn-based auto/mixotrophy
using genomic approaches and substrate stimulated (e.g., addition of Mn(II)) CO2
fixation measurements and stable isotope probing (SIP) genomic analysis; and 4)
isolate and characterize Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria and determine whether
thermophilic Mn oxidizers exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will increase our understanding of
Mn(II) oxidation in hydrothermal sediments, identify microorganisms that are the
environmentally relevant Mn oxidizers and begin to address the long standing
question of whether Mn auto/mixotrophy exists using approaches not based on the
biases associated with cultivation. Ultimately this information is critical to
our understanding of biogeochemical cycles (Mn oxidation and Mn oxides impact
many other elemental cycles, including carbon, sulfur, and heavy metals) and the
natural attenuation of toxic metal and organic compounds; this may lead to
improved technologies for environmental remediation. Because Mn oxides are
believed to be an analog to the ancestral Mn centers in photosystem II, this
research may also lend new insights into ancient biogeochemistry occurring
before the Great Oxidation Event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide support and training for one Ph.D.
student and one postdoctoral researcher, and will contribute to the education of
undergraduate and highly qualified high school students through independent
research projects and mentorships. They will participate in a geoscience
education program targeting the education of 6-12 grade Alaskan Native
Americans. In addition, this project will contribute to a training program
targeted to middle school teachers that highlights the connections between
chemistry, biology, and geology in the environment. The results of the work will
be broadly disseminated through presentations, publications, and the World Wide
Web.