* 1129752
* A Truncated Prediction Approach to Control of Time-Delay Systems with Applications to High Speed Rotor/AMB Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Zongli Lin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 255,000.00

The objective of this award is to develop a truncated prediction approach to
control design for time-delay systems with or without magnitude/energy
constraints in the control input. In comparison with the classical prediction
based approaches, this proposed approach will result in controllers that do not
contain distributed terms and will thus entirely avoid the implementation
problems associated with the traditional prediction based approaches. It will
also provide a powerful tool for the control of constrained time-delay systems
which is seldom considered in the literature. Deliverables include a set of
powerful tools for various aspects of the analysis and control such systems,
including the problems of disturbance rejection and output regulation. An
important part of the project is to apply the obtained theoretical results on
high speed rotors suspended by active magnetic bearings
(AMBs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design methods developed in this project will
help engineers to handle practical systems more effectively. The applications of
these methods to the control of a high speed rotor/AMB test rig will enhance our
ability to operate compressors in the oil and gas industries more effectively
and in deeper seas. Therefore, the successful completion of this project will
contribute in a way to alleviate one the most pressing issues our society faces
today: the energy crisis. The research will require the involvement of graduate
students and undergraduate students, possibly minority and female students, and
thus will leverage the funding that NSF can provide for basic research
activities to assist in education. The results obtained in this research will be
prepared into conference and journal papers for dissemination.