* 1129053
* Collaborative Research: Frequency-agile filterless software-defined radio
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Numan Dogan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop fundamental radio-frequency
building blocks enabling the development of software-defined radio technology to
demonstrate ubiquitous reconfigurability for increased connectivity and natural
resource preservation. The approach is based on the cooperative operation of the
radio-frequency circuitry with the baseband signal processing unit to achieve
high average power efficiency and linearity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: A new power amplifier operating principle in which tunable matching
networks work cooperatively with an envelope predistorter will be developed to
optimize overall average power efficiency while delivering linear RF transmitted
power. A new filter-less up-converter implemented using a polyphase mixer
integrated with a new digitally controlled rotary traveling wave oscillator will
be developed for spurious control and frequency agility. Demonstration testbeds
will be realized to validate the cooperative operation concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Power-efficient and standard-compliant
wireless technology will have profound societal and economic impact by saving
energy and preserving natural resources through hardware reuse. The scientific
results will be disseminated in the classroom and educational laboratories,
through the Connection One NSF Industry/University Collaborative Research
Center, and in scientific journals. The research will provide significant
support to the wireless industry by training personnel for wireless technology.
Half of the research activity will be conducted at North Carolina A&amp;T State
University, an institution with a large undergraduate and graduate minority
population. Underrepresented minority undergraduate students in engineering will
be recruited through summer internships and outreach activities to work on this
project.