* 1129564
* DIMES Finestructure Profiling Floats: Enhancement and analysis of shear measurements in the Southeast Pacific, Drake Passage and Scotia Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* James Girton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2015
* USD 743,298.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Southern Ocean mixing has the potential to play an
important role in the Meridional Overturning Circulation, but considerable
uncertainty still exists as to the locations and processes responsible for the
most mixing. The DIMES (Diapycnal and Isopycnal Mixing Experiment in the
Southern Ocean) tracer release, together with 10 EM-APEX profiling floats and
ship microstructure surveys, has quantified the mixing in the Southeast Pacific
(west of Drake Passage), revealing modestly elevated mixing due to wind-
generated near-inertial waves, but has yet to extend fully into the high-energy
environments of Drake Passage and the Scotia Sea. The shear measurements of the
EM-APEX (a profiling float with an electromagnetic velocity measurement) have
proven a valuable tool for the characterization of the Southern Ocean's internal
wave field (the "finestructure" seen in velocity and density profiles with
wavelengths between 10m and 1000 m). This inclusion of shear is particularly
necessary, given the predominance of near-inertial waves with relatively weak
signature in density (i. e., high shear/strain ratios). The combination of high-
quality shear and density profiles over the upper 2000 m and sustained duration
makes the EM-APEX an economical choice for extending these types of measurements
into the less well-sampled regions and times of the
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator and his student
will take full advantage of the existing DIMES dataset by (a) conducting an in-
depth analysis of both mesoscale and fine-scale shear and stratification data
from the initial EM-APEX, along with surface fields from satellite altimetry, to
understand the connections between the internal wave field and mesoscale
currents, winds, and bottom topography and (b) deploying 8 additional EM-APEX to
extend the observational array's coverage within Drake Passage and the Scotia
Sea, fill gaps in the seasonal cycle, and increase the robustness of the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project has
important implications for the development of model parameterizations, such as
being developed by the Climate Process Team on Internal Waves and Mixing. The
incorporation of internal wave mixing processes into large-scale circulation
models is essential for accurate predictions of circulation and future response
to climate change. Without parameterizations based on comprehensive observations
and solid physical understanding of mechanisms, there is little hope that the
mixing in large-scale models that do not directly simulate internal waves will
be correct. Much of the project will be conducted by a graduate student, Byron
Kilbourne, and will form the basis of his Ph.D. dissertation. This is a valuable
educational opportunity, considering the novel nature of the measurements and
the need for full-time focus in understanding this complex region. It also
provides the benefit of training a talented new member of the ocean science
workforce. Educational outreach will be conducted through the Seattle Aquarium
and Pacific Science Center, with an emphasis on bringing basic information on
the physical oceanography of the Southern Ocean to a public forum.