* 1129573
* Sampling the intermediate loop of the subduction factory at Nankai: The mud volcanoes of the Kumano Basin, Japan
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2015
* Michael Tryon, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2015
* USD 290,815.00

The major 2011 earthquake that devastated Japan has its origins in the
subduction zone just west of the island in the Pacific Ocean. The presence of
fluids on fault zones and trapped in rocks many times helps to lubricate slip
or, when under stress, cause overpressuring and fracturing of the crust,
resulting in fault motion and earthquakes. Knowing the origin of fluids in
accretionary wedges that form just shoreward of subduction zones can help us
better understand fault and earthquake dynamics. This research involves
measuring the rate of fluid fluxes emanating from mud volcanoes in the area of a
major international program that is studying the faulting and deformation
associated with slip in the Nankai subduction zone (NanTroSEIZE). This funding
allows a US scientist to participate in an international oceanographic cruise
where his fluid meters will be deployed to collect a time-series set of fluid
samples for later geochemical analysis in the laboratory. In addition cores will
be taken to allow the study of sediments and associated pore waters. Samples
from both devices will be analyzed for various key chemical elements and
signatures that will illuminate the source of fluids and the chemical reactions
going on in the mud volcanoes and sediments. The broader impacts of this project
include increasing our knowledge of possible triggers of major earthquakes,
support of an early career investigator, leveraging of ship time at no cost to
NSF, international collaboration with German and Japanese scientists, and public
outreach through a local aquarium. Public outreach activities include the
interaction of scientists and aquarium staff and the development of learning
materials for K-12 students. In terms of workforce training, a graduate student
and undergraduates will be involved.