* 1129008
* UBM-Institutional: UCI Mathematical and Computational Biology for Undergraduates (MCBU)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Sarah Frey, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 803,428.00

The Mathematical and Computational Biology for Undergraduates Program (MCBU) at
the University of California, Irvine will provide a unique, collaborative type
interdisciplinary training in knowledge and skills in systems biology for
undergraduate students. The MCBU program consists of three key
features:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A new mathematics major specialization in
Mathematical Biology with&lt;br/&gt;a innovative, flagship course sequence on
Mathematical Modeling in Biology. This major&lt;br/&gt;specialization directs
math students to take courses in mathematics, biology,
biochemistry,&lt;br/&gt;biophysics and computer science which would best support
work at the interface of mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;computation and biology. The
major capstone, cross-disciplinary research component will&lt;br/&gt;prepare
this group of students for graduate work or careers in high demand mathematical
biology&lt;br/&gt;fields.&lt;br/&gt;2. A new minor in Applied Mathematics for
Biology designed for students in various biology disciplines to supplement their
biology training with relevant mathematics courses, including the course
sequence on Mathematical Modeling in Biology.&lt;br/&gt;3. Significant funded
research opportunities for cross-disciplinary teams consisting of math and
biology undergraduate students and faculty mentors. Every year there are topics
from a range of biology fields available for student researchers, with each
topic including significant laboratory, computing and mathematical analysis
components. Research areas include: cell signaling, tumor growth modeling, viral
dynamics, cell-to-cell feedback mechanisms, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Mathematical and Computational Biology for Undergraduates Program (MCBU) at the
University of California, Irvine will provide undergraduate students training
and research experience at the interface of biology, mathematics and
computational science. Opportunities for the MCBU students include: foundational
courses in biology, mathematics and computation, a year-long interdisciplinary
course in Mathematical Modeling in Biology with emphasis on ties to current
research, summer training boot camp in systems biology, year-long mentored
interdisciplinary research led by a team of math and biology faculty, and
attendance and participation at interdisciplinary mathematical biology and
modeling conferences. The MCBU program includes a new major and minor in
computational mathematical biology, which should provide this specialized
interdisciplinary training to a broad audience of students, beyond just those
funded for research under the UBM project. The MCBU program makes particular
efforts to recruit a diverse group of students including underrepresented
groups.