* 1129964
* A Nanoporous Route to Manufacture Next-Generation III-Nitride Devices and Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Jung Han, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2014
* USD 370,000.00

This project exploits a recently discovered electrochemical process to create
new manufacturing techniques for GaN that have not been possible. The project
represents a bold integration of epitaxial optoelectronics with scientific
interdisciplines including electrochemical processes, solid-phase mass
transport, and applied fracture mechanics. At the same time the investigators
seek to develop concrete, manufacturable processes that will impact the energy-
efficient lighting and power distribution industries, projected to capture
markets of hundreds of billion dollars by 2020. Three concrete objectives are
(1) manufacture-friendly thin-film LEDs for general illumination, (2) the
regenerative usage of heteroepitaxial substrates to offset the substrate cost in
LED production, and (3) hybrid integration of GaN membrane devices with flexible
hosts. The combination of a nanoscale porosification process with MOCVD epitaxy
enables a flexible embedding of nano-voids and nano-cavity layer underneath LED
device layers. The presence and coalescence of these nano-cavities facilitate
wafer splitting, large-area layer transfer and, simultaneously, substrate
recycling. Furthermore, the transferred, free-standing thin-film devices provide
an ideal configuration as hybrid inorganic-organic flexible devices in both
optoelectronics and electronics. The investigated etching-epitaxy-splitting
process will open up untapped opportunities in substrate utilization, growth
design, and device fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GaN is a ubiquitous
semiconductor that is finding applications in everyday life. This wide bandgap
material is capable of producing efficient ultraviolet, blue, and green light
for display and lighting. It is an ideal replacement for silicon as compact
transistors for high-power electricity transmission and energy conversion.
However, GaN is chemically inert and mechanically robust, thus imposing rigid
constraints to fabrication techniques for mass production. In spite of the
demonstrated superiority in optoelectronic and electronic performance, GaN LEDs
and transistors still face a stiff bottleneck in the cost of manufacturing. This
projects exploits a recently discovered electrochemical process to create new
manufacturing techniques for GaN that have not been possible. It aims to propel
the manufacture technology for solid state lighting into a smarter, greener, and
more sustainable state based on nanoscale scientific insights. Using a simple
anodization process to create a foam-like GaN, the investigators plan to
demonstrate the possibility of micromachining GaN, including slicing and shaping
thin layers, for manufacture-friendly and cost effectively fabrication of GaN
devices for energy-efficient lighting and power distribution, an industry that
is projected to capture markets of hundreds of billion dollars by 2020.