* 1129405
* Scholarship for Service: Digital Forensics and Undergraduate Information Security
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Florian Buchholz, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,377,267.00

The Computer Science Department at James Madison University is supporting three
cohorts of undergraduate and graduate students in Information Security and
Digital Forensics via the Federal Cyber Service: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
in Information Assurance program. The undergraduate students are earning a
Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science and a thorough Information
Security certification while the graduate students are earning a Master's degree
in Computer Science with a concentration in Digital Forensics, a combination of
core computer science concepts and a technical study of digital forensics. The
curriculum is system-oriented but also includes core digital forensics
components such as the forensic process, relevant laws, analysis techniques, and
report writing. The CS Department has already graduated over 200 graduate
students with IA concentrations and over 150 undergraduate students with CNSS
4011 certificates. Future security professionals are given opportunities to be
involved in research activities, especially in the area of Digital
Forensics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is having an immediate impact on the
Information Assurance and Computer Security capabilities of the federal
workforce by providing Bachelor of Science graduates with general computing and
security skills to the agencies that employ them. The graduates from the Digital
Forensics concentration are valuable assets for federal law enforcement and
intelligence agencies, bringing with them the skills needed to investigate
complex incidents and attacks to the national infrastructure. The PIs are
focusing strongly on recruiting students from minority institutions.