* 1129603
* Support for the U. S. GEOTRACES Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2016
* USD 989,909.00

This award will provide three years of continuing support for the U.S. GEOTRACES
Project Office at the Lamont-Dougherty earth Observatory of Columbia University.
The Office works under the direction of the U.S. GEOTRACES Scientific Steering
Committee to support all aspects of the GEOTRACES program, including enabling
activities (preparation and distribution of standard reference materials;
intercalibration; modelling; data management) and field expeditions (science
planning; cruise logistics; synthesis of results). The GEOTRACES program is
designed to study the global marine biogeochemical cycles of trace elements and
their isotopes (TEIs), employing a multi-tracer approach to characterize the
sources, sinks and internal cycling of TEIs while also quantifying the rates of
these processes wherever possible. Biogeochemical cycling of TEIs has direct
implications for research in such diverse areas as the carbon cycle, climate
change, ocean ecosystems, and environmental contamination. GEOTRACES promises
clear benefits to each of these areas by significantly advancing knowledge of
the marine biogeochemical cycles of TEIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
GEOTRACES contributes to the training of the next generation of oceanographers
by involving a large number of graduate students and post docs. It was evident
in JGOFS and other recent programs that participation benefited young people by
giving them exposure to peers and to potential future employers. It also informs
young people about the procedures for developing new programs and the benefits
thereof. GEOTRACES has also established community building as one of its highest
priorities. At the international level, this involves expanding the distribution
of technologies for contamination-free sampling at sea, and training
investigators to use those new technologies. In the U.S., community building is
focused more on sharing the GEOTRACES experience with other sectors of the
oceanographic community, freely providing information, assistance and advice to
those who wish to follow a path like that of GEOTRACES and organize their own
coordinated effort to attack substantial problems in oceanography that are too
complex to address by small groups or individual PI projects.