* 1129271
* Project TUESTYC: A Workshop and Mentoring Program for Two-Year College Faculty
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2011,11/30/2014
* John Dwyer, St. Catherine University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 11/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The Nation's two-year colleges (2YCs) educate a substantial and rapidly growing
number of undergraduate students, including a significant number of students in
STEM fields. Furthermore, the racial, ethnic, and geographic diversity of
students served by 2YCs make these institutions key entry points to STEM fields
for students who have been historically underrepresented.

The Transforming Undergraduate Education in STEM of Two-Year Colleges (TUESTYC)
project is developing and implementing a grant writing workshop and mentoring
program for STEM faculty from 2YCs. Project components are designed to address
the barriers to participation in TUES program faced by 2YC faculty. The overall
goals of the project are to broaden awareness of the TUES program as a resource
for 2YCs and to increase the number of TUES awards to these institutions. This
project is extending the work of two previous projects by specifically targeting
faculty from the disciplines of biology, engineering, and physics/astronomy. By
enhancing participation of target faculty in the TUES program, the project is
directly impacting 2YC faculty and students through improved curricula,
pedagogy, and instrumentation. Furthermore, by broadening the TUES community to
include institutions not previously represented, the project is seeking to
further facilitate collaboration between 2YCs and the broader undergraduate STEM
community.