* 1129408
* Collaborative Research: Pliocene and Pleistocene transient climate simulations and model-proxy comparisons for surface temperature and monsoon circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Warren Prell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2017
* USD 470,780.00

Model-proxy comparison is a cornerstone of climate change science. This project
introduces a new, quantitative approach to model-proxy comparison for
application to the new and rapidly developing field of transient climate
modeling. The approach expands applicability of model-proxy comparisons to a
broader research community and the range of proxy records that can be used in
comparison with model results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the work
involves a collaborative effort between investigators at Brown University, the
University of Wisconsin, and the Institute of Earth's Environment, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Xian. A fully-coupled climate model (Community
Climate System Model-version 3; CCSM3) will be run in time-dependent mode using
accelerated insolation forcing in order to simulate the evolution of climate
during two key intervals in Earth history, the past 300,000 years (a time of
high-amplitude climate variability related to changing greenhouse gases, polar
ice sheets and sea level) and 3.142 to 2.842 million years ago (an interval of
time with the same insolation forcing but much smaller amplitude changes in
greenhouse gases, ice sheets, and sea level). These two model experiments and
their component forcings will be compared to one another to study the
sensitivity of the model-produced climate to changing ice volume and greenhouse
gases with an emphasis on tropical surface temperatures and monsoonal
circulation. The model results will also be compared to previously published
records of surface temperature and monsoonal circulation from marine and
terrestrial geological archives. This comparison will focus specifically on the
timing (phase) of changes in surface temperature and monsoonal circulation
relative to changes in insolation (orbital), ice volume and greenhouse gases.
This focus on comparing the phase of the climate response in the model and proxy
records leverages the fact that phase is a robust metric that can be quantified
from a wide range of proxies. Successful model-proxy comparisons serve to
validate model reliability and promote confidence in the use of models for
identifying the underlying physics of climate change. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Model results will be widely available and archived at the NOAA/NCDC
World Data Center. Funding supports a full time graduate student at Brown
University, who will work closely with a full time post-doctoral researcher at
CAS (no cost to this project). This interaction will ensure an in-depth
experience in climate modeling for the student and experience in geological
proxy generation and analysis for the post-doctoral researcher. Fostering this
close collaborative approach, including oversight and scientific leadership by
the senior researchers, is crucial to furthering the synergistic integration of
researchers from these two fields.