* 1129630
* Collaborative Research: Atomistic Simulations of the Nanotribology of Carbon-based Materials: Establishing Links between Structure, Chemistry, and Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* James Schall, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 146,562.00

The research objectives of this work are to complete development of a
fluctuating-charge molecular dynamics code and potential energy function that
are capable of reliably capturing bond breaking and forming events that occur
between carbon-based materials and oxygen-containing environmental species, such
as water. The phrase "carbon-based materials" encompasses a broad range of
materials, including the building blocks of biology, allotropes of carbon, and
carbon-based films. Because carbon-based solid lubricants have desirable
properties, such as high hardness and ultralow friction and wear, they are being
used or considered for a wide range of applications that include space systems,
micro-electromechanical systems, orthopedic implants, computer hard disks, and
as scaffolds on which to build DNA-based microsensors. Perhaps the most
significant factor that has prevented even wider spread use of carbon-based
materials as solid lubricants is the sensitivity of their friction to the
environment. This project will also validate a potential energy function based
on a similar formalism that can model dynamics in Si-, C- and H- containing
systems. Knowledge gained from these development projects can be used to create
a potential capable of modeing chemical reactions in Si-, O- and H- containing
systems with charge. These tools can then be used to examine the nanotribology
and mechanical properties of carbon-based material in the presence of water, the
properties of Si-doped DLC, and epitaxial graphene on Si-C.

If successful, this research effort will provide several new tools that can be
used to examine dynamics at the atomic scale. In addition, a fundamental
understanding of the way in which environmental species, such as water, impact
carbon-based solid lubricant performance will be developed. This knowledge will
allow for the rational design of carbon-based solid lubricants with the desired
tribological and mechanical properties and increase the viability of
applications where carbon-based solid lubricant films can be used. Also as part
of this project, a broad range of middle and high school students will be
introduced to nanotribology via the integration of a nanotribology module into
the existing USNA STEM program and into the DAPCEP program at OU. Nanotribology
modules will also be developed for graduate-level tribology classes at OU.