* 1129477
* SFS Scholarship:  Auburn-Tuskegee-Albany State-Western New Mexico Scholarship Partnership
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Kai Chang, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,499,124.00

Auburn University is adding three new cohorts to its existing SFS program. The
SFS scholarship program at Auburn helps mitigate the severe shortage of
technically qualified information assurance personnel in the Federal Civil
Service. A unique aspect of this program is its successful engagement with three
minority institutions: Albany State University (an HBCU), Tuskegee University
(an HBCU) and Western New Mexico University (an HSI). Auburn is a National
Security Agency Center of Academic Excellence in both Information Assurance
Education and in Research and its outreach activities in Huntsville and
Montgomery areas enable alignment of scholarship recipients with Federal
agencies early in their academic careers. In fact, more than half of the
entering SFS students already have a prior SFS-qualifying internship. SFS
students are completing federally recognized certificate programs that make them
more competitive for placement in the U.S. Civil Service. The program has a
successful record working with high-risk under-served students and placing them
in the federal government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is contributing to
the safeguarding of critical U.S. network and system infrastructure by renewing
and expanding a successful SFS Scholarship Program at Auburn and Tuskegee
University, and by establishing strong partnerships and recruiting pipelines
with programs at Albany State University and Western New Mexico University. This
project is developing unique recruiting and retention techniques for community
college engagement. Auburn has a strong record of graduating engineers from
under-represented groups and by working with its Minority Engineering Program
(MEP), it is awarding at least half of the scholarships to students from under-
represented groups.