* 1129409
* Scholarship for Service in Information Assurance program at The Pennsylvania State University
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2011,06/30/2019
* Anna Squicciarini, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,325,306.00

The College of Information Science and Technology (IST) at Penn State is
supporting three cohorts of undergraduate and graduate students in Security and
Risk Analysis and related programs via a Federal Cyber Service: Scholarship for
Service (SFS) in Information Assurance program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SFS
students are enrolling in a strong interdisciplinary program in cybersecurity
offered by the College of IST and are preparing to identify and solve security
and privacy problems from technical, legal, ethical, policy, and business
perspectives. The project is contributing to the mission of the SFS program by:
(1) providing government organizations with cybersecurity professionals that
possess the research, scientific, technological, analytic, and cultural
competencies required to support the nation's long term security requirements;
(2) providing professional development and academic mentorship to students to
enhance their potential to support current and future National and Homeland
Security requirements; (3) facilitating programs and protocols that enhance the
opportunities for students and faculty to engage in cybersecurity education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is promoting academic and
extracurricular cybersecurity programs at Penn State and its partners, in
particular historically underrepresented groups. The principle investigators are
women actively involved in recruiting other women in science, and they are
recruiting women to the SFS program as well. The project's curriculum
development and research initiatives are addressing government priorities and
strengthening existing ties to federal partners as well as creating new
partnerships to support the Nation's cyber defense.