* 1129163
* Real Option Management of Commodity and Energy Conversion Assets
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Francois Margot, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 385,000.00

Managing commodity and energy conversion assets is difficult because it involves
managing operational activities in the face of notoriously volatile commodity
and energy prices. These activities include the production, processing,
refining, transportation, storage, distribution, and physical trading of
commodities and energy. The management of these activities is naturally modeled
as the exercise of complex real options on commodity and energy prices. This
gives rise to computationally intractable stochastic dynamic programming models.
The goal of this award is to develop and analyze novel real options models of
fundamental commodity and energy conversion assets, and to design effective and
efficient novel approximate dynamic programming methods to compute near optimal
operating policies and optimality bounds on their performance. This research
will leverage in novel ways operations management models and analyses of
operating policies, emerging operations research approaches to approximate
dynamic programming based on math programming and Monte Carlo simulation
techniques, and financial engineering models of the stochastic evolution of
commodity and energy prices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research
will generate quantitative models and methods to support managers in maximizing
the market value of commodity and energy infrastructure. This has the potential
to benefit society at large because commodities and energy are used in virtually
every manufacturing and service process, and commodity and energy conversion
assets are typically managed heuristically in practice. This research will also
benefit operations management, operations research, and financial engineering
education by generating novel material for potential adoption in current and/or
future courses on real options, providing an operations perspective on real
options.