* 1129793
* Collaborative Research: Downstream Impacts of the South Pacific Tropical Water
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Rana Fine, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2016
* USD 397,826.00

Observations of South Pacific Tropical Water (SPTW) have revealed variability on
interannual time scales and a trend of increasing salinity over several decades.
SPTW identified by a shallow salinity maximum forms in the eastern South Pacific
and is transported in the subtropical gyre and along the equator. Variability of
SPTW may affect the circulation and water properties in the equatorial region,
in particular if the salinity and temperature anomalies are not density
compensated. SPTW has a significant interior equatorward pathway, and thus a
relatively short (5-15 years) residence time and high formation rate. As a
consequence, the contribution of SPTW to the equatorial Pacific is expected to
be faster and stronger than its North Pacific counterpart. This project will
initiate a more complete understanding of how the equatorial ocean is ventilated
through the subduction of South Pacific waters and how variability in this
ventilation contributes to climate variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall research objectives of the project are: to identify variability in SPTW,
and to assess downstream impacts of this variability. The relationship of SPTW
variability to interannual and longer term atmospheric forcing will be
investigated. Depending on the extent and magnitude of the SPTW variability, it
is hypothesized that there will be a dynamical signature in the downstream
circulation and thermal structure of the tropical South Pacific. The research
includes the analysis of available Argo floating profiles and WOCE/CLIVAR tracer
(salinity, potential vorticity, oxygen, CFC, SF6, tritium, helium-3, 14C, etc.)
data, as well as results from the OGCM for the Earth Simulator (OFES), and
simulated passive and adjoint tracers from the Estimating the Circulation and
Climate of the Ocean (ECCO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
project will utilize all available hydrographic (mainly Argo) and tracer
observations to identify the variability of SPTW. The combined use of
observations with results from high-resolution GCMs will allow for a
comprehensive, physically consistent interpretation of this variability and its
downstream impacts on the tropical Pacific Ocean circulation and thermal
structure. In addition, the simulated passive tracer and its adjoint will
provide unambiguous means to identify the SPTW pathways and in particular to
assess the influence of meso-scale eddies and small scale processes. The SPTW
contributes to the Equatorial Undercurrent and water upwelled in the eastern
equatorial Pacific, both having direct relevance to ENSO. The derived assessment
of the SPTW downstream impacts will enhance the understanding of ocean?s role in
climate variability, and provide new information for the predictability and
prediction of interannual and longer time scale variability such as ENSO and PDO
in the Pacific. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will lead to
improved skills for use with ENSO and climate prediction; advance science while
promoting education by the training of a postdoctoral fellow and a graduate
student in the analysis of observational data and model outputs; enhance
infrastructure for research and education by establishing collaborations between
different disciplines and different institutions; and benefit the society by the
use of existing observations and results from high-resolution GCMs to assess
climate change. One of the PIs participates in the program Mentoring Physical
Oceanography Women to Increase Retention, and is on the implementation committee
of an NSF Advance grant to the University of Miami.