* 1129541
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hospice Care Workers and Emotion Management in the Workplace
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Cindy Cain, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 05/31/2013
* USD 9,675.00

Proposal 1129541 - Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hospice
Care Workers and Emotion Management in the Workplace&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do
emotions factor into the daily lives of workers within caring occupations? This
project uses the case of hospice care workers to understand the ways that
workers divide emotional tasks, the consequences of experiencing emotions at
work, the factors that mitigate negative consequences of emotionally difficult
work, and strategies workers use to make work meaningful. Using mixed
qualitative (participant observation and semi-structured interviews) and
quantitative (closed-ended survey) data collection techniques, this work will
rely on, challenge, and help refine the concept of emotional labor, which
includes producing or displaying organizationally supported feelings as well as
creating the conditions under which others have particular feelings.
&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the project aims to produce a better understanding of the
conditions under which emotional experiences at work are detrimental to workers,
and the conditions under which they are useful. Additionally, this project will
examine the ways that individuals' personal characteristics, occupational
positions, and organizational policies structure the amounts and kinds of
emotional labor performed, the consequences, and the strategies for dealing with
emotional labor. Hospice, an end-of-life care option that emphasizes quality of
life and utilizes teams to meet the needs of patients, is an ideal case for this
analysis as it is an especially emotional workplace and the structure of hospice
organizations requires extensive collaboration with others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research include improving the experiences of hospice and other care workers
through explicitly assessing policies and organizational structures that make
work difficult or worthwhile. Exjperiences can also be improved as a result of
analyzing the ways that different kinds of workers in different kinds of
positions deal with emotions and the consequences of emotional labor. By looking
at the diverse ways in which emotions factor into the experiences of a diverse
set of workers, this project contributes to a larger dialogue about how to make
work in any service or helping occupation more rewarding.