* 1129475
* NCRN-SN: Census Bureau Data Programs as Statistical Decision Problems
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2017
* Bruce Spencer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,434,389.00

How the government should invest in statistical data, and in research more
generally, is a fundamental and unsolved question. This problem is increasingly
significant as uses of statistical data grow and resources for investment are
constrained. The project will address fundamental problems for government
statistical agencies, such as how to understand the value of the statistics they
produce, how to compare value to cost in order to guide rational setting of
statistical priorities, and how to increase value for given cost. To understand
the value of statistical data, it is necessary to understand how the statistics
are used, and what would occur if the statistics were available with different
data quality characteristics, ranging from high accuracy to no data collection
at all. The researchers will extend and apply statistical decision theory,
including cost-benefit analysis, to attack such basic questions. One objective
is to develop new theory so that effective case studies for use of data for
policy making and for research in the social, behavioral, and economic sciences
can be developed, analyzed, and interpreted. A second objective is to apply
basic research findings to problems of the U.S. Census Bureau. Activities
include (a) the development of guidelines for studying data use and cost-benefit
analysis of data for allocations; (b) methods for trading off cost, sample size,
and response rates; and (c) state of the art methods for studying more complex
uses, including developing a sampling frame for data uses, and designs for new
case studies of data use and cost-benefit analysis. A third objective is to
advance and stimulate academic education and training related to problems of
government statistical agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project findings will
be useful for the Census Bureau and across the federal statistical system.
Federal statistical agencies and other agencies, such as OMB, will be better
able to understand and quantify the value of statistical data programs and of
changes to their data quality, leading to better-informed decisions regarding
investment in government statistical activities. Tangible products will be
developed and disseminated for researchers, both within academia and public and
private statistical agencies, for their use in designing and evaluating
statistical data programs. By enhancing the pipeline of well-trained graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in this area, the project also will have a
beneficial impact on statistical education. This activity is supported by the
NSF-Census Research Network funding opportunity.