* 1129998
* Examing the 100-Year Floodplain as a Metric of Risk, Loss, and Household Adjustment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Michael Lindell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2014
* USD 345,891.00

This project examines the effectives of the 100-year floodplain in predicting
property damages from floods and offers improved criteria for assessing risk of
inundation in low-lying coastal areas. As flood losses continue to increase in
the United States, recent evidence suggests that the 100-year floodplain (the
primary marker of flood risk and mitigation) is neither accurate nor sufficient
in guiding communities and household decisions to mitigate the adverse impacts
of floods. The inability of the floodplain designation to effectively capture
the likelihood of property loss has left potentially millions of property owners
unaware of the flood risk and has made it more difficult for local decision
makers to ensure community development occurs in a resilient manner. First, the
record of insured property damage at the household level from 2000-2009 will be
spatially examined for a sample of coastal counties along the Gulf of Mexico.
Second, statistical models to predict insured property damage from floods will
be analyzed using proximity and built environment measures not traditionally
used to determine floodplain boundaries. Finally, a survey will be conducted of
households claiming losses both in and out of the floodplain to understand the
perceptions of flood risks and motivations to mitigate their potential adverse
impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide important information
to decision makers on how to implement more precise strategies to reduce the
costs of floods at the local level. An improved understanding of flood risk will
enable localities to better protect themselves against loss of property and
lives in coastal areas. Research findings will also help individuals living
outside the floodplain, but still at high risk for flood damages reduce the
chances they will experience devastating losses in the future. To this end, a
major part of the research project will be to deliver findings that can be
easily accessed and understood by both public officials and local residents.
First, data on flood loss and areas of risk will be integrated with an existing
web-based GIS system that currently serves as a technical assistance and
outreach tool. Second, local neighborhoods that have become hotspots of flood
loss will be worked with to increase awareness of the problem and provide
options for reducing future loss. Third, results from the study will be brought
into the classroom as part of graduate and undergraduate studies across two
college campuses. These approaches will ensure the research findings assist
local governments and individual households on how to better reduce the negative
impacts of coastal flooding in the US.