* 1129722
* GOALI: Real Time, Nanoscale Imaging of Electrochemistry and Electroplating in Liquid Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Frances Ross, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2014
* USD 282,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project with
the University of Pennsylvania and the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center will
study fundamental aspects of electrochemical nucleation, growth, and dendrite
formation as functions of substrate and process conditions with a novel imaging
tool, the nanoaquarium, which facilitates imaging of electrodeposition in a
liquid medium, in real time, with the nanoscale resolution of the transmission
electron microscope (TEM). A hermetically-sealed, liquid cell (the
nanoaquarium), with a height ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometers,
sandwiched between electron-transparent, silicon-nitride windows will be
constructed using microfabrication technology for real-time imaging of
electrochemical processes with the TEM. The device will be equipped with
electrodes for electrochemical plating/dissolution and sensing, and heaters for
temperature control. The electrochemical process will be monitored in situ in
real time with the electron microscope as a function of solution composition,
additives, applied voltage/current, current ramping, electrode geometry, and
temperature. The device will enable one to vary process conditions dynamically
and monitor and modify parameters in real-time, yielding insights that are
inaccessible by other means. The results of the study will assist both in
developing basic electrochemical nucleation and growth models and in developing
materials systems for various manufacturing processes. UPenn will design and
construct the electrochemical nanoaquarium based on a previously successful
liquid cell. Collaborative electrochemical experiments and data analysis will
then be carried out at both IBM and UPenn. The materials studied will be chosen
for their relevance to rechargeable battery technology, thin film photovoltaic
cells, and advanced interconnects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical
processes play a critical role in a plethora of technologies, ranging from
energy conversion in batteries, to the production of photovoltaic (PV) cells, to
the fabrication of interconnects in high density microelectronics; yet a
complete understanding of nucleation, growth, and development of morphology
during electroplating is still lacking for many industrially important
processes. Since its invention, the electron microscope, with its sub-nanometer
resolution has enabled important discoveries in disciplines ranging from
materials science to biology. The conventional electron microscope operates,
however, in a high vacuum environment and is not capable of imaging processes in
liquid media. To enable imaging of processes in liquid media such as
electrodeposition and electrodisorption, it is necessary to construct a very
thin, hermetically-sealed liquid cell (nanoaquarium) sandwiched between two
electron-transparent membranes. Such a device will enable nanoscale observations
and a better understanding of the initial, nanoscale stages of the
electroplating process that ultimately control the process outcome. In addition
to advancing fundamental science, this study will aid the optimization of
manufacturing processes, help improve the performance and reliability of
rechargeable batteries, and assist in the development of high throughput, low
cost production of solar cells and higher density microelectronics. In addition,
the nanoaquarium has broad applicability for in situ electron microscope imaging
of diverse processes in liquid media such as nano particle self and controlled
assembly, formation of metamaterials with unique properties, and biological
phenomena. The nanoaquarium is likely to be transformative, provide new insights
in diverse disciplines, and enable discoveries. The grant will also facilitate
the translation of academic research to an industrial laboratory and enable
academic researchers to get acquainted with critical problems encountered by
manufacturers. The results of the study, in particular the videos obtained with
the nanoaquarium, will be incorporated into instructional material in courses in
materials science, electrochemistry, and nanotechnology. In situ electron
microscopy videos obtained with the nanoaquarium convey information about
dynamical, nanoscale phenomena that is vivid, accessible, and exciting to
scientists and non-scientists alike. Narrated videos will be posted on the web
for high school students and teachers, undergraduate students, and the public to
convey the excitement of discovery and promote interest in science and
engineering.