* 1129381
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Does Change in Fine-Scale Soil Properties After Fire Stimulate Exotic Species Colonization?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* William Cumming, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 01/31/2013
* USD 11,684.00

Fire is a natural part of most forest ecosystems in the western United States.
Forest managers utilize fuel reduction projects to lessen fire severity, often
without considering potential negative ecological consequences of non-native
plant species introductions. The establishment and spread of non-native species
following fire may significantly alter the ability of native plant communities
to recover. Factors such as fire severity, resource distribution, and soil
alterations all play a role in where and how non-native plant species may
establish in burned areas. This doctoral dissertation research project addresses
the invasion potential across the forest/grassland ecotone following low
severity fire by studying microsite changes from pre- to post-burn conditions.
The two research questions of the proposed study are: 1) Are there significant
differences in the biotic (vegetation attributes) and abiotic (soil moisture,
temperature, nutrients) microsite conditions across the ponderosa pine/grassland
ecotone of the Colorado Front Range following low severity fire, which would
make the site more invasible? 2) In the post-fire landscape, following low
severity fire, how are non-native plant species colonization patterns affected
by the microsite patterns? Data collected from several research sites along this
forest/grassland ecotone over the course of several seasons prior to prescribed
burning provide information on variation in soil moisture and temperature and
vegetation structure during times of near normal conditions. Following
prescribed burning, the changes in microsite patterns may vary across the
ecotone and impact the availability of sites for native and non-native species
colonization. Many of the studies of fire effects to date address this question
at coarser scales. This research applies a more fine scale approach to determine
the mechanisms involved in the spread of non-natives into the forested landscape
from a grassland matrix. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to
the understanding of the importance of microsite conditions and their effects on
the potential for non-native plant species to move across ecotones after low
severity fire. The use of this information will contribute not only to the
overall understanding of the degree to which a recently burned area is
susceptible to invasion by non-native species at the fine scale, but will also
contribute to the integration of these fine scale mechanisms into landscape
level responses to disturbance. This research will provide fundamental
information that is necessary to support present and future forest management
decisions in the western United States, in regards to prescribed fires and non-
native species control. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.