* 1129664
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Childhood Disadvantage and Body Weight in Adulthood
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2011,02/28/2013
* Gregory Pavela, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 02/28/2013
* USD 4,501.00

Substantial evidence demonstrates that people who are economically disadvantaged
are more likely to experience a variety of adverse events related to health and
other personal outcomes. Individual experiences of disadvantage begin before
people are born and continue into childhood, during which circumstances related
to family structure, income, and parental occupation shape subsequent
experiences in adult life.

This project examines how disadvantage experienced at different points in life
creates long-term effects on a specific dimension of health: body weight. To
date, many researchers have examined the contemporaneous effects of social
position on health and weight status. But only recently have data and analytic
techniques become available that make it possible to analyze the long-term
effects of economic disadvantage on health later on in life. To measure the
association between early disadvantage and weight status in adulthood, this
project employs latent cluster analysis and multilevel model regression
analysis. Three central hypotheses will be tested. First, it is hypothesized
that higher levels of childhood disadvantage will be associated with increased
adult weight. Second, it is hypothesized that adult neighborhood characteristics
will be independently associated with adult weight status. Third, it is
hypothesized that neighborhood characteristics will explain some, if not all, of
the association between childhood disadvantage and adult weight status.

Broader Impact Obesity has been characterized as a national epidemic, and rates
of obesity are predicted to increase for the next several decades. Increasing
rates of obesity, in turn, are associated with significant increases in
predicted health care costs as well as lost income. For instance, obesity is
associated with Type II diabetes and cardiovascular disease, the leading cause
of death in the United States. Moreover, this burden falls disproportionately on
members of ethnic minority groups, such as African American women and Mexican-
American men. Results of this dissertation will contribute to scholarly work on
the long term effects of social inequality on health and life course outcomes.
Results also seek to inform public policy on how to best address the American
obesity epidemic. In light of recent efforts to reform access to and delivery of
health care, findings may inform the ability of policy makers to design more
effective programs aimed at curbing current obesity trends.