* 1129360
* Bridging the Achievement Gap with Authorable Virtual Peers
* CSE,IIS
* 10/25/2010,01/31/2013
* Justine Cassell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2013
* USD 156,782.00

This project will implement and evaluate technological supports for African-
American Vernacular English(AAVE)-speaking children to learn Standard American
English while engaging in problem-based scientific inquiry. The technology
consists of virtual peers that collaborate with children to solve a bridge-
building problem, while scaffolding the notion that different kinds of language
are appropriate for different conversational contexts. The work relies on the
recognition that primary school education is based on a set of mainstream oral
practices and literacy-preparation skills, and yet all children do not share the
same cultural experiences typical of mainstream culture, nor come to school
speaking the same dialect of English. Similarly, while traditional science
classrooms have emphasized a particular style of scientific discourse, not all
children come to school with the mastery of these discourse styles. Scientific
inquiry is at the heart of the contemporary science classroom but it is usually
defined according to a specific cultural tradition that privileges individual
opinion, 'talking back' to the teacher, and criticism of others; a tradition
that may not be shared by all students, and which may have ramifications for
science achievement among diverse populations. A unique approach for integrating
cultural authenticity into learning technology will be pursued: (1) carrying out
an in-depth investigation into AAVE peer-oriented language and nonverbal
communicative behaviors. The corpus of data obtained from this study will be
shared with all interested researchers via the Penn Linguistic Data Consortium;
(2) Two technological innovations will extend prior work on virtual peers so as
to make possible the current work: (a) PIPER, a new platform for rapid
prototyping and implementation of virtual peers so that each of the virtual
peers does not require extensive re-implementation as it did in our Flash days;
(b) AVP, an authoring system for virtual peers so that children themselves can
program the virtual peer as a way of actively engaging with the technology, with
code-switching and with collaborative science inquiry and then description of
that inquiry to a teacher; (3) evaluating the technologies with respect to their
role in improving children?s use of SAE, their educational self-efficacy, and
their learning gains in second grade standardized science
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and important of the
work lies in: (1) the potential to substantially increase access to reading,
writing, and science literacy for under-served, at-risk children, and to thereby
decrease the Black-White achievement gap; (2) technological innovation that will
allow other researchers to quickly prototype and implement virtual peers and
pedagogical agents that speak different dialects and language, and that can be
programmed by their designers, and by their users; (3) an innovative program of
dissemination of results and research practices that involves publication and
presentation of results, sharing the corpus of data via the Penn Linguistic Data
Consortium, but also the involvement of local schools with high populations of
African-Americans, local churches and community centers, and informal education
institutions such as science centers and children's museums.