* 1129874
* Variability of the Equatorial undercurrent in the eastern tropical Atlantic: Analysis of the 2007-2011 TACE-EUC Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* William Johns, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 470,988.00

The Equatorial Undercurrent (EUC) is a quasi-permanent feature of the zonal
equatorial circulation in both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Its main role in
both oceans is to supply thermocline waters from the shallow subduction zones in
the subtropics to the main upwelling zones in the central and eastern part of
the equatorial basins. While in the Pacific Ocean the EUC is rather well-
described from nearly two decades of intensive shipboard and time-series
observations in the tropical Ocean Atmosphere programs, the EUC in the Atlantic
has until recently been relatively poorly sampled and neither its mean structure
across the basin or its seasonal-to-interannual variability is understood. Its
linkage to warm and cold phases of the boreal summer equatorial cold tongue is
also poorly understood. During 2007-2011, a coordinated set of moored current
meter observations has been collected across the central and eastern equatorial
Atlantic during 2007-2011 by German, French, and U.S. investigators. These
observations contribute to the goals of TACE (the Tropical Atlantic Climate
Experiment), a 2007-2012 international CLIVAR program designed to improve
climate predictions for the tropical Atlantic region, with a particular focus on
the eastern equatorial Atlantic. The U.S. part of this effort consisted of
moored ADCP current profile measurements at four sites along 10W and 0E,
complementing a French (PIRATA) ADCP mooring at 10W, and an array of moorings
along 23W maintained by IFM-GEOMAR (Germany). This project will complete the
analysis of the data collected in this program, following the original NSF grant
that supported the U.S. measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The variability of the EUC across the basin, its
linkages to wind forcing and SST variability, and the nature of the
intraseasonal variability along the equator will be documented. The data will be
used together with models to understand the dynamics controlling the EUC
variability and the fate of EUC waters in the eastern Gulf of Guinea. The
results of this analysis are expected to lead to a vastly improved understanding
of the EUC in the Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data collected from the TACE program,
including all moored time series and cruise data, is being assembled into a web-
accessible database maintained by the TACE Observations Working Group
(http://tace.ifm-geomar.de/index.html), to provide ready access to the broader
research community. The program has also provided graduate student training
opportunities and promoted collaboration and sharing of technical expertise
among international partners. The study will also contribute to an improved
understanding of processes influencing SST variability in the eastern tropical
Atlantic and associated climate variability in the tropical Atlantic region.