* 1129395
* Experiences in Applied Low Temperature Plasmas: Student Travel Support to Attend the 2011 American Vacuum Society International Symposium in Nashville, TN, 10/30-11/4/2011.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Matthew Goeckner, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 5,000.00

1129395&lt;br/&gt;Goeckner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for partial
support of student participation in the plasma science and technology fields in
the 2011 American Vacuum Society International Symposium in Nashville, TN. AVS
focuses on scientific and technological aspects of surface science, materials
science, vacuum science with the physics and chemistry of low temperature
plasmas, electric discharges and plasma chemistry, and their technological
applications. Fundamental topics addressed include plasma diagnostics, ion and
electron distribution functions, as well as kinetic, particle-in-cell (PIC) and
fluid plasma modeling. Applications include plasma processing of materials,
plasma interaction with surfaces, lasers, lighting, plasma medicine, plasma
aided combustion among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AVS has a strong
tradition of encouraging and promoting student participation. The AVS has an
enviable reputation of being the first conference that many of the leading
members of the community presented their research results as graduate students.
Student participation in AVS is particularly important to the professional
development of young scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: AVS is the leading international conference in the science and technology
of applied low temperature plasmas (LTPs). The conference has been the venue of
the first presentations on world leading developments in investigations of LTPs,
from lighting and lasers, to plasma materials processing and plasma-medicine.
The invited speakers represent the world?s leading industrial and academic
scientists in LTPs. This year's conference is expected to continue the tradition
of presenting on the state of the art in plasma physics and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This symposium broadens the
perspectives of graduate students. The broader impacts include the opportunity
for young U.S. scientists to attend one of the most important international
conferences in their field. They will have the opportunity to observe firsthand
the scientific and cultural diversity of the field, and establish what will
hopefully be career long collaborations with their international counterparts.
The organizers will make a special effort to support women and underrepresented
minority graduate students.