* 1129509
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Governing the Environment Privately: Politics, Property, and Markets in Chile's Aquaculture and Forestry Sectors
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* David Tecklin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2014
* USD 12,000.00

Chile's natural resource industries have experienced explosive growth within
market-oriented policy frameworks since the sweeping neoliberal restructuring
imposed by the military government beginning in the 1970s. Conflicts and
coordination problems over alternative uses and values of forest and marine
resources in the multifunctional landscapes of southern Chile have been
pervasive, however, and in 2008, the country's booming salmon aquaculture
industry all but collapsed due to failures in environmental management and
disease epidemics. This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on a
crucial question: When state regulation is constrained by design, how are the
environmental conflicts and coordination problems associated with export-
oriented agricultural industries addressed? To explore answers to this question,
the doctoral student will conduct comparative analyses of aquaculture and
forestry sectors in Chile, focusing special attention on why ecological markets
developed to address environmental quality have not developed to address natural
resource problems and the extent to which private forms of governance can
resolve the internal coordination problems and the external conflicts associated
with different agricultural industries. The cross-sector comparison of
environmental governance mechanisms will focus on institutional arrangements
(the configurations of rules, norms, and conventions), politics, and practices
of governance. The student will conduct research in south central Chile, using
multiple methods, including archival research, semi-structured interviews, the
observation of regulatory venues, and a survey questionnaire. In order to
explore the paradoxical absence of ecological markets in these sectors, the
student's fieldwork will include both a "top down" focus on the policy arena as
well as an examination of the "bottom up" efforts by conservation projects to
create ecological rights and markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
enhance understanding of environmental regulation within neoliberal policy
contexts and help to fill a gap in the understanding of environmental governance
within Chile's globally emblematic natural resource sectors. Project findings
should provide valuable information and insights that can be used by
stakeholders and policymakers in the study areas as well as in other nations
seeking to effectively manage natural resources in free-market contexts. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.