* 1129002
* RUI:  Secondary Organic Aerosol and Brown Carbon Formation from Aldehydes, Ammonium Salts, and Amines
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* David De Haan, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 337,508.00

This project will characterize atmospheric aqueous-phase chemistry and formation
of brown carbon, targeting two compounds: glycolaldehyde and hydroxyacetone.
Other common atmospheric aldehydes such as acetaldehyde and formaldehyde, while
not expected to form brown carbon, may still form large amounts of secondary
organic aerosol (SOA) material via reactions with ammonium salts and amines. In
the presence of alpha-dicarbonyls, these compounds can be incorporated into
imidazole products, so their SOA-forming potential will be examined with and
without alpha-dicarbonyls present. A suite of methods will be used. First, brown
carbon formation will be studied by cavity attenuated phase-shift and
ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy. Product structure will be
characterized by proton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Hygroscopicity tandem differential
mobility analysis and Raman microscopy will be used to measure water uptake and
surface activity of reaction products. Reaction rates will be measured by NMR
and UV-Vis spectroscopies. Aerosol will be generated by three different methods,
as required for specific experiments. The aim of these studies will be to
identify and characterize reaction products, measure reaction rates and
gas/particle partitioning, and determine the atmospheric significance of these
SOA and brown carbon formation pathways.

At least twenty diverse undergraduate students will be mentored in first
research experiences as part of this project, widening the pipeline of students
choosing careers in science by offering more student research opportunities, an
enhanced research infrastructure, and an increased publication rate of articles
with undergraduate co-authors. The addition of a postdoctoral teacher /
researcher will allow more students to be mentored while providing excellent
training for an early-career scientist. The field will benefit from the
characterization of potentially significant sources of SOA and brown carbon, and
from the training of a diverse group of young scientists. Finally, a connection
between brown carbon formation and ammonia / amine emissions may suggest new
avenues for mitigating aerosol formation to improve air quality and address
global warming.