* 1129703
* Mechanisms of Decoupling Graphene from Strong-Binding Substrates by Intercalation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Vivek Shenoy, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2013
* USD 320,147.00

The goal of this grant is to elucidate the electronic interaction of graphene
with various substrates and the growth process of decoupling underlayer growth
through a combined modeling and experimental approach. Graphene, a single-layer
of carbon atoms, exhibits dissipation-free electric conduction over the scale of
microns even at room temperature. To enable truly groundbreaking advances in
graphene-based nanodevices, large and defect-free graphene sheets must be grown
on insulating substrates. While graphene grown epitaxially on silicon carbide is
particularly attractive for future nanoelectronics, this method has a serious
drawback. The first graphene layer, while easy to grow uniformly, is
nonconductive; from an electronic point of view, this layer is not graphene at
all, but rather a "buffer layer." In this proposal, oxygen intercalation will be
used as a means to decouple graphene from the SiC surface. Conditions that lead
to a perfectly decoupled graphene layer or alternatively the formation of
defective/oxidized graphene depend not only on atomic-scale processes, but also
on interactions of surface features over distances of hundreds of nanometers. In
order to address this challenge, we propose a multi-scale approach that combines
experimental techniques for in situ surface characterization with atomic-scale
calculations, stochastic methods for finding surface structures, and kinetic
Monte Carlo methods.

If successful, this work will lead to a novel approach to grow large area
graphene, which through lithographic patterning can be used to fabricate low-
power nanoelectronic devices. The method of decoupling graphene we propose is
simple to implement, can be carried out on prefabricated devices i.e., with
metal contacts in place, and is compatible with conventional complementary
metal-oxide semiconductor processes; it is therefore of great interest to the
semiconductor industry. The grant will provide an opportunity for graduate and
undergraduate students to both carry out experimental work at a leading
industrial lab and to develop advanced computational and modeling skills. The
progress made in the modeling methods will be included in the courses that the
PI has created to promote hands-on simulation experience.