* 1129688
* Optimal Blood Screening Strategies for Infectious Agents: Mathematical Models and Decision Support Tools
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Ebru Bish, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 07/31/2015
* USD 339,999.00

The research objective of this award is to develop mathematical models to
determine an optimal screening strategy to eliminate pathogens from the blood
supply. Blood products are essential for many medical treatments, and because
many dangerous pathogens can be transmitted through blood products, blood
screening is a vital medical service. For each pathogen, there are often
multiple FDA-approved screening tests from which to choose, each having
different characteristics (e.g., false-positive and false negative probabilities
and cost). Thus, the set of screening tests, testing strategies (e.g., pooled
versus individual testing), and decision rules (to classify blood as "safe"
based on test outcomes) must be determined to minimize the risk of a
transfusion-transmitted infection. This research will result in novel
mathematical models and effective solution methodologies to determine an optimal
screening strategy. Considerations include the amount of pathogen-free blood
falsely discarded through screening, subpopulation specific and uncertain
infection rates and test performance parameters, co-infection rates among
pathogens, and the limited resources available. Other objectives focus on using
this problem to help further the education of engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
contribute to the safety of healthcare delivery by building a better
understanding of optimal screening strategies for donated blood, considering
unconventional solutions, such as regional, blood group, or sub-population
specific testing, which focus on equity in outcomes. As such, it has the
potential to be transformative by shifting focus to unconventional testing
schemes. This research is driven by the current needs of blood suppliers, and
our collaboration with the American Red Cross, within a multi-disciplinary team
of engineers and medical professionals, is an essential component of this
project. Further, this research has application beyond blood screening (e.g.,
organ/tissue transplants, carcinogen testing, food testing). Graduate and
undergraduate engineering students will benefit through classroom instruction
and involvement in the research.