* 1129613
* Fast Growth of Large Diamond Crystals in Open Air
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2016
* USD 275,195.00

The research objective of this award is to elucidate the mechanisms responsible
for growth of large diamond crystals at carat levels on non-diamond substrates
in open air for industrial applications. The proposed research will establish a
synthetic strategy using laser vibrational-resonant excitation in diamond
growth. A gas mixture of ethylene, acetylene and oxygen will be used as
precursors. Using a tunable carbon dioxide laser, vibrational resonant
excitations of the alkene group of molecules will be induced to promote chemical
reactions and enhance diamond growth. An excimer laser with ultraviolet
wavelength will also be used to improve the quality of the diamond crystals.
Deliverables include a laser system configured for fast growth of diamond
crystals in air, documentation of research results, and engineering student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop a simple,
low-cost approach for synthesizing large diamond crystals. The research results
will create a new direction for diamond growth and expand the horizon for
industrial diamond uses beyond the current applications in electronics, optics,
mechanical cutting and sensors, to name a few. The cost savings for diamond
synthesis will be realized through the use of common hydrocarbon gases as
precursors. Additionally, using this technique it is expected that many more
complicated diamond crystals and devices can be realized at a much lower cost.
The technique also has the promise of enabling an easy and viable route for
fabricating large-scale diamond structures.