* 1129781
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Coexisting Sovereignties, Overlapping Geographies: The Gwich'in Nation and the U.S.-Canadian Border
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Sallie Marston, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 02/28/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine alternative
formulations of sovereignty and non-state nationhood expressed through the
practices and collective values of the indigenous Gwich'in Nation. Sovereignty
often is described as ultimate state power over a set territory with fixed
borders. This project will confront that orthodox understanding with alternative
understandings of both power and territory. The communities who populate the
Gwich'in Nation inhabit fifteen disparate villages between the northern U.S. and
Canadian border and across overlapping geographies that include multiple legal
jurisdictions, inter-governmental relations, environmental management
collaborations, social economies, and distinct cultural conceptions of space and
time. These geographies are the sites in which the Gwich'in people practice and
articulate their transboundary sovereignty in a relational, coexistent process
despite ongoing challenges from federal, provincial, state governments and
private corporations. What the Gwich'in Nation proposes in their exercise of
sovereignty is to assert a physical, social, and political form of power that is
distinctly Gwich'in and that operates within the shared national landscape of
their people, while simultaneously living in the larger nation-states of the
U.S. and Canada. The objective of this project is to analyze the practices and
articulations of Gwich'in sovereign power as they coexist within other sovereign
bodies (U.S. and Canadian governance entities) in order to propose a new
formulation of relational power. The doctoral student will employ an indigenous-
based research methodology to inform community-based data accumulation and
dissemination models while also using traditional qualitative research
techniques. Methods will include one-on-one interviews, community-based focus
groups, and conceptual mapping workshops on both sides of the U.S.-Canadian
border. The diversity of methods will be used to render understandings of how
the Gwich'in people operate as a nation; how the Gwich'in Nation exercises
sovereignty throughout its multiple geographies; and how members of the Gwich'in
Nation conceive their nation in theoretical and material
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The alternative formulations of sovereignty expressed
and practiced by members of the Gwich'in Nation are part of a larger, emerging
conversation in indigenous communities around the world. Not only is there a
need for introducing more examples of dynamic sovereignty from indigenous
nations into political geography, there is legitimate cause to examine these
practices for a changing world where vocalizations of self-determination and the
desire for some political communities to operate outside the nation-state nexus
is increasing at a rapid pace, accelerated in part by international mechanisms
such as the U.N Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and rulings of
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. This project will engage
contemporary global political changes in conversations about power, state, and
nation and share how the indigenous Gwich'in Nation offers alternative
operations of power and assembly within a complex geography. The Gwich'in Nation
demonstrates how traditional culture, sovereign power, and geography can be
sustained and shared by a people as well as how nations can coexist and
adjudicate boundaries, jurisdictions, and natural environments. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.