* 1129041
* Radiation Response and High Temperature Stability of Nanotwinned Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Yashashree Kulkarni, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2015
* USD 228,431.00

The goal of this research project is to elucidate the behavior of nanotwinned
structures under extreme environments due to irradiation and high temperatures.
As nuclear power plays an increasingly vital role in meeting our demand for
energy in an environmentally acceptable manner, the design of structural
materials that can sustain extreme radiation environments is a critical
challenge for future nuclear power systems. Recently, a new class of
nanomaterials known as nanotwinned metals has shown extraordinary structural
properties such as ultra-high yield strength, high ductility, and enhanced
stability at high temperatures. Thus, their optimal design could lead to a
possibly enhanced performance of nanotwinned metals as next-generation
radiation-resistant materials. Employing multi-scale computational methods and
atomistic simulations, the project will address fundamental questions pertaining
to the response of nanostructured materials to radiation effects caused by
formation and interaction of point defects. This project also investigates
critical issues, namely, creep and grain growth, that become dominant mechanisms
of deformation in nanostructured metals at elevated
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to several
important areas of nanostructured metal science and technology by providing
insight into the deformation mechanisms governing their behavior under extreme
conditions. It aims to lead to a synergy among experimental, analytical and
manufacturing efforts for the optimal design of novel nanomaterials for critical
structural applications such as nuclear reactors and storage facilities, defense
and biomedical applications. Moreover, graduate and undergraduate students
working on the project would develop a strong foundation in the highly
multidisciplinary areas of nanomechanics and computational materials science.