* 1129359
* LINKING SINGLE-CELL GROWTH RATES AND GENOMICS
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2016
* Martin Polz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2016
* USD 408,000.00

Marine ecosystems are primarily microbial in nature. Microscopic organisms
represent over 90% of biomass, including the major primary producers, and drive
biogeochemical processes. Although this insight is merely 30 years old, it has
led to concerted efforts in studying the structure and functioning of microbial
communities in the ocean. Techniques are now available to estimate many key
ecological parameters of microbial life; however, one fundamental gap is that
estimates of microbial growth rates in the wild remain poorly constrained.
Questions, which have largely remained unsolved, are:

What does the growth rate distribution look like for free-living microbes? Which
species grow at what rates? How do environmental changes (e.g., nutrients,
light) affect growth rates of different microbes?

To begin to address these questions, this project will develop a single-cell
based system that allows coupled measurement of in situ growth rates and genomic
characteristics. The suspended microchannel resonator (SMR) is a well-developed
microfluidics-based mass-sensor that has sufficient resolution for measuring the
natural range in size and growth rate of ocean microbes; here, this system will
be adapted to enable: (i) capture and growth measurement of individual microbial
cells in their native seawater microenvironment, (ii) genomic analysis of the
same cells for which growth rates have been determined, and (iii) direct
analysis of bacterioplankton communities obtained from mesocosm and natural
ocean samples. This system is unique in that it couples quantitative growth rate
determination and genomic identification of individual microbial cells in their
natural microenvironment, and therefore promises to be applicable to the above
questions.

Intellectual Merit: Understanding what regulates bacterial growth on the single
cell and population level is of fundamental importance in linking microbial
diversity to function, and to model and predict carbon fluxes in the ocean. This
project establishes a prototype system to couple determination of growth and
genomics on the single cell level, for which no data currently exist. Future
directions will include design of a system with increased throughput and
capability of running onboard ship or autonomous sampling devices.

Broader Impacts: Broader impacts arise from graduate and undergraduate student
training, and communication with the scientific community and the public.
Students will be trained in an interdisciplinary manner in a project that unites
aspects of engineering and science. Thesis committees will reflect this
diversity of fields. Building plans for the system will be made available over
the web. The project will also engage in a public outreach program, for which
undergraduates will produce a series of podcasts. Emphasis will be given to
describing the process of doing engineering and science rather than only
results. Podcasts will be made available on the project's website and Facebook
page, and also through the website of MIT's Earth System Initiative and the MIT
portal on iTunes. Listeners will be invited to subscribe, and will be given the
option of providing contact information. The effectiveness of the podcasts will
be assessed through surveys of these confirmed listeners. In addition, podcasts
will be played for participants in MIT's teen outreach programs, and their
effectiveness with these teen audiences will be assessed.