* 1129719
* Workshop: 2011 Wind Energy Research Workshop, Lowell, MA, August 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* David Willis, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Niezrecki 1129719 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to hold a Wind Energy Research Workshop
to take place mid-August 2011 in Lowell, Massachusetts. This workshop will bring
together a diverse audience with a collective wealth of knowledge that will:
&lt;br/&gt; (1) identify research gaps that currently exist in the wind industry
&lt;br/&gt; (2) determine future research directions that will provide immediate
and long-term benefits to the nations? ability to harness wind energy
&lt;br/&gt; (3) exchange information via several panel sessions with
distinguished and knowledgeable speakers &lt;br/&gt; (4) educate the wind-energy
community about the relevant issues that need to be addressed to reduce the cost
of wind harvested energy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will focus
on topics not covered by other conferences. These topics include: Manufacturing,
Structural Health Monitoring, NDI, Computational Modeling, Energy Storage,
Workforce Development, and Offshore Wind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exchange of
knowledge and ideas by speakers and participants will advance the research of
the participants and their institutions, agencies, and companies. It will also
foster collaborations leading to basic and applied research that increases the
intellectual merit of the wind energy community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will award approximately 40 travel supplements to applicants that meet certain
selection criteria. The funding to support participants, especially junior
faculty and students, will be leveraged to support as large a number and as
diverse a group as possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop discussions will not only enhance
participants? understanding of the Wind-Energy field, they will also promote the
development of research collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;A report highlighting the
workshop outcomes will be published and participants? presentations will be
posted on a website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A special effort will be made to
ensure that the student awardees represent a significant number of
underrepresented groups, as well as a diversity of institutions and geographic
locations.