* 1129460
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Building Theories That Inform Practice: Exploring Engineering Epistemologies Through Cross-Disciplinary Data Analysis
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2014
* Shane Brown, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 01/31/2014
* USD 276,369.00

This engineering education research project seeks to investigate how conceptual
misunderstandings of students in different engineering disciplines have common
features. By understanding patterns of misunderstandings, the project will
attempt to develop a theory of engineering misconceptions that is trans-
disciplinary. The PIs represent three different universities and multiple
engineering disciplines. The large amount of data collected and archived by this
project can serve to provide new insights on
misconceptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of
this project, if successful, will be to inform new ways of teaching engineering
that better address students' conceptual understanding. Such knowledge is vital
for practicing engineers, lays a foundation for lifelong learning, and provides
a necessary framework for developing disciplinary expertise. Additionally a
sound grasp of concepts may be important for developing innovative engineers,
able to see deep connections between engineering fields. This project overlaps
with NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through preparation of
an engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's
goal of innovating for society is enabled by supporting the development of
innovative learning systems.