* 1129580
* Collaborative Research:  Production Fluxes and Physicochemical Properties of Nascent Marine Aerosols:  Implications for the Atmosphere and Upper Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Lynn Russell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2014
* USD 137,084.00

Production of primary marine aerosol at the ocean surface is a major process in
the earth?s climate system, with important implications for the physicochemical
evolution of the troposphere and feedbacks on upper ocean biogeochemistry. Newly
formed marine aerosol are number-dominated by sub-Ã¬m diameter, hygroscopic,
organic-rich particles that scatter solar radiation and serve as condensation
nuclei. Photolysis of the associated marine-derived organic matter (OM) produces
reactive oxygen species and other oxidized species. The nature, magnitude, and
consequences of the production and evolution of marine aerosol are highly
uncertain, precluding development of a reliable predictive capability for
associated influences on tropospheric chemistry, upper ocean biogeochemistry,
and climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address some of these uncertainties, an
interdisciplinary research team from the SUNY College of Environmental Science
and Forestry, the University of Virginia, and the Scripps Institute of
Oceanography will participate on a multidisciplinary research cruise from the US
to Bermuda in the summer of 2012 to study fluxes of marine aerosols as a
function of seawater characteristics. In particular they will characterize size-
and composition-resolved marine aerosols by comparison of measurements made with
their own custom-designed UVA aerosol generator with parallel measurements with
the NOAA SeaSweep aerosol generator and eddy covariance techniques. Comparative
studies will be carried out at two or three optically distinct stations with
seawater characteristics that are compositionally distinct. These results will
also be compared with similar data already in-hand to yield a more thorough
synthesis and to serve as the basis for developing numerical models of the
aerosol transport system. An important outcome of this project will be a
thorough characterization of the aerosol material generated by the UVA
instrument for future aerosol work at sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Results of the proposed research are expected to advance further study of the
influences of the surface ocean on the size-resolved organic and inorganic
composition and flux of nascent and ambient marine aerosol, and the related
influences of these aerosol in the multiphase chemical and physical evolution of
the marine boundary layer, surface ocean biogeochemistry, and Earth's radiation
balance. The project will also provide for the training and support of one or
more graduate and undergraduate students.