* 1129185
* International Workshop on the Globalization of Engineering Research, Development and Design. To be held in Arlington, VA on April 4-6, 2012
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2014
* Ronil Hira, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2014
* USD 87,658.00

Project Title: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International Workshop on the Globalization
of Engineering, Research, Development and Design&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
Activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to hold a two-day workshop
exploring, in-depth, the globalization of engineering, research, development and
design. The workshop will bring industry practitioners, such as corporate
engineering and R&amp;D managers, together with academic researchers to explore
the emerging phenomenon of engineering globalization. There is strong evidence
of a trend that engineering work and tasks are being restructured and
reallocated across different countries. Yet this significant transformation of
engineering hasn?t been explored systematically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop includes panels of leading corporate engineering managers who will
discuss the scale and scope of specific tasks being done in particular
geographies. In addition, leading academic researchers will present the current
state of knowledge about engineering globalization. The second day will include
breakout sessions exploring topics in more depth, identifying the gaps in our
knowledge, and generating and calibrating an agenda for further research in this
important field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have reached a level of U.S. R&amp;D investment
overseas which approaches 25% of the total annual research budget. As a
consequence the challenge of managing global engineering and research resources
is a being faced by a growing number of companies. Yet, we know very little
about how companies protect intellectual property, manage global technical
integration of resources and acquire and maintain complementary assets to ensure
appropriation of benefits from these investments in technical projects. The
conference aims to calibrate the research agenda in this arena and generate
researchable, applied questions with high potential
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &amp;
Deliverables:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary deliverable from the workshop is
an edited proceedings and website. The workshop conveners will complete a paper
summarizing the findings of the workshop including the workshop generated
research agenda for engineering globalization. In addition to the proceedings
and paper, we will pursue the idea of a call for a special journal issue in an
appropriate outlet for the best conference papers and any new papers that might
be generated after the conference. The journal would be a scholarly publication
that practitioners read. The findings will be widely disseminated to academics,
industry practitioners, and policymakers.