* 1129010
* Power-Efficient Reconfigurable Wireless Network-on-Chip (NoC) Interconnects for Future Many-core Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* David Matolak, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2015
* USD 396,000.00

The objective of this research is to improve the performance of future large-
scale Network-on-Chips (NoCs) architectures by overcoming the limitations of
excess power dissipation and increased latency observed in current metallic
interconnects. The proposed approach is to exploit wireless technology to design
power-efficient, reconfigurable, and scalable hybrid NoCs for future multi-
cores.

This proposal will evaluate novel wireless interconnects for NoCs and understand
the interplay between power, performance and technology. The project will
consist of architecture studies, evaluation of media access protocols and
transceiver technologies, and performance modeling. The proposed architecture
studies will encompass topology evaluation and shared-memory programming with
the goal of reducing power and optimizing performance. The proposed media access
studies will involve the development of reconfigurable protocols that adapt to
the traffic fluctuations and change connectivity characteristics to improve
performance. The proposed technology evaluation will uncover the capabilities as
well as limitations of current technologies, and simultaneously evaluate novel
materials/devices that can facilitate the design of the proposed wireless
interconnects.

The crosscutting nature of the proposed research will foster new research
directions in several areas, spanning computer architecture, wireless
communication and nanotechnology. Undergraduate and graduate students involved
will get versatile training in several areas through the jointly administered
courses. Minority and women students supervised by the investigators will
directly participate in this project and the proposed outreach efforts will be
organized by the diversity lead of the team. The results and findings of the
proposed research will be disseminated to researchers and educators through
technical publications and presentations.