* 1129796
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Fair Trade Organizations Across Nations and Over Time
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Kristen Shorette, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

SES-1129796&lt;br/&gt;Nina Bandelj&lt;br/&gt;Kristen
Shorette&lt;br/&gt;University of California-
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation
Research: Fair Trade Organizations Across Nations and Over
Time&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Persistent inequalities between countries constitute
one of the most significant contemporary social problems. Fair trade
organizations (FTOs) emerged as a way to address these inequalities,
redistribute profits between trading partners, provide a democratic outlet for
community development, and protect the natural environment from destructive
production practices. This research will explain the uneven rise of fair trade
(FT) over the last sixty years. A growing body of social science literature
addresses the phenomenon of FT, but this research is limited to case studies of
commodities or producer communities. In addition, most research on FT assumes
that individual values of altruism and commitment to sustainability drive the
growth of its organizations and practices. In contrast, this project adopts a
macro-institutional approach and emphasizes the importance of normative,
structural and institutional forces in explaining the over-time and cross-
national variation in FT. The project seeks to answer the following three
questions: (1) What explains the foundation of new FTOs overtime? (2) What
explains the concentration of FT producer organizations in some developing
countries rather than others, and thus provides more resources to fight
inequality in some communities rather than others? and (3) What explains cross-
national variation in the amount of FT goods consumed among developed countries?
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This study will improve understanding of how
normative, structural and institutional forces shape global markets. It will
also expand knowledge of a new organizational and economic phenomenon which has
benefited producers from the developing world and has potential to reduce
persistent international inequalities. Findings from this study about the causes
of proliferation and variation in FT goods are essential information for the
current FT community and its efforts to expand the industry and thereby promote
Third World development.