* 1129396
* Seismic Response of Concrete Gravity Dams Subjected to Spatially Variable Excitations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Alan C. Lau, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2017
* USD 259,932.00

Concrete gravity dams are critical infrastructure serving electricity
generation, water supply, flood control, irrigation and recreation. Large
concrete dams would most likely experience different earthquake induced motions
at different points on their base during an earthquake. This spatial variation
of the motions is commonly ignored in the seismic design of these massive
structures, although it may induce more severe response patterns in the
structures, which may potentially pave the way for the loss of the reservoir and
ensuing devastation. This project will comprehensively study the effect of the
spatial variability of the ground motions on a few carefully selected concrete
gravity dams from the nation?s inventory exposed to seismic excitations
pertinent to their sites. The study will involve detailed numerical modeling and
dynamic analysis of dam systems to accurately include the complex nonlinear
material behavior and interactions of the dam concrete, foundation rock and
water in the reservoir. The project will provide the methodology and framework
for the evaluation of the effect of spatially variable ground motions on the
response of concrete gravity dams. Based on the research results,
recommendations for incorporating the effect of spatial variability of seismic
motions in the design and retrofit of dam structures will be
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will enable engineers to design
safer concrete gravity dams and to evaluate the performance of existing dams to
identify those posing significant hazard to the community in terms of expected
casualties and economic losses. The outcomes of the study will be directly
disseminated to the profession via publications and presentations. The numerical
codes and data generated with this project will be posted on a web site for use
by researchers and practicing engineers. This will eventually enhance the safety
of the nation?s vital infrastructure. The research will also provide advanced
training to graduate and undergraduate students. Underrepresented groups will be
recruited in the project using well established institutional partnerships.