* 1129526
* SIGMOD 2011 Programming Contest
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Samuel Madden, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2012
* USD 30,000.00

This proposed project is to support the third annual programming contest to be
held at SIGMOD 2011 conference in Greece. The funding is to sponsor travel for
the contest participants to the conference and staffing for running the contest
at MIT. The contest is open to graduate and undergraduate teams from degree-
granting institutions. This year's contest task is to build a system that stores
(key, value) pairs sorted in key order, durably on a Flash disk. As with
previous years, the goals of the contest are to: (a) stimulate student interest
in the DBMS field, (b) present a research challenge, (c) foster the creation of
sharable open source code modules, (d) foster Computer Science education by
creating a forum where students can excel, and (e) present a forum where
excellent students can get noticed without writing papers. This contest will
stimulate the database community to develop robust open source implementations
of challenging research software. Such implementations have intellectual merit
in that they provide a base upon which other researchers can build tools and
students can learn how others have architected large data management systems.
The contest will attract young, eager, students with enthusiasm for building
real systems to the database community. It will emphasize that the community
values real implementations in addition to academic papers, and will potentially
lead to open source software that will be used by researchers outside of the
community. To promote participation from under-represented groups, participants
from such groups will be especially encouraged.