* 1129270
* Collaborative Research: Using Transcriptomics to Understand Mechanisms of Stress Response and Toxin Production in Pathogenic and Toxigenic Microbes in Tropical Marine Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Alexandria Boehm, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 281,885.00

In this project an interdisciplinary research team from the University of Hawaii
at Manoa, Stanford University, and Rutgers University will study the
transcriptomes of Gambierdiscus, Staphylococcus aureus, and Enterococcus in
Hawaiian coastal waters - toxin-producing species that pose significant health
hazards to humans. Their goal is to elucidate the mechanisms associated with
toxin production by Gambierdiscus and inactivation by sunlight of the bacterial
pathogen, S. aureus, and the fecal indicator, Enterococcus. Because the
transcriptome of an organism reflects the genes that are actively being
expressed at any given time, this study, by elucidating levels of messenger RNA
expression in the target organisms, should provide valuable insights into the
mechanisms responsible for toxin production, responses to stress and/or
subsequent bacterial inactivation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program
will be organized around four working hypotheses: &lt;br/&gt;H1: Production of
ciguatoxin by Gambierdiscus reflects the physiological condition of the culture
as influenced by temperature, irradiance, and growth phase. &lt;br/&gt;H2: High
throughput transcriptome analysis from toxin (+) and toxin (-) cultures will
allow the identification of genes involved in ciguatoxin production and
understanding of the light and nutrient conditions that favor this function.
&lt;br/&gt;H3: Whereas E. faecalis is susceptible to indirect photoinactivation
under exposure to sunlight in seawater, S. aureus is not. This is likely due to
the presence of carotenoid pigments within the cells, which are able to quench
reactive oxygen species. &lt;br/&gt;H4: E. faecalis and S. aureus respond to
photo-stress in clear seawater by up-regulating genes that encode for proteins
to repair cellular damage and mitigate oxidative stress; this "stressome" will
change with increasing exposure to photostress, revealing the stress at which
repair is no longer possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
information that will be gathered in this study is expected to contribute
significantly to advancing the field of risk management with respect to
recreational water use and seafood consumption beyond reliance on empirical
correlations and towards policies that are based on a mechanistic understanding
of the threats these organisms pose to human health.