* 1129872
* Support for the IGS/FRIS Symposium on Interactions of Ice Sheets and Glaciers with the Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Helen Fricker, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 09/30/2012
* USD 23,276.00

This award provides partial support for "Support for the IGS/FRISP Symposium on
Interactions of Ice Sheets and Glaciers with the Ocean" to be held in June 2011.
The workshop will bring together U.S. and international researchers to discuss
the topic of ice/ocean interactions for a one week period and will take place at
the Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Promoting interdisciplinary research on
this topic is important because most of the current mass loss from ice sheets is
occurring in areas where the ice sheet interacts with the ocean. The hope is to
bring together modelers, glaciologists, oceanographers, geologists, and outreach
specialists. The two overarching goals of the workshop are to 1) assess the
state of knowledge of ice-ocean interactions; and 2) to discuss what is needed
for development of reliable, quantitative models of ice sheet evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The ocean has a profound influence on
the ice sheets and tidewater glaciers and it is becoming increasingly clear that
to understand how the ice sheet system will evolve we need to better understand
ice-ocean interaction processes. By hosting the forum at an oceanographic
institution the hope is to foster strong links between the oceanographic and
glaciological communities of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The topic has broad societal relevance because of the link between loss of land
ice and global sea-level rise. Funds provided by this award will support
graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and early career scientists. There
will also be outreach activities with local California schools to engage the
K-12 population in topical scientific research. Understanding ice-ocean
interactions is a key component of being able to predict future climate change
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds provided by the NSF will only be used to
support US scientists, with the specific focus being to provide partial support
for early career scientists and outreach specialists. Inclusion of early career
scientists and students in the presentation and discussion of a necessarily
interdisciplinary, integrated, and truly cutting edge area of Antarctic science
will be extremely valuable in training the next generation of Antarctic
researchers. Outcome from the meeting will include a symposium volume that is
likely to be a very valuable research compendium for future work.