* 1129088
* RAPID: Carbon Cycle-Climate Feedback Analysis in CMIP5 Models
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Ning Zeng, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 05/31/2012
* USD 29,762.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) models with a focus on the
strength of coupled carbon-climate feedback. The PI will analyze the ability of
the latest suite of models, in simulating 19th -20th century co-variability in
carbon cycle and climate, as well as projected future changes. The main tasks
that will be undertaken are: (i) assessing the realism of the model simulations
by comparison with observations; (ii) establishing criterion based on key
observational constraints to group the models; (iii) analyzing the strength of
carbon-climate feedbacks projected for the 21st century, comparing with earlier
results and diagnosing the results in terms of response and feedback; (iv) using
a model of intermediate complexity to further understand the CMIP5 model
behaviors, such as sensitivity to carbon parameterizations. The principal
investigator will also conduct regionally focused analysis for vulnerable carbon
pools in such as the Arctic permafrost and subtropical semiarid and forested
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project lies in its
support of the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide information on climate
change and its consequences to decision makers worldwide. This project will
examine carbon-climate feedbacks in the current state-of-the-science models. The
study will shed insights into both the deficiencies in current models as well as
key observations and experiments needed to improve the models. Such an effort is
critical to understanding the trajectory of future concentration of atmospheric
CO2, aerosol radiative forcing and sensitivity of earth's climate to greenhouse
gas increases.