* 1129090
* Physical Control of Carbon Export in the Subarctic Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Charles Eriksen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 323,623.00

Intellectual Merit: One of the largest outstanding and ongoing research problems
in the physical and biogeochemical oceanographic community concerns the fate of
organic carbon generated from primary production in the surface ocean. Though
carbon export exerts a profound control on CO2 concentrations in the world?s
atmosphere, in-situ measurements of production rates are not fully reconciled
with those inferred from the global annual average, and the spectrum of
variability of carbon export in a variety of oceanic environments has yet to be
fully determined. A popular method for evaluating ocean metabolism is the
formulation of an oxygen mass balance, in which an oxygen budget is constructed
in the mixed layer or euphotic zone, the effects of physical processes are
removed, and the residual oxygen production is stoichiometrically related to the
export of carbon to depth. While ship-based oxygen mass balance studies are
hindered largely by expense and the availability of resources, recent efforts
using remote measurement of oxygen from moored sensors display considerable
potential for cost-effective and geographically widespread diagnostics of the
biological pump. These techniques have been expanded to mobile autonomous
platforms such as profiling Argo floats and ocean gliders, which offer an
enhanced, highly-resolved vertical and horizontal picture of major physical
processes controlling primary production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuing the
evolution of studies of net biological oxygen production from autonomous
platforms, the project will apply a comprehensive physical and oxygen mass
balance assessment to a remote-sensing time series of unprecedented duration and
resolution: the University of Washington Seaglider Ocean Station P time series
in the southern Gulf of Alaska. Three separate Seaglider deployments orbited the
well-instrumented National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration Pacific Marine
Environmental Laboratory (NOAA/PMEL) Station P mooring from June 2008 to January
2010, collecting detailed vertical and horizontal profiles of basic physical
properties, bio-optical variables, and dissolved oxygen. During extended
portions of this time, the Station P mooring observed atmospheric variables and
corresponding physical parameters within the near surface ocean; taken together
these datasets represent a powerful tool for adding to the established picture
of physical variability and net oxygen production in the central subarctic
Pacific Ocean. In the course of our proposed analysis, we hope to: 1) better
constrain horizontal advection, vertical advection, and diapycnal mixing
processes, as they apply to the budget of an active tracer; 2) obtain a robust
estimate of net oxygen production in the mixed layer during the course of the
time series; 3) evaluate respiration (oxygen consumption) below the mixed layer
and above the permanent halocline; and 4) estimate the dependence with depth of
respiration below the pycnocline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will expand the knowledge base of the physical dynamics controlling the
biological pump in the Gulf of Alaska as well as add to the length of the time
series which has been analyzed in a carbon export context. A better
understanding of advection in the surface layer would allow comparison to
previous residual estimates of this term and its relative importance at each
phase of the seasonal cycle. Exploring the dependence in time and depth of
diapycnal diffusivity would improve and clarify our knowledge of its role in
vertical transport of oxygen at Station P. Additionally, analysis of a combined
moored and autonomous vehicle time series should provide a foundation of
techniques to be used in similar future deployments in difficult-to-observe
regions of the world ocean.