* 1129820
* Collaborative Research: Geometry of Group Behaviors with Application to Fish Schooling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Maurizio Porfiri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 218,634.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypothesis that collective
behavior is a manifestation of an inherently low-dimensional structure
underlying the group motion. This project will classify collective behaviors
through the topological analysis of the corresponding manifolds and the study of
measurable properties defined thereon. This research will establish
computational schemes to model such low-dimensional manifolds through undirected
graphs which respect underlying geodesic structures and analyze these graphs
through modern methods from computational topology and information theory. The
project focuses on the fish schooling phenomenon in the universal animal model
of zebrafish. Experiments and simulations will be synergistically integrated to
produce a comprehensive dataset for validation of the proposed data-driven
dynamical systems framework while contributing to mathematical modeling of
biological groups.

If successful, the results of this project will provide principled and robust
computational suites for the characterization of collective behavior in
biological groups from raw data that can be used by a broad animal behavior
community. Mathematical tools developed in this project will aid modeling of
networked dynamical systems, by providing tools for model validation based on
large-scale data, and image processing for data mining, by developing novel
geometric classifiers for complex systems. In addition, methods developed in
this project will result into new computational tools for error analysis of
time-series and data-driven studies of dynamical systems with fast and slow time
scales. The results will be integrated in curricula, course materials, and
projects for courses in Mechanical Engineering and Mathematics to fostering
outside-the-box and multidisciplinary thinking in undergraduate and graduate
students. K-12 students and teachers will be introduced to dynamical systems
through formal and informal learning experiences in and out of the classroom
combining fish, manifolds, and complexity.