* 1129355
* Collaborative Project: Developing Faculty Expertise in Information Assurance through Case Studies and Hands-on Experiences
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Bei-Tseng Chu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Three universities, North Carolina A & T State University, the University of
North Carolina at Charlotte, and the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, are
collaboratively developing faculty expertise in information assurance (IA) and
computer security through two faculty development workshops. Covering two years,
the workshops involve thirty-six faculty members from two-year, four-year, and
minority colleges and universities. The workshops are helping participants to
integrate IA labs and case studies into the curricula at the participants' home
institutions. The workshops are designed to increase the faculty members'
expertise and their home institution's capacity to produce a diverse workforce
in the area of information assurance. Personalized instruction plans and follow-
up assistance are provided to faculty participants. Besides building faculty
expertise, the project is improving partnerships in information assurance
education.

This project is improving overall information security and critical
infrastructure protection in the U.S. by producing a larger and more diverse IA
workforce with better IA skills. The curriculum materials disseminated through
the workshops can be adopted across multiple disciplines such as computer
science, software engineering, information technology and business, and are
being made available to a broader audience through conferences, publication, and
a dedicated website. The project is building a community of security education
experts across multiple disciplines. Broad coverage of IA topics and the
introduction of innovative teaching techniques are attracting faculty
participants with diverse backgrounds.