* 1129214
* UBM-Group: Integrated Undergraduate Training in Mathematics and  Life Sciences at NCSU
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* James Gilliam, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

The goal of the Integrated Undergraduate Training in Mathematics and Life
Sciences at North Carolina State University (NCSU) is to attract and train
undergraduates in mathematics and life sciences for academic and nonacademic
careers at the interface between mathematics and the life sciences. Galileo
argued that the laws of nature are mathematical. Today, some 40 decades later,
cutting edge research at the forefront of life sciences has become more
dependent on mathematical, computational, and statistical methodologies. The
proposed UBM program uses a multi-faceted approach to prepare next generation of
mathematicians and scientists that will meet the holistic, multi-disciplinary
research problems of the 21st century. The program engages in cutting edge,
significant, cross-disciplinary research; successful, well established
curricular and support programs; as well as exciting, novel, new initiatives.
Its aim is to provide a comprehensive, challenging, yet supportive academic
environment for students in mathematical and life sciences designed to ensure
their success.

The NCSU UBM team is truly interdisciplinary, with members in mathematics,
biomathematics, statistics, biology, chemistry, veterinary medicine and
medicine. This powerful combination of areas of expertise offers a truly unique
cross-disciplinary educational experience for undergraduates in life sciences
and mathematics. The results of the proposed UBM program will provide a vehicle
for systemic institutional change in introductory mathematics and science
education. Since project leadership includes key members of existing academic
units on campus, the project is set to implement these reforms from inside of
existing structures. The program will provide important professional development
courses for many NCSU students and will recruit diverse students from many
groups that are currently under-represented in mathematics and the life
sciences.