* 1129127
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate Change, Law, and Transnational Space: The Politics of Climate Justice Mobilization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Steve Herbert, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 01/31/2013
* USD 11,947.00

Recent studies have highlighted the differential impact of climate change on
people and their livelihoods in different parts of the world. Such findings have
led to widespread political mobilization for "climate justice" in a range of
contexts. Human rights, legal argument, and international institutions have
structured such efforts by several government and civil society advocates, while
many NGOs and social movements have called instead for structural change,
organizing popular mobilization across political scales. The varied framings and
strategies employed by these groups bear upon the direction of future regulatory
action and, ultimately, the production of physical and social geographies.
Little scholarship, however, has examined these politics as they involve
differently positioned actors, with different resources, stakeholders, and
commitments. This doctoral dissertation project explores these themes through a
comparative study of two significantly differentiated mobilization efforts for
"just" climate regulation. The project asks (1) how the groups frame the problem
of uneven climate change and appropriate responses, (2) what political
opportunity structures exist for them and how they make strategic choices, and
(3) how framings and opportunity structures inform each other, and the
assessment of outcomes. In-depth interviews with key actors in two efforts,
observations of meetings and actions in the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and the European Union, and texts produced by the two efforts
will provide data to answer these questions. The findings will demonstrate the
range of framings and political opportunities that characterize the two cases,
relationships between these two definitive aspects of mobilization, and links
between them and the factors that differentiate the cases, which include the
institutional affiliations of key actors; forms of expertise; the ideological
commitments of actors and their stakeholders; political scales of engagement;
and legal vs. non-legal strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
analyze how differently positioned actors engage in formal political processes
and direct action in response to the imminent and uneven environmental impacts
associated with climate change. In so doing, it will unpack the divergent
conceptualizations of global justice that these efforts pursue, which involve
legal norms and processes, relational connections, and prescription for
redistribution and redress in varying forms and degrees. It will examine how
emergent scientific knowledge plays a role in the construction of political
efforts that cross space to link disparate impacts, communities, and places, and
how such efforts mobilize strategically at different political geographic
scales. It will demonstrate the importance of actors' situatedness for their
means and abilities to participate in processes of global governance and
representative politics. This research has potential policy implications because
it will lead to better understanding of advocacy practices and participation in
current climate policy formation structures. It may also contribute to expanding
knowledge of the political dimensions of climate change and its regulation in
relation to themes of justice, issues of importance that have been recognized by
inclusion in the mitigation section of the next Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change report. The study holds potential to contribute to knowledge in
political geography, political ecology, as well as socio-legal studies, and to
better integrate these literatures. The project will contribute to the training
of a young scholar, and will incorporate results into teaching and learning
opportunities.