* 1129524
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Remote Sensing Using Ambient Noise
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Oleg Godin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2015
* USD 335,928.00

Intellectual Merit: In recent years it has been shown theoretically that, under
very weak assumptions, a good approximation to the acoustic Green's function
G(A, B, t) can be extracted by computing the cross-correlation of simultaneous
measurements of ambient acoustic noise at locations A and B. G(A, B, t) is the
response at location A to an impulsive point source at location B; by
reciprocity G(A, B, t) = G(B, A, t) in a quiescent environment. This procedure
is sometimes referred to as noise interferometry. The practical utility of noise
interferometry has been demonstrated in a variety of settings, including seismic
applications. Because this technique does not involve the use of active acoustic
sources, it requires only very modest experimental resources. This project seeks
to demonstrate the feasibility of noise interferometry in the ocean, and explore
several issues relevant to understanding the limitations of noise interferometry
for ocean remote sensing. The work involves a combination of experiment, data
analysis, theory and numerical simulations. It is anticipated to provide a
foundation for using noise interferometry as a practical means of acoustic
remote sensing of the ocean's interior, and to that end the focus will be on
using real ocean data to demonstrate the utility of the method under practical
ocean conditions, rather than such things as idealized simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed work has applications to
several fields with obvious societal benefits. These include noninvasive medical
ultrasound for diagnostic and monitoring purposes, and nondestructive evaluation
of structures, e.g., crack detection in bridges using only traffic-generated
vibrations. In addition to developing the tools to understand and address these
problems, the project will support and train two graduate students. For ocean
remote sensing, the ability to use ambient sound for remote sensing of the ocean
volume eliminates the possibility of harming marine life with active sound
sources. The work will be done in loose, unfunded collaboration with a small
group of Russian scientists, thereby contributing to the strengthening of
international ties.