* 1129401
* Climate Change and Biogeography: Effects of Extreme Events
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Sarah Woodin, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 708,066.00

The long term goal of this project is to make verifiable forecasts of the
biodiversity consequences of climate change in the coastal zone. By falsifying
some and corroborating other biogeographic hypotheses, the investigators will
establish a mechanistic framework for forecasting that can be verified by
hindcasting the biogeographic changes that have been documented over the past
century of climate change. The confluence of the rich biogeographic history of
the European intertidal, the extreme conditions of the past 3 cold winters, and
our rapidly expanding abilities in ecological forecasting provide a unique
opportunity to make extraordinary progress in forecasting biodiversity responses
to climate change. The investigators will quantify the metapopulation dynamics
of ecologically dominant intertidal species to determine mechanisms responsible
for setting geographic limits, and develop long term forecasts of future change.
This research will also allow them to test the effect of episodic extreme events
on the usefulness of ensemble methods for biogeographic forecasting. In a
changing climate, with increasing frequencies of extreme events, it is important
to determine whether the biogeography can ever "catch up", or whether the time
lags caused by the demographic storage effect and connectivity will prevent the
biology from ever tracking the long term change. The methods for ecological
engineer and biodiversity forecasting and hindcasting that are described here
have general applicability to marine habitats worldwide. All ecosystems have
ecologically dominant species that control the rest of the assemblage of
organisms, and they all are metapopulations whose connectivity and age structure
determines their sensitivity to climate change and extreme events via the
demographic storage effect. The players change from place to place and the
oceanographic context also changes, but the methods applied here are broadly
transferable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this study will impact dramatically the discourse on the impacts of climate
change. Results to date have centered on descriptions of gradual biogeographic
range changes and exploration of the mechanisms driving those changes. Rarely in
this literature is there discussion of the importance of broadscale episodic
catastrophic events on biogeographic ranges, or how to capture those events in
forecasting ecological response to climate change. A central prediction of
climate change is an increase in the frequency of such potentially catastrophic
climatic events which have the power to periodically reset the range boundaries
of species in a ratchet-like manner. Of central interest is the degree to which
such resets by extreme events determine long-term biogeographic patterns due to
the combination of metapopulation dynamics and time lags caused by "storage
effects" of long-lived individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce an annotated bibliography
of biogeographic data from the Portuguese, Spanish, and French biodiversity
literature of the 19th and early 20th centuries, much of which is unavailable in
North America. The PIs actively support undergraduate research in their
laboratories and field work, and encourage their students to present their work
at national meetings. The PIs use research-based approaches in formal teaching,
including extensive readings of the primary scientific literature and multi-
disciplinary hypothesis driven laboratory exercises. The PIs will collaborate
with local high school teachers, who have been co-authors of research papers
with the PIs. These collaborations will be enhanced with the Science Lab program
of the USC Center for Science Education, which brings students and teachers to
USC for 1-day lab experiences. The project will develop a climate change atlas
of the European coast including measures of historical risk and the distribution
of extreme events. A forecast atlas of the next century will be developed by
coupling population models to regional climate forecasts. These products will be
used as models of ways to translate scientific results into products of greater
utility. The PIs have used this approach in their web-based 7-day ecological
forecasts of stress in marine communities, which are in the initial phase of
transition to NOAA operational status. The PIs have also engaged policy makers
and have worked closely with resource managers.