* 1129125
* Dynamics of frontal meandering and related exchange processes at the shelfbreak south of New England
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Glen Gawarkiewicz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2015
* USD 590,249.00

The shelf break front is one of the most salient features of the regional
oceanography of the Middle Atlantic Bight, both in terms of its physics and
biology. Processes associated with the shelf break front are inherently
nonlinear and exhibit variations over a broad range of spatial and temporal
scales. The shelf-break frontal jet, subject to local instabilities, meanders
along the shelf break and interacts with winds, continental shelf eddies and
slope sea warm-core rings. The shelf-break region also has significant along-
and cross-shelf fluxes of heat, salt and nutrients that are subject to
modification by frontal meandering, winds and impinging warm-core rings. Despite
many years of study in the region, many scientific questions related to
meandering of the shelf break front, bottom boundary layer dynamics, and cross-
shelf exchange remain unanswered. The primary objectives of the proposed
research are to understand characteristics of the shelf-break frontal meandering
south of New England, its underlying dynamics, and effects of frontal meandering
and other forcing mechanisms on cross-frontal exchanges. The proposed research
will consist of analysis of historical and forthcoming Pioneer Array
observations and idealized numerical simulations to: reveal the formation and
evolution of large amplitude shelf-break frontal meandering south of New
England; diagnose characteristics of the frontal meandering; investigate the
effects of frontal meandering, winds and warm-core rings on flows in the shelf-
break bottom boundary layer; investigate the effects of frontal meandering,
winds and warm-core rings on cross-frontal exchange; and examine the along-shelf
and vertical variations of the cross-frontal exchange.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Numerical simulations will be used in
conjunction with analysis of historical and forthcoming observations to address
fundamental scientific questions concerning dynamics of frontal meandering at
the New England shelf break and effects of frontal meandering and other forces
on cross-frontal exchange. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Better
understanding of meanders of the shelf break front and cross-frontal exchange
will provide the physical background for studies of biological productivity and
contaminant dispersal at the shelf break. This project has implications for
commercial fisheries and marine conservation. Results of this project will be
communicated to general public and K- 12 students, and also used for future
outreach effort providing informal education materials including video and
multi-media presentations.