* 1129076
* PIRE: Training and Workshops in Data Intensive Computing Using The Open Science Data Cloud
* O/D,OISE
* 12/03/2010,07/31/2016
* Robert Grossman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 4,891,876.00

Many scientists today face the unprecedented challenge of managing and analyzing
a rapidly growing set of complex data. This international PIRE project aims to
narrow the growing gap between the capability of modern scientific instruments
to produce data and the ability of researchers to manage, analyze, and share
those data in a reliable and timely manner. The emerging technology of cloud
computing is a step forward from the current cyberinfrastructure. Cloud
computing involves clusters (the "clouds") of distributed computers that provide
potentially less expensive, more flexible, and more powerful on-demand resources
and services over a network, usually the Internet, while providing the scale and
the reliability of a data center. This PIRE team intends to help develop large-
scale distributed computing capabilities - the Open Science Data Cloud (OSDC) -
to provide long term persistent storage for scientific data and state-of-the-art
services for integrating, analyzing, sharing and archiving scientific data. The
group proposes to study and strengthen storage systems that integrate
specialized network protocols and support data transport over wide-area, high-
performance networks. As data grows in size, the only practical means to analyze
it is to use parallel programming, but until recently it has been time consuming
for a domain scientist to take advantage of parallel programming. Another
research focus will be to develop new classes of cloud-based parallel
programming frameworks and to integrate them into the cloud infrastructure so
that this technology is more broadly available to scientists. In addition to the
research dimensions of this project, another key aspect is the involvement, in
workshops and in subsequent use of the cloud cyberinfrastructure, of many domain
scientists and their students. These groups will be trained in the basics of
cloud computing and then will work to ensure that the cloud computing research
advances maximize the manageability and analytical power of the complex datasets
unique to their disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE project embraces
cloud computing as a global issue and so taps the cloud computing, high
performance networking, domain science, e-Science, education and outreach
expertise of its many collaborators in Europe, Asia and South America. Foreign
partners also provide a natural mechanism to engage international scientific
datasets and distributed networks, and accommodate different international
standards to guarantee interoperability. The international collaborators can
provide an entry into international collaborations for U.S. graduate students
and early career scientists and can also serve as global ambassadors for this
new cyberinfrastructure, helping to garner widespread support that will be
critical to its future adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a
strong cadre of students with a global perspective on scientific data management
in many research areas vital to U.S. and international scientific
collaborations. The project will provide U.S. graduate students and early career
scientists with international research and education experiences with leading
scientists via research and training at foreign institutions and participation
in annual workshops. As a group, the PIRE students will share an interest in
data intensive computing but will be drawn from fields as diverse as computer
science, physics, astronomy, geosciences, chemistry, engineering, and biology,
lending an interdisciplinary vigor to their training. The PIRE team members will
also develop 1-2 day and 1-2 week courses on data intensive computing, with
hands-on exercises developed by U.S. and international faculty in computer
science and the domain sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE project is
likely to have numerous impacts above the level of the individual collaborators.
For the U.S. PIRE institutions, it will strengthen current linkages and
collaborations in the global Cloud Computing community and engage more U.S.
students in international interdisciplinary research teams for the service,
support and analysis of large scientific datasets. The project will enhance
internationalizing efforts both at the University of Illinois at Chicago and at
Florida International University by providing opportunities for short term
research abroad and other academic experiences to a diverse group of students.
This project will increase the virtual international engagement of the U.S.
institutions via distributed research collaborations, courses with
transcontinental participation, global web discussions, and focused social
networking forums. Increasing the number of scientists with expertise in
managing and analyzing very large datasets is also vital to the future of our
nation. Finally, since this transformative technology is broadly applicable to
any scientific project struggling to manage and analyze the volume of data
produced, the OSDC and its facilitative impacts are likely to persist long after
the PIRE project has ended. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participating U.S.
institutions include the National Center for Data Mining (NCDM) at the
University of Illinois at Chicago and Florida International University. OSDC
U.S. partner institutions include the University of Chicago and Johns Hopkins
University. Partnering foreign institutions include the University of Edinburgh
(UK); Universidade Federal Fluminense (Brazil); University of Amsterdam (The
Netherlands); National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST) (Japan); Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information (KISTI)
Supercomputing Center; Beijing Institute of Genomics (BIG) - Chinese Academy of
Sciences, and the State University of Sao Paulo (Brazil).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is cofunded by the NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering, the Office of Cyberinfrastructure, the
Division of Computer and Communication Foundations, the Division of Astronomical
Sciences, and the Division of Physics.