* 1129584
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Collaboration Affects Group Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Michael Lovaglia, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 7,200.00

SES - 1129584&lt;br/&gt;Michael Lovaglia (PI)&lt;br/&gt;Shane Soboroff (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;University of Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation
Research Proposal: How Collaboration Affects Group
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;How does group size affect
group member trust and cohesion? In unstructured task groups, cohesion and
performance begin to decline when the group has taken on too many members. Yet
group size can also be an advantage, because it adds diverse skill sets to
groups working on shared tasks. As group size increases, the problem of
coordination often results in bureaucracy, which in turn can create new problems
for effective collaboration. Investigating the maximum number of members for
effective, unstructured task groups is important for understanding both how
teams work together to achieve goals and how bureaucracy becomes attractive as a
strategy for solving problems of collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines how the maximum effective size of unstructured task groups is
affected by the degree to which individual contributions are central to task
completion, a phenomenon known as "task jointness." The study involves a set of
laboratory experiments involving face-to-face groups, in which group size and
task jointness are systematically varied. The following hypotheses derived from
social psychological theory are tested: 1) Members of groups working on joint
tasks will report higher trust than members of groups working on additive tasks
and members of groups having a purely social interaction. 2) Groups with seven
and eight persons working on joint tasks will report higher trust and cohesion
than similar groups working on additive tasks, or than groups engaging in purely
social interaction. 3) Members of groups working on joint tasks will be less
likely to choose to leave their group as group size increases than members of
additive task groups or purely social groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The results of this study on the determinants of effective
team work are of interest to people in business and complex organizations, both
in the profit and non-profit and governmental sectors. Results seek to inform
organizational design, as well as workflow and related workplace activities.
Research will be conducted at a nationally known center for small-group
research. The study will generate experimental and qualitative data that can
serve as the basis for future research, theory development, and graduate student
training in data analysis. The P.I.s will train undergraduate researchers in
experimental methods, data collection, and analysis. Results will be
disseminated at a multi-disciplinary conference on small-group research and
prepared for publication in an appropriate academic journal.