* 1129437
* Modular Curriculum for Embedded Systems Security
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2013
* Janusz Zalewski, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2013
* USD 114,475.00

The objective of this project at Florida Gulf Coast University is to improve the
quality of teaching security for embedded systems in computer science and
software engineering. Embedded systems are ubiquitous in our everyday lives in
microwave ovens, garage door openers, cars, cell phones, and point-of-sale
credit card transactions to name a few. However, the explosive growth in
embedded technology has not been accompanied by substantial educational
activities particularly in the area of the security of embedded systems. The
issues in the security of embedded systems are substantially different from
those in traditional enterprise systems and desktop computing. First, embedded
systems are highly distributed and essentially unattended, which makes them
vulnerable; and second, embedded applications involve the use of sensors and
actuators, which are themselves computerized and thus subject to security
breaches if not protected properly. The diversity of potential threats makes it
difficult to provide general countermeasures to protect embedded devices and,
consequently, teach protection techniques. The embedded systems curriculum at
Florida Gulf Coast University involves junior and senior level courses on
Embedded Systems Programming, Data Acquisition and Control, Computer Network
Programming and Senior Software Engineering Projects. In this curriculum,
students work on real life projects, designing and implementing embedded systems
using microprocessors, microcontrollers and FPGA circuits. The project is
developing course materials with the following goals: 1) studying and learning
professional issues in embedded systems security; 2) developing eight learning
modules on the subject; 3) presenting them as web-based lectures; 4) creating
lab exercises for practical applications; 5) evaluating the project results by
two professional evaluators; and 6) assessing the project's effectiveness and
impact in the classroom by the students. The broader impact of this project lies
in exposing undergraduate students to the security aspects of embedded systems,
which is rarely covered at the undergraduate level. Development and
dissemination of comprehensive learning modules is helping to create a
knowledgeable workforce in an area that is critical to U.S. national security.