* 1129369
* CAREER:  Linking Pore Structure, Performance, and Material Design of a Sustainable Macroporous Concrete for Multifunctional Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Narayanan Neithalath, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 07/31/2014
* USD 320,482.00

Enhanced Porosity Concrete (EPC) is a relatively new class of concrete having
higher than normal porosity and pore connectivity, thus facilitating
applications such as storm water runoff control, and highway noise mitigation.
The fundamental objective of this CAREER proposal is to link the pore structure
features and performance of EPC to its material design parameters through a
multi-disciplinary approach that involves stereological methods, fracture
properties, porous media flow, and mathematical optimization. Geometrical data
from two dimensional EPC images will be stereologically interpreted using
stochastic geometry, and a novel porosity prediction method based on particle
packing theory developed to establish correlations between material design
parameters and pore structure features. Pore structure features will be related
to: (i) mechanical behavior using a fracture criterion that involves both
toughness and strength, thus providing an understanding of the competition
between crack-blunting and higher void fraction, (ii) permeability using X-ray
tomography, three-dimensional reconstruction of planar images, and fractal
models, and (iii) pollutant retention efficiency using multi-phase flow theories
and reconstructed models. Since EPC systems need to be designed for more than
one performance requirement, a multi-objective optimization procedure will be
used to arrive at a feasible set of material design parameters. This will
facilitate the development of relationships between material design and
performance through the pore structure features. &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal
will result in a much needed performance-based design methodology for EPC
systems, and enable predictions of performance. This will aid in the development
of test methods to determine EPC properties, and will facilitate the transition
of EPC design to a scientific process from the currently employed trial and
error methods. The educational plan in this proposal is strongly tied with the
research component through problem-based design and learning, development of a
teaching lab course, and K-12 outreach program. A conceive-implement-design-
operate (CDIO) approach will be used to put the problem-based learning and
design into practice where the students will be responsible for designing,
constructing, and evaluating a few small EPC test bed systems. A teaching lab
course, where the undergraduate students can do research on structured topics
related to cement-based materials will be developed. The existing GK-12 program
at Clarkson will be used as a vehicle to emphasize hands-on activities and
engineering problem solving to middle and high school students using EPC as a
model porous engineering material, thus integrating research and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;