* 1129449
* Excessive Bridge Deflections: Inverse Analysis to Identify Multi-Decade Creep Properties of Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Zdenek Bazant, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 347,061.00

The resaerch objective of this project is to use actual data on excessive creep
deflections to find a realistic multi-decade concrete creep law. The fatal
collapse of KB Bridge in Palau, a segmental box-girder bridge of world record
span, called attention to the preceding creep deflections, which attained 1.61m,
nearly 5-times the design deflection. Forced unsealing of the technical data on
this bridge allowed Northwestern University researchers to conclude that the
standard design recommendations were obsolete. This motivated a broad search
which has so far led to a collection of 64 large-span bridges deflecting
excessively within 20 to 40 years, while supposed to serve &gt;100 years. The
main cause of this obsoleteness is that most laboratory creep data have
durations &lt;6 years. The bridge deflection data are combined in one aggregate
database, and an inverse three-dimensional finite-element creep analysis of box-
girder deflections is combined with the lab database to calibrate an improved
material law for creep of concrete. Sophisticated statistical concepts and a
genetic algorithm are used to predict the parameters of material creep law from
the concrete composition characteristics and strength. The results will be
proposed for standard design recommendations of engineering
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the societal costs of retrofits or
closings of numerous excessive deflecting bridges are enormous, their data
represent a gold mine for progress. The research will clarify how to avoid
repetitions, which causes serviceability losses and cracking with corrosion. An
improved creep model will also be important for design against differential
shortening of columns in modern super-tall buildings.