* 1129448
* The Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar in Ethiopia Workshop to Identify Science Rationale; Chestnut Hill, MA; September 2011
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Anthea Coster, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 39,972.00

This award supports a two and a half day invitation-only workshop for ~40 people
to be hosted at Boston College in September 2011. The objective of the workshop
is to identify the scientific and societal motivations for deploying the
Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar (AMISR) in Ethiopia. The workshop will
address logistical issues associated with this plan, and outline the major
hurdles to be overcome. The final output from this meeting will be a document
summarizing the results of the discussions. To date, the vast majority of
equatorial incoherent scatter radar (ISR) measurements have been collected at
Jicamarca, Peru, so that much of what is known about equatorial physics is based
on Jicamarca ISR observations. However, Jicamarca is in the American sector
where the geomagnetic equator dips, and there is a fairly large excursion
between the geomagnetic and geodetic equator. On the other hand, in the African
sector the geomagnetic equator is fairly well aligned with the geodetic equator.
Moreover, observational results from different satellites have indicated that
the equatorial ionosphere in the African sector responds differently than other
sectors. The uneven distribution of ground-based instruments has been an
obstacle in achieving global understanding of the dynamics and structures of the
ionosphere. In regions like Africa, observations of the ionosphere are currently
not possible due to lack of ground-based instruments. During the past couple of
years a few small instruments, like GPS receivers and magnetometers have been
deployed in the region. Adding a single ISR to the limited space science
instrumentation in the equatorial African sector would be of significant
scientific benefit. The workshop will promote international research
collaborations and advance space science research in Africa. This will not only
enhance the research/training infrastructure, but will also play a vital role in
the future socioeconomic development of Africa. For the United States, this
project will serve as a vehicle to create opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in different phases of the development and
deployment process.