* 1129056
* UBM-Institutional: Integrated Undergraduate Research Experiences in Biological and Mathematical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Gabriella Pinter, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 754,546.00

The Integrated Undergraduate Research Experience at the Interface of Biology and
Mathematics program aims to promote broader access to cross-disciplinary
education in biology and mathematics with an emphasis on undergraduate research,
and to strengthen the culture and academic foundation of interdisciplinary
biology-mathematics education. To meet these goals it is 1) supporting four
cohorts of eight undergraduate students through a two-year research immersion
program involving active mentoring and collaborative learning on original
research projects in the key biology-mathematics research areas of quantitative
ecology, environmental health and freshwater biogeochemistry; and 2) developing
new curricular components to facilitate flexible undergraduate biology-
mathematics training, including both an interdisciplinary Certificate Program in
Quantitative Biology, and a research-oriented biomathematics specialization
within the Mathematics major. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selected research
themes, which emphasize aquatic ecology, are dynamic and of topical interest,
and closely match the core interests and expertise of participating faculty
within the College of Letters and Science and the newly established School of
Freshwater Sciences. Students begin their research immersion with a mathematical
modeling course sequence, and a parallel research seminar in which they study
increasingly open-ended biological research questions, and learn relevant
laboratory techniques. In their second year, cohorts investigate research
questions within the key research themes, under the joint mentoring of
mathematics and biology faculty. The curricular program is strongly connected to
the research immersion, in order to motivate student participation in
interdisciplinary learning opportunities both inside and outside of the typical
classroom. Further, it is providing participating students with appropriate
qualifications that reflect these interdisciplinary skills, and which will be
recognized in the context of emerging biomathematics programs. The curricular
program also is serving to identify, motivate and train future professionals
with a skill set that is highly relevant to national interests in restoring and
maintaining the health of the Great Lakes region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UBM
research program is building on a pilot biology-mathematics undergraduate
research program at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM), and serving as
a model to extend and encourage undergraduate research within interdisciplinary
education at UWM. The program is also strengthening teaching and research
collaborations among the Departments of Biological Sciences, Mathematical
Sciences and the School of Freshwater Sciences, as well as supporting the long
term plans of the institution as a whole. Research outcomes are being published
in formats accessible by the scientific community as well as by non-scientists
and public-policy decision makers.