* 1129757
* Assessing the importance of deep ocean topographic scattering of low mode internal tides
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Thomas Peacock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 235,588.00

Despite several decades of research, there is still much ambiguity about the
importance of deep ocean topographic scattering of the low mode internal tide.
Theoretical studies based on infinitesimal topography predict a modest 6-10%
scattering efficiency (Muller & Xu 1992; StLaurent & Garrett 2002), and recent
field data reveals long range propagation of the low mode internal tide
northeast from Hawaii (Zhao et al. 2010). A recent theoretical study using
finite-amplitude random topography, however, indicates that scattering can
provide a rapid decay mechanism for internal tides (Buhler & Holmes-Cerfon
2011), and the currently underway NSF EXperimental study of Internal Tide
Scattering (EXITS) field program is focusing on the Line Islands Ridge, where
satellite altimetry data indicates 37% of the mode-1 flux propagating southwest
from Hawaii is dissipated (Johnston, Merrfield & Holloway 2003).

The intellectual merit of this project is in the advancement and utilization of
an analytical Green function method to make reasonable predictions of
topographic internal tide scattering in the deep ocean. The method, which the PI
has already used for internal tide generation studies, is not subject to many of
the idealizations of previous theoretical approaches (e.g. infinitesimal
topography and/or constant stratification). The theoretical model will be
validated through comparison with laboratory experiments that employ a novel
internal tide generator; a proof-of-concept experiment has already been
performed to demonstrate the feasibility of the experimental program (Peacock et
al. 2010). The work will be integrated with the field studies and numerical
simulations of the NSF-funded EXITS program.

The primary broader impact of this research is a robust and quantitative
assessment of the efficiency of deep ocean topographic scattering of low mode
internal tides. The analytical method, validated by laboratory experiments, will
provide a benchmark for testing numerical models and interpreting field data; it
will also be integrated into a MATLAB code called iTide that will be made freely
available to oceanographers. The project will support the training of a
postdoctoral researcher and an undergraduate MIT researcher. The theoretical
method and experimental results will be incorporated in graduate and
undergraduate courses on wave mechanics, fluid mechanics and instrumentation.
The results of this study will be disseminated through journal articles, invited
seminars and the PI?s website. A workshop on internal waves at the Aspen Center
for Physics will be proposed.