* 1129400
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Conservation and Development Implications of a United Nations Environmental Initiative in Aceh, Indonesia.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Richard Schroeder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 08/31/2013
* USD 11,320.00

This doctoral dissertation research will assess efforts to attain the
potentially competing goals of a major United Nations-sponsored climate change
mitigation initiative through a case study of the Ulu Masen project in Aceh,
Indonesia, one of the largest and most well-established such projects in the
world. The United Nations originally conceived of its Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) initiative exclusively as a market
based climate change mitigation strategy. Under pressure from critics, the UN
and other agencies have recently expanded the program?s agenda to include
conservation and sustainable human development goals (REDD+), hence the "plus."
This re-envisioning of REDD promised a "triple win" solution because it
simultaneously promoted green economic growth (via carbon markets), protected
the environment, and enhanced local community well-being. To date, robust
empirical studies that gauge the effectiveness of the broader REDD+ policy
agenda have been absent. Existing studies have tended to focus on technical
issues related to implementation whereas this study will specifically examine
critical questions to assess the abilities of the REDD+ project to contribute to
the conservation and development of the region in which it is being implemented.
Fieldwork in two village sites in the Ulu Masen area, Banda Aceh will be
conducted over a period of ten months, during which time data will be gathered
via a household survey, focus group discussions, participant observation, semi-
structured and in-depth interviews, and archival research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will contribute to a better
understanding of REDD+ in the climate change literature through documenting and
analyzing the set of innovations that have been implemented under the 'plus' in
REDD+ initiatives. It will constitute an empirical study that analyzes the
effectiveness of the expanded agenda envisioned by REDD+ policy makers. The
proposed study will also examine the significance of local agency in shaping the
global REDD+ agenda. Given that the REDD+ project is being implemented in
Indonesia, the world?s second largest contributor of carbon emissions resulting
from deforestation and one of its most critical biodiversity hotspots, suggest
its potential for close monitoring as a model for future climate mitigation
initiatives. The broader impact of the new knowledge created by this research
will be to assist policy makers to develop better tools for the assessment of
climate change mitigation projects, thereby ensuring that such projects are more
likely to improve human development and empower forest dependent communities in
the future. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.