* 1129889
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Influence of Riparian Vegetation on Near-Bank Flow Structure and Erosion Rates on a Large Alluvial River
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Bruce Rhoads, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2014
* USD 11,624.00

The process of bank erosion in meandering alluvial rivers occurs through the
dynamic interactions between channel contours, the three dimensional structure
of water flow, sediment transport, and the geotechnical characteristics of the
channel banks and floodplains. Rates of bank erosion are also influenced by the
type of vegetation growing on the banks - a factor that is still poorly
understood and therefore commonly neglected in models of river shape evolution.
The goal of this doctoral dissertation research project is to examine the
influence of bank vegetation on the migration of meanders in large alluvial
rivers by characterizing the geotechnical properties of channel banks as well as
the near-bank water flow structure for forested and non-forested bends. Channel
banks and floodplains will be characterized by obtaining data on the bulk grain
size distribution, cohesion, root-tensile strength, and hydraulic conductivity
for forested and non-forested river bends. Time-averaged and instantaneous
velocity measurements will be taken at various water flow stages in forested and
non-forested meander bends to characterize the water flow structure near the
river bends and how this interacts with the channel banks under differing
conditions. In addition, repeat detailed bathymetric and morphologic surveys of
the channel bed and banks will be obtained using state-of-the-art technologies.
Analysis will focus on interactions among flow structure, vegetation, and the
geotechnical properties of floodplain sediments to evaluate differences in bank
erosion in forested and non-forested bends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will provide basic insight into the dynamics of how the shapes of
channels in large meandering rivers evolve and the influence of vegetation in
this process. The research will produce data that can be used to calibrate,
test, and evaluate numerical models of river shape dynamics, allowing for more
accurate simulations of channel change in meandering rivers. Prediction of
channel change is important because meandering rivers often form political
boundaries between states and countries, are used as traffic ways for goods, and
provide a vast range of habitats for aquatic organisms. As a meandering river
migrates across its floodplain, it can result in loss of land, damage to human
infrastructure, and introduction of large amounts of sediment into the river
system. Thus, an improved understanding of bank-erosion processes in meandering
rivers is not only important scientifically, but has important implications for
environmental and societal concerns.