* 1129631
* Collaborative Research: Stable isotope tracers of the subsurface biosphere and its geochemical effects in oceanic ridge flank basement
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jeffrey Alt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 211,999.00

A vast subsurface biosphere exists beneath the seafloor, but there is little
understanding of exactly how microbes affect chemical exchange between seawater
and oceanic basement, or how this affects global geochemical budgets. Recent
research shows that microbes have an active role in altering the volcanic rocks
on the seafloor, and new isotope techniques have been developed that can tell
the temperatures at which the alteration has taken place. This research uses the
stable isotopes of sulfur and oxygen in altered seafloor mafic lavas sampled by
NSF-funded Ocean Drilling Program to (1) trace the distribution of the
subsurface biosphere in the oceanic basement, (2) understand how microbial
processes affect chemical and isotope exchange between seawater and the crust,
and (3) determine the influence of microbial processes on geochemical cycling in
the oceans. This is the first study of its kind, and as such is potentially
transformative in terms of its ability to inform us about life in the deep
biosphere. Research will involve the sulfur contents and isotopes in rocks from
cool fluid downwelling sites along the flanks of mid-ocean ridges. The oxygen
isotope compositions of phosphate adsorbed to iron-oxyhydroxides from warm and
cool sites will also be analyzed to examine the effects of in-situ biological
activity and estimate the temperature at which microbial metabolic processes are
occurring, giving an idea of the depth in the ocean crust to which life extends.
The broader impacts of the work include support of an African American female
researcher and the training of undergraduates and a postdoc in state-of-the-art
stable isotope techniques. Minority high school students in the New Haven CT
area will also be engaged in the laboratory research. In addition, public
outreach associated with the project will be carried out by the Peabody Museum
in New Haven and the University of Michigan Nano-Rocks summer high school camp.
The work will incorporate research results into courses and support analytical
facilities at both institutions.