* 1129855
* U.S.-German Collaboration: Building common high-dimensional models of neural representational spaces
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Peter Ramadge, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2014
* USD 348,685.00

Methods known as 'multivariate pattern' (MVP) analysis can be used to decode the
information patterns in brain activity obtained using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). However, a new decoding model has to be built for each
brain, because two brains (and the representational spaces they employ) are
difficult to align at a fine spatial scale. As a consequence, we do not yet know
if different brains use the same codes or idiosyncratic codes to represent the
same things. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Drs. James V.
Haxby of Dartmouth College, and Peter J. Ramadge of Princeton University, in
collaboration with Michael Hanke of the University of Magdeburg (Germany), are
developing new methods to discover a coding scheme that works accurately across
different brains. The methods being developed align brain activity across brains
by projecting individual brain data into a common, high-dimensional space. This
approach allows the researchers to build models of brain representational spaces
for different cortical areas that are valid both across brains and across a wide
range of stimuli and cognitive states. The researchers are developing two
algorithms. One is referred to as 'hyperalignment' and the other as 'functional
connectivity hyperalignment.' Hyperalignment rotates the voxel spaces (i.e., the
smallest units in a brain image) of individual brains into a single high-
dimensional space, in which each dimension is a profile of differential
responses to stimuli, that is common across brains. Functional connectivity
hyperalignment aligns voxel spaces based on the functional connectivity profile
(i.e., relationships among activated brain areas) for each cortical location.
Functional connectivity profiles allow for models of areas that do not respond
to external stimuli in a consistent manner, for example, those areas in the so-
called 'default-intrinsic system' that plays a central role in social cognition.
The investigators are an interdisciplinary partnership - cognitive
neuroscientists and signal-processing engineers - who have been working together
successfully for several years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing the
computational methods to build common models of representational spaces will
augment the power of brain activity decoding techniques, making it possible to
investigate how finer, more detailed information is embedded in brain activity
patterns, and to read out that information from functional brain imaging data.
The proposed methods also will allow extension of brain decoding to the neural
codes that underlie social cognition, that is, the representation of knowledge
about the personal traits and mental states of others. These models also will
allow investigation of how neural coding is altered within brain regions that
are affected by experience, by development, and by
psychopathology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience and the Office of
International Science and Engineering. A companion project is being funded by
the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).