* 1129204
* Collaborative Research:  Hydraulic Sustainability of Soil-Bentonite Cutoff Walls Subjected to Cyclic Wetting and Drying
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Radhey Sharma, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2012
* USD 53,815.00

This research project is a collaborative effort between Louisiana State
University (LSU), a Research I institution, and Bucknell University (BU), a
predominantly undergraduate institution (PUI). The overall goal of the research
is to evaluate the potential for degradation in hydraulic performance of soil-
bentonite cutoff wall backfill within the zone of a fluctuating groundwater
table. In most cutoff wall applications, some portion of the cutoff wall is in
the zone of a fluctuating water table. This portion of the wall, when below the
water table, must be sustainable as a barrier to transport of miscible
groundwater pollutants despite the cyclic wetting and drying that may occur as
the groundwater table rises and falls in this zone. However, limited results
from field and laboratory studies suggest that an irreversible increase in the
hydraulic conductivity of soil-bentonite backfill is possible during the drying
phase of cyclic wetting and drying. This project will be accomplished by
fabricating a model soil-bentonite backfill with composition and properties
representative of those exhibited at field scale. Specimens of the model
backfill will be subjected to drying cycles under controlled matric suction.
Hydraulic conductivity of the model backfill will be evaluated as a function of
consolidation stress, the number of wet-dry cycles, and the suction applied
during the drying phase. In addition, moisture retention and volumetric behavior
of the model backfill will be measured in a triaxial environment and correlated
with matric suction. Finally, the data will be analyzed and synthesized using
currently applied models of unsaturated soil behavior and, as appropriate,
models revised to account for the data developed in this study. The results of
the research will provide a new understanding of (1) the behavior of soil-
bentonite cutoff walls in the zone of a fluctuating water table, (2) the
potential for degradation in hydraulic conductivity within this zone, and (3)
the need to consider cyclic wetting and drying behavior as a factor when
designing and constructing soil-bentonite cutoff walls for sustainable long-term
protection of human health and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;The results of the
research will advance the state-of-the-art with respect to the design and
construction of soil-bentonite cutoff walls for in situ waste containment to
achieve more sustainable long-term protection of human health and the
environment . In addition to the scientific aspects of the project, the
collaboration between LSU and BU promotes substantial teaching, training, and
learning of both graduate and undergraduate students resulting in long-term
impacts on the profession. The involvement of undergraduate students in the
research at BU enhances the probability that these students will decide to
pursue advanced degrees. The research also provides opportunities for the
investigators at BU to interact with professional colleagues at LSU, while
enhancing the exposure of the investigator at LSU to a pool of potentially high
quality graduate students at BU. Moreover, the research exposes numerous
students to the latest research during the scheduled site visits by the
investigators during the academic year. Finally, the results of the research
will be disseminated to the scientific and professional communities through oral
presentations, refereed published papers, and a web site devoted to providing
information on sustainability of vertical barriers that is accessible by the
practicing profession. &lt;br/&gt;