* 1129534
* An Innovative Cybersecurity Curriculum for Civilian and Military Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Xinming Ou, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 299,652.00

In this SFS Capacity Building project, the Center for Information and Systems
Assurance (CISA) at Kansas State University, which is a Center of Academic
Excellence in Information Assurance Research (CAE-R), is collaborating with the
U.S. Army Command and General Staff College (CGSC) and Manhattan Area Technical
College (MATC) to develop a comprehensive cybersecurity/information assurance
curriculum appropriate for the different student bodies at the three
institutions. Kansas State University is a public land-grant university with a
high level of research activity. CGSC's mission is to educate military officers
to support the Army's operational requirements. MATC is a two-year public
institution of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four courses constitute
the overall curriculum being developed: Introduction to Information Assurance
and Cybersecurity, Emerging Threats in Cyberspace, Advanced Cyber-Offense and
-Defense Technologies, and Cyber-Warfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes
of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* a comprehensive cybersecurity
curriculum that addresses the challenge of educating and providing hands-on
training to students of broad academic backgrounds;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
courses with innovative modules and lesson plans based on lab exercises,
warfare, and cyber-threat scenarios that can seamlessly integrate security
education content throughout different parts of existing information technology
curricula;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* detailed instructional manuals to accompany
each course module; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* enhancement of faculty expertise
in cybersecurity at the partnering institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Course
materials are being created, piloted, and evaluated at the three institutions,
and are being made available to a wider audience via the Web. The investigators
are also using connections with other regional colleges and leveraging other
initiatives at Kansas State -- e.g., Research Experiences for Teachers (RET),
GK-12 STEM Fellows, Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU), and Girls
Researching Our World (GROW) -- to extend the reach of the curriculum.