* 1129313
* Collaborative Research:  Towards Rare-Earth-Free Advanced Permanent Magnets - High-Anisotropy L10 Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Katayun Barmak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 10/31/2012
* USD 159,014.00

This project seeks to elucidate materials factors that control the thermodynamic
and kinetic stability of the equiatomic compound FeNi with the chemically-
ordered tetragonal L10 structure that holds very high potential for rare-earth-
free advanced permanent magnet applications. Fundamental exploratory research on
magnetic alloys in the near-equiatomic compositional region of the Fe-Ni phase
diagram will take place in materials with and without the ternary alloying
additions of Ti, V, and Al. These materials will be synthesized in both bulk and
thick-film form, with insight gained from film analogs of the focus alloys used
to guide rational design of bulk alloys. Correlations between chemical ordering
and magnetic properties such as magnetization, anisotropy and Curie temperature
will be determined and quantified to facilitate trend
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomers have identified the L10 FeNi phase
in selected meteorites and attributed its presence to an extraordinarily slow
cooling rate that fosters long-range chemical ordering over a period of 4.6
billion years. Confirmation of the L10 structure in the Fe-Ni system is
extremely significant because the tetragonal distortion that accompanies the
chemical ordering in this structure gives rise to appreciable anisotropy. The
development of rare-earth-free permanent magnet materials is essential to offset
supply limitations and ensure U.S. competitiveness. Attainment of a rare-earth-
free magnetic material with very high magnetocrystalline anisotropy would carry
tremendous impact that ranges from the basic science realm all the way to
advanced applications of great societal importance. Students supported by this
grant will obtain an interdisciplinary research experience via educational
exchange at three geographically diverse, strong science and engineering
schools.