* 1129693
* The Stochastic Healthcare-Facility Configuration Problem
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Wilbert Wilhelm, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 182,000.00

The research objectives of this award include a model of the stochastic
healthcare facility configuration problem (SHFCP); new knowledge bases to
optimize SHFCP and to model workload, capacity, and recourse; and computational
tests to evaluate methodology and gain insights from focused case study. SHFCP
is to prescribe facility configuration, including the location and size
(allowing openings, expansions, contractions, and closures) of each facility
along with the services it offers - given uncertain patient needs. The goal is a
scalable methodology to plan healthcare facility configuration, for example,
adjusting to demand and demographic changes. This work is timely as the U.S.
seeks to expand access to healthcare services. Rural healthcare is especially
problematic due to the number, demographics, and health of residents; shortage
of family doctors; and travel distances. The methodology can be used by
healthcare administrators to plan levels of service and by government officials
to evaluate policies. The method of approach entails evolving a prototype model
along with solution methodology and deriving models of workload, capacity, and
expected recourse. Computational tests will evaluate efficacy and undertake case
study, based on information provided by healthcare collaborators and focused on
rural healthcare as a testbed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have five
significant broad impacts. The first two comprise benefits to society at large,
which accrue from the capability to solve actual SHFCPs and the generality of
results in configuring other systems and solving stochastic problems in other
areas important to society. The third will result from dissemination, providing
public access to data according to the Data Management Plan; making research
results widely available through publication, presentations, and teaching in
universities; and placing students. The fourth is that research assistants will
be actively recruited from under-represented groups. The fifth impact deals with
education: supplementary grants will engage undergraduate students and high
school teachers