* 1129727
* IDR: A Novel Multiplexed Multichannel Biosensor Chip for High-Throughput Detection of Macromolecular Biomarkers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jiang Zhe, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 561,448.00

The research objective of this award is to create a multiplexed microfluidic
biosensor that allows simultaneous detection of multiple macromolecular
biomarkers with high throughput and high sensitivity. The approach taken will be
an integration of an immunoaggregation assay using ultra-stable nanogels and a
multiplexed multichannel resistive pulse sensing array. In the immunoaggregation
assay, biomarkers corresponding to specific polyclonal antibodies will cause
aggregation of the nanogels functionalized by the antibodies; the nanogel-
biomarker aggregates will be detected by a resistive pulse sensing array,
dramatically amplifying the sensing signals because of their large size. The
resistive pulse sensing array will allow parallel detection of nanogel-biomarker
aggregates as they pass through the sensing channels. Frequency division
multiplexing will be applied to the signals from the parallel sensing channels
to enable high throughput detection using only a single set of detection
electronics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this research
will contribute to improved biosensing technology for rapid and onsite analysis
of a wide variety of biological targets such as biomarkers, toxins, virus and
pathogens in liquid environment, and thus will enable improved disease
diagnosis/prognosis, enhanced homeland security and improved water safety. This
project will provide multidisciplinary training opportunity for the graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the research. The project also aims to
develop and deploy biosensor and micro/nano technology-related educational
materials and contribute to motivating K-12 students and undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups to pursue science and engineering careers. Through
University of Akron's "Increasing Diversity in Engineering Academics," "Women in
Engineering" and "High School Bridge" programs, undergraduate students and high
school students will be recruited to conduct research in this project, with an
emphasis on underrepresented minorities and women.