* 1129551
* Electrogenic Reactions during Lactose/proton Symport Catalyzed by LacY
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2014
* Ronald Kaback, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2014
* USD 643,002.00

Intellectual merit. One of the major challenges in the broad field of
bioenergetics is to understand how nutrients such as sugars and amino acids
cross biological membranes and accumulate inside of cells. It is now understood
that most living cells function like batteries. Thus, chemical reactions like
respiration or ATP hydrolysis are coupled to the pumping of hydrogen ions or
sodium out of cells. In this manner, cells or intracellular organelles like
mitochondria create an electrochemical gradient of either hydrogen ions or
sodium in which the inside of the cell is electrically negative and low in
hydrogen ions or sodium relative to the outside. Given this scenario, there is
then a driving force on hydrogen ions or sodium to diffuse back into the cell
down their electrochemical gradients. Transport proteins embedded in the
membrane like the one described in this proposal utilize the free energy
released by this energetically downhill movement to drive translocation and
accumulation of a specific nutrient in this case, the sugar lactose and it is
known that transport of each lactose molecule across the membrane is accompanied
by one hydrogen ion. It is the aim of this research to understand the molecular
mechanism of this basic and universal biological process by studying the
electrical properties of the lactose permease (LacY), a model for the members of
the Major Facilitator Superfamily, a huge group of related membrane transport
proteins. The project includes the application of an important new technique to
observe the electrical properties of this transporter using newly developed
solid-supported membrane electrodes.

Broader impacts. Studies on active transport and bioenergetics with LacY as the
paradigm have revolutionized the field of membrane transport. From (i) the
initial discovery that membrane vesicles are useful as a model system to study
transport to (ii) the development of probes for quantifying electrical
potentials and hydrogen ion gradients in microscopic systems to (iii) site-
directed and Cys-scanning mutagenesis to (iv) purifying LacY to homogeneity in a
functional state to (v) obtaining X-ray crystal structures to (vi) engineering
the symporter for all manner of biochemical and spectroscopic studies, this
laboratory has pioneered developments in the field for over 45 years. Most of
the breakthroughs in the history of the research have been widely selected for
inclusion in various textbooks, reference books and teaching materials in many
languages for both undergraduate and graduate teaching worldwide. The PI will
continue to speak to high school and university audiences in order to convey
scientific knowledge to young people and stimulate their interest in basic
science. Invited lectures in symposia, at universities and multi-disciplinary
conferences nationally and internationally will serve as multiple channels to
convey this novel information to society in a timely manner.