* 1129012
* A Genetically Programmable Module for Screening of Protease Inhibitors based on Quantum Dot-Donor Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2011,03/31/2014
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 03/31/2014
* USD 360,144.00

A Genetically Programmable Module for Screening of Protease Inhibitors Based on
Quantum Dot-Donor Fluorescence Resonance Energy
Transfer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wilfred Chen&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;University of
California-
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0755775&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this collaborative project
is to develop a genetically programmable module that is easily adaptable for
screening inhibitors for a wide range of proteases. The approach is to generate
a quantum dot (QD)-modified, protease-specific protein module that can be used
as a Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) substrate for probing
protease activity. This will result in a new generation of genetically
programmable protein modules as QD-based FRET substrates for protease inhibitor
discovery. High-throughput screening analysis (HTS) of protease activity will be
achieved using these new QD-based FRET substrates that can be delivered
intracellularly by a cell-penetrating TAT peptide. The combination will enable
the Principal Investigators to provide a rapid and sensitive assessment of
protease activity and the corresponding inhibitor efficacies in a HTS
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of the development of tunable biomolecules
with FRET-based HTS screening represents a unique effort that expands the
fundamental development of protein engineering with the implementation of drug
discovery. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers participating in this
research will gain an integrated perspective of the important interfaces and
synergies connecting biochemistry, modern genetics, and HTS.