* 1129646
* Collaborative Research:  Microstructure and Mixing Measurements During SPURS
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Raymond Schmitt, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,925,975.00

Surface salinity variations in the global ocean are caused by freshwater
exchange with the atmosphere and land, via evaporation, precipitation and
runoff. The expectation that the water cycle will accelerate with global warming
has motivated an increased interest in upper-ocean salinity; since the water
cycle is predominantly over the ocean, the sea-surface salinity may well be the
very best indicator of changes in the water cycle. In considering such ocean-
atmosphere interactions, areas of surface salinity extrema are of special
interest. A multi-agency field program, the Salinity Processes Upper-ocean
Regional Studies (SPURS), to begin to understand the oceanic processes that
control upper ocean salinity will be executed in 2012-13. SPURS is focused on
the surface salinity maximum in the eastern North Atlantic. The salinity of the
upper ocean is controlled by surface freshwater exchange with the atmosphere,
mixing and entrainment from below, and mean and eddy advection by horizontal
currents, including those due to geostrophic, Ekman and smaller scales of
motion. Other elements of SPURS will evaluate many of these processes; here we
propose to focus on upper-ocean mixing. Microstructure sensors on profiling and
gliding platforms will be used to quantify the mixing processes operating within
the salinity maximum region. In addition, model simulations will elucidate both
model quality and the physical processes important to the mixing and upper ocean
stability structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Understanding and
prediction of the evolution of the upper-ocean salinity field depends on
accurate description and parameterization of the sub grid-scale mixing processes
that dissipate the salinity variance created by surface water fluxes.
Microstructure measurements will quantify the diabatic flux terms relevant to
the temperature and salinity budgets being constrained by the overall SPURS
study. The role of surface convection, internal wave processes, and double-
diffusive mixing on these fluxes will be assessed. Model simulations, fed by the
air-sea interaction buoy data, will help identify the source of the turbulence.
Mixing parameterizations for double diffusion will be assessed through
alteration of the model implementation to utilize diffusivities as taken from
the microstructure based estimates. The combined approach of microstructure
measurements and modeling is the most efficient route to provide information
that could lead to improved parameterizations. The impact will be multiplied by
the synergistic effects of being incorporated into the overall SPURS program,
where observations and models of basin, regional and the mesoscale will be
undertaken. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Improved understanding of
ocean mixing processes are essential for advancing climate science, as the
representation of sub grid-scale processes in large-scale models continues to be
a major unresolved issue. The focus of this project on the salinity is
especially relevant to documenting change in the global water cycle, which has
tremendous implications for society. As part of this project the investigators
will maintain web sites on SPURS and the mixing processes operant in the
salinity maximum region. To enhance educational outreach, the investigators will
collaborate with The Zephyr Education Foundation's innovative marine science
literacy and education program, located in Woods Hole. The Zephyr Foundation is
ideally suited for this purpose and attracts school groups from Massachusetts
and Rhode Island, including underrepresented and disadvantaged students from
inner-city programs in Boston and New Bedford. This project will also involve
active roles for full-time graduate students at WHOI/MIT. In addition, a
modeling and data analysis module suitable for distribution will be produced.