* 1129932
* Manufacturing Nanostructured Contact Lenses for Drug Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Anuj Chauhan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 280,000.00

The objective of this research project is to develop particle-laden soft contact
lenses as a new vehicle for ophthalmic drug delivery in order to reduce drug
loss, eliminate systemic side effects, and improve drug efficacy and compliance.
Nanoparticles are dispersed in hydrogels in several nanomanufacturing processes
for improving mechanical, electrical, optical, and transport properties of
hydrogels. In this project, the PIs plan to develop a new approach for preparing
nanoparticles, explore the mechanisms of particle entrapment in hydrogels and
evolution of microstructure, and the effect of the particle entrapment on
physical and transport properties of the gels, when the particles are added to
the polymerizing medium. Here, the project will focus on the specific
application of controlling the drug release properties of the hydrogels to
develop extended wear contact lenses for delivering ophthalmic drugs. The three
specific aims of the research are: (i) Develop drug loaded highly crosslinked
nanoparticles and understand the mechanism of particle formation and drug
transport in the nanoparticles; (ii) Polymerize silicone-hydrogels in presence
of the highly crosslinked nanoparticles to fabricate contact lenses loaded with
drug encapsulated highly crosslinked nanoparticles; (iii) Characterize the
particle loaded contact lenses to understand microstructure, drug transport, and
all other properties of the gels relevant to the use of these materials for
contact lenses. The research will combine both modeling and experiments to
explore fundamentals of nanoparticle and lens preparation while focusing on the
eventual goal of developing contact lenses for drug delivery. Currently,
approximately 90 percent of all ophthalmic drug formulations are applied as eye-
drops. While eye-drops are convenient and well accepted by patients, these
suffer from low bioavailability (<5 percent), side-effects due to systemic
uptake, and low compliance. The compliance could be lower than 50 percent and
further smaller when multiple eye drops are required each day, which contributes
to worsening of the ophthalmic disease even when treatments are available. The
bioavailability increases to about 50 percent when ophthalmic drugs are
delivered through contact lenses because of the increase in the residence time
of the drugs in the tear film. The increased bioavailability (>50 percent)
results in lower side effects, and will likely lead to higher compliance because
of the continuous drug delivery for about 2-weeks with a contact lens. In
preliminary results a novel approach has been developed of making ultrasmall (~4
nm) particles without utilizing any surfactant that release drugs for over 15
days. This novel approach of making nanoparticles without using surfactants is
scalable to industrial standards, and it could be useful in several areas of
nanomanufacturing, particularly when addition of surfactant is undesirable or
too expensive. This concept has also been proven by fabricating transparent
particle-laden gels loaded with novel nanoparticles containing a glaucoma drug
timolol. It has also been established that contact lenses containing the highly
crosslinked particles can deliver timolol at therapeutic rates for 2-3 weeks.

If successful, the particle-loaded lenses will lead to a paradigm shift in
ophthalmic drug delivery as it will eliminate several deficiencies in current
delivery systems including very low bioavailability (<5 percent), potential
side-effects, and low compliance. The nanoparticle-loaded lenses will have
higher bioavailability (>50 percent), resulting in lower side effects, and will
likely lead to higher compliance. This research is inherently multidisciplinary
as the project combines expertise in new materials, transport, biomedical
engineering, and modeling. Also, this research will likely leads to paradigm
shifts in the area of ophthalmic drug delivery, and thus lead to a significant
societal impact particularly in the area of glaucoma therapy which affects about
66.8 million people in the world, leaving 6.7 million with bilateral blindness.