* 1129059
* Predicting the outcome of inertial instability in ocean currents and eddies
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* George Carnevale, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 427,910.00

Inertial instability of a vortex can rapidly intensify radial velocity
gradients, triggering an instability that then tears the vortex apart.
Eventually the flow equilibrates as a set of new stable vortices. This process
often proceeds through a strong turbulent phase that on the surface, might seem
to preclude any possibility of predicting the final state. However, based on
absolute angular momentum conservation, it is possible to deduce rules that show
exactly how inertial instability acting alone would transform any unstable
barotropic flow. Stabilization of inertial instability ultimately requires
reducing potential vorticity to zero in the initially unstable region. Previous
work has resulted in simple rules for angular momentum mixing which can be used
to predict how an unstable barotropic vortex will evolve. This project will
extend these results to: include the combined effects of inertial and barotropic
instabilities, and to account for stratified flows. A method will be devised to
predict the effect of the turbulent breakdown due to inertial instability and
the subsequent production of meanders and vortices due to barotropic
instability. The approaches will involve a new method in which small incremental
changes in the velocity field are linked with changes in the shape of the
isopycnals in a way that mimics the natural progression of the instability. The
goal is to be able to predict the ultimate fate of any inertially unstable
velocity profile, barotropic or baroclinic. This will include how many vortices
will emerge from the instability, what their vorticity profiles will look like,
how much energy they will carry away, and how much energy will be dissipated in
the process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This work will improve
understanding of the role that inertial instability plays in production,
transformation and maintenance of oceanic currents and eddies. The methods being
developed here are new and fundamental. They should be applicable to any branch
of rotating fluid dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results
obtained through this research can have an important impact on the development
of ocean models. Small-scale instabilities are not resolved in ocean models, but
their role in developing and maintaining large-scale currents is very important.
By studying these instabilities, their effects can be predicted, and could lead
to parameterizations for ocean models. Improvement in ocean modeling can have an
important impact on climate research because of the essential role that the
ocean plays in controlling the climate.