* 1129364
* Long Term Salinity Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Raymond Schmitt, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 716,441.00

Sea surface salinity (SSS) is a key indicator of the intensity of the water
cycle over the oceans. It also has a strong influence on the stability of the
upper ocean, which affects its propensity to mix vertically and thereby store or
release heat and carbon dioxide. Thus, it has emerged as an important variable
for understanding the Earth?s climate system. However, our data base on SSS is
limited, salinity has always been a difficult measurement to make autonomously
due to the challenges of biological fouling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
request funding to continue development of a self-cleaning conductivity sensor
(and associated temperature and pressure measurements) with the goal of
obtaining stable, long-term salinity measurements from a variety of ocean
platforms. Deployment of such sensors on the drifters of the Global Drifter
Program would provide a quantum leap in the numbers of SSS observations obtained
and thereby make a substantial contribution to an improved understanding of the
global water cycle requires a redesign to minimize the size and the
manufacturing cost. In addition they propose to make a profiling model suitable
for use on gliders and profilers. Their goal is to produce a sensor that will
enable continuous monitoring of surface salinity from drifters in order to
advance our understanding of the water cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new capability to deploy
low power salinity sensors with long-term stability in most of the platforms
like drifters, moorings and AUV's. It's useful for the global drifter program.
It is very useful for providing ground truth for the satellite derived salinity
from SMOS (operational) and Aquarius (to be launched in June, 2011). Reliable
long-term salinity measurements of the surface ocean are critical to accurately
constrain the accelerating changes in the global water cycle, which are both
predicted and appear to be occurring in response to global warming. The new
sensor design should be commercially viable, thereby extending the scope of this
proposal to include many more users such as with global ocean observing
programs.