* 1129123
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Hierarchy of Gender Discrimination in the Workplace
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Alison Fogarty, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,000.00

SES-1129123&lt;br/&gt;Paula England&lt;br/&gt;Alison Fogarty&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Hierarchy of
Gender Discrimination in the
Workplace&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on gender based discrimination in the workplace particularly as it is
influenced by issues related to gender expression and fixity. The research
examines how underrepresented gender groups experience the workplace and how
others respond to their presence, and thus, it provides a lens on individuals'
cultural understandings of gender and its binary and fixed nature. This research
expands the conceptualization of the dimensions of gender based discrimination
in its differentiation of gender expression and gender fixity, two concepts
frequently considered as a unit, to see if one or the other plays more into
prejudice or discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;The research involves both quantitative
and qualitative research and employs Respondent Drive Sampling (RDS) to compute
unbiased calculations of population estimates for the survey work so that solid
generalizations can be made. It examines data about workplace experiences at
various time periods in order to assess changes in discrimination. Interviews of
individuals who have or are contemplating transitioning genders and of
individuals who work with them makes it possible to assess the attitudes that
motivate behaviors and handle challenges to their binary and fixed view of
gender. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This research has the opportunity to
result in positive social change by helping to increase awareness of the
socially constructed nature of gender. It has the potential to facilitate
reducing gender inequality and gender based discrimination and abuse in the
workplace.