* 1129717
* Expedition Objective Research: U-series Geochronology for IODP Expedition 325
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* William Thompson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,999.00

The Great Barrier Reef (GBR) drilling project (IODP Exp. 325) was designed to
complement existing deglacial records from Barbados and Tahiti, and to establish
the history of sea level and climate change during deglaciation and earlier
stages, and the reef?s responses to these changes. Expedition 325 recovered 225
m of fossil coral reef sequences, many representing shallow reef environments,
encompassing the sea level history of the last 30,000 years, and beyond. The
scientific objectives of IODP Expedition 325 are to: 1) Establish the course of
postglacial sea level rise at the GBR; 2) Define SST variations for the region
during the glacial/interglacial transition; 3) Analyze the impact of sea level
changes on reef growth and geometry. The successful accomplishment of these
goals, and the fulfillment of the Science Party?s IODP obligations, requires
that an accurate and detailed chronology be established for each of the
recovered cores. These samples will be dated by U-series geochronology, one of
the most accurate and precise methods available. Here we request funds to
support U-series dating of corals to accomplish the research objectives of IODP
Expedition 325. &lt;br/&gt;The sea level history of the last ~30,000 years,
including the lowest sea levels of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and the record
of the deglaciation, is a crucial piece of earth and ocean history. This record
provides constraints on how fast sea level can rise, which is key for making
projections of future sea level rise. Furthermore, estimates of the current rate
of sea level rise from satellite and tide gauge data require corrections for the
continuing isostatic adjustment of the globe from the presence of former ice
sheets. These corrections depend on an accurate record of sea level and ice
sheets over the last 30.000 years, from several widely spaced sites. The
extensive scientific impact of the existing deglacial records from Barbados and
Tahiti speak directly to the intellectual merit of the proposed work and the
extremely high confidence for its successful outcome. The relative sea level
record from the GBR will complement existing records of the deglaciation from
Barbados and Tahiti, filling in gaps in those records during the LGM and early
deglaciation. The GBR is an ideal location to refine models of glacial isostatic
adjustment and identify sources of melt water. &lt;br/&gt;Estimating magnitudes
and rates of future sea level change is an urgent scientific and societal
problem and an accurate history of sea level will provide crucial information on
past links between sea level and climate. The results of this project will be
broadly disseminated through presentations, publications, and ongoing
interactions with an established PAGES/IMAGES sea level working group (PALSEA),
as well as cooperation and communication with the media, and public
presentations adapted for a general audience. This project includes
participation by a postdoctoral researcher and summer students to advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning.
The participation of underrepresented groups will be actively encouraged.