* 1129227
* Coupling of Silicon Isotope Distributions to Meridional Overturning Circulation of the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2015
* USD 248,737.00

The silicon (Si) isotope proxy is increasingly being used to assess the role of
diatoms and silicic acid in past shifts in ocean productivity and their
implication for climate; however, before it can be successfully used, we need to
understand the mechanisms that control the spatial and temporal variability of
the Si isotope composition in ventilating water masses. A scientist from the
University of California, Santa Barbara put forth the hypothesis that the Si
isotope distribution is a function of the coupling of fractionation during
silica production and during silica dissolution to the biological pump and the
meridional overturning circulation (MOC). To test the hypothesis, the researcher
plans to measure Si isotopes within the major water masses of the North
Atlantic, a key end member within the MOC (i.e., surface and mode waters, the
southward flowing North Atlantic Deep Water, and its northward flowing
counterparts: Antarctic Intermediate Water and Antarctic Bottom Water). In
addition, because the samples for the Si isotope work are being collected as
part of the 2011 GEOTRACES North Atlantic zonal section, the scientist has the
opportunity to collaborate with researchers working on nitrogen (N) isotopes to
determine the controls on N and Si isotope dynamics and create the first
numerical model that includes both isotopes, as well as incorporates Si isotope
fractionation during silica dissolution.

In terms of the broader impacts, data generated will be submitted to the
GEOTRACES databases and thereby be readily available to the science community.
Two undergraduate students will be supported and trained as part of this
project.