* 1129562
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Spatio-Temporal Patterns of Soil Respiration and Age of Respired Carbon from High-Elevation Alpine Tundra
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* John Knowles, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2013
* USD 11,820.00

Carbon dioxide is increasing in the contemporary atmosphere as a result of an
imbalance between the rates of human-related and natural carbon dioxide emission
and biospheric and oceanic carbon dioxide assimilation. These circumstances are
augmenting the natural greenhouse effect. Resultant climate warming has been
linked to flooding, hurricanes, and the loss of sea-ice, glaciers, and
permafrost. Alpine tundra is an underrepresented ecosystem in global
environmental databases due to its inherently remote nature and the difficulties
associated with working in steep, mountainous terrain. Recent research suggests
that carbon dioxide emissions from alpine tundra may be far greater than
previously estimated. Toward a process-based reconciliation of net annual carbon
loss from high-elevation alpine tundra, this doctoral dissertation research
project will evaluate soil respiration and net ecosystem exchange through space
and time at Niwot Ridge, Colorado, using a distinctive suite of measurement
techniques in combination with radiocarbon isotopic analysis. The doctoral
student will use a multi scale approach to (1) substantiate previous data
through the use of independent sampling designs including chamber, gradient, and
eddy covariance techniques; (2) investigate the relationship between soil
properties, climate, and carbon dioxide flux; (3) model the differential
response of carbon dioxide flux by soil type; and (4) constrain the age,
mechanism for, magnitude, and trend of atmospheric carbon loss through the
application of radiocarbon dating techniques. These methods will be used to test
the hypothesis that an imbalanced carbon cycle suggested by previous research
represents metabolism of paleocarbon by an unexpectedly active microbial
community. Confirmation of this hypothesis would demonstrate that directional
climate change has already begun to affect alpine regions while also providing
an early indication of potentially more-widespread carbon cycling patterns in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses expansion of the current
network of carbon dioxide flux measurements into understudied ecosystems and
will refine the magnitude and spatio-temporal variability of carbon dioxide flux
from alpine tundra. By coupling top-down monitoring techniques to bottom-up
mechanistic analyses, this project will investigate both the causes and effects
of observed alpine carbon dioxide loss. To promote application of specific
results to other alpine systems, conceptual and empirical models will be
developed to describe both plot- and ecosystem-scale fluxes. These models will
directly contribute to knowledge about the global carbon cycle. A comprehensive
understanding of the natural carbon cycle is crucial to accurately assess the
future ramifications of present-day carbon dioxide emissions, policy decisions,
and climate-forcing scenarios. To that end, the results of this work will help
constrain the probable effects of proposed policies and regulations. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.