* 1129985
* Collaborative Research: Langmuir Turbulence Under Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Tetsu Hara, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2016
* USD 376,221.00

Turbulent mixing in the ocean surface layer under tropical cyclones effectively
couples the ocean and atmosphere through air-sea fluxes of heat and momentum.
Air-sea heat fluxes sustain Tropical Cyclones and strongly depend on near
surface temperature, which is determined by mixing with cooler deeper water.
Understanding the turbulent processes involved in near-surface layer mixing
remains one of the great challenges in modeling the coupled ocean-Tropical
Cyclone system. Upper ocean turbulence is driven by the surface wind stress,
resulting in sheared subsurface currents. Furthermore, surface gravity waves
influence upper ocean turbulence through wave-current interactions that lead to
wind-aligned vortices, called Langmuir circulation or Langmuir turbulence. Wave
effects on ocean turbulence are particularly complex under Tropical Cyclones,
since wind, wave, and current fields are inhomogeneous and may be misaligned. In
addition, the surface wave height spectrum can comprise multiple peaks at
different wave frequencies and directions. The proposed work is aimed at
understanding Langmuir circulation under realistic Tropical Cyclone conditions
and at assessing the role of Langmuir circulation on the coupled ocean-wave-
atmosphere Tropical Cyclone dynamics. This project addresses the following
hypotheses: Langmuir circulation characteristics under Tropical Cyclones
critically depend on detailed wind, wave, and current conditions. Specifically,
regions under Tropical Cyclones exist where upper ocean mixing is greatly
influenced by Langmuir circulation. The use of an ocean mixing scheme with
explicit Langmuir circulation effects will lead to significantly modified mixing
and sea surface temperature cooling in Langmuir circulation regions. Including
explicitly the Langmuir circulation effect will have a significant effect on the
three-dimensional Tropical Cyclone dynamics and
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses will be tested by applying
synergistically a coupled atmosphere-wave-ocean model (AWO) and a turbulence
resolving large eddy simulation model (LES) that captures Langmuir circulation.
Initially, the AWO will provide critical output (wind, waves, and currents) to
drive the LES model. LES results, in turn, will aid in characterizing Langmuir
circulation under tropical cyclones and in critically assessing the ocean mixing
parameterization. Finally, a turbulent mixing scheme with explicit Langmuir
circulation and turbulence effects will be implemented in the ocean model
component of the AWO model and a sensitivity study by simulating idealized and
real case tropical cyclones will be performed. The model results will then be
validated against available field observations in collaboration with scientists
at the University of Washington. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project investigates ocean and atmosphere dynamics under Tropical Cyclones,
which are coupled through turbulent upper ocean mixing. The investigators will
examine an insufficiently understood turbulent process, Langmuir circulation,
that is not explicitly represented in most ocean models, despite the fact that
Langmuir circulation and turbulence may be a principal mixing component. The
combination of regional and process-based models is anticipated to significantly
advance our understanding of Langmuir circulation under Tropical Cyclones.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: While pursuing some fundamental scientific
questions related to air-sea interactions, turbulent mixing, and Tropical
Cyclone dynamics, the research will aid in addressing an important societal
challenge. Tropical Cyclones critically disrupt infrastructure, cause severe
flooding, and displace people in coastal regions. The investigator will advance
the scientific basis of Tropical Cyclones models and improve their prediction
skill, which will ultimately lead to increased reliability of hurricane
forecasts and thus confidence in the official hurricane warnings. The resources
from the proposed grant will train two doctoral graduate researchers. The
outreach effort will educate the public about basic science with its societal
impacts through special events (e.g., at the Open House at the University of
Delaware). Science material developed in the course of this project will
contribute to the University of Rhode Island comprehensive educational website
Hurricanes: Science and Society (www.hurricanescience.org). The website provides
information on the science of hurricanes, how hurricanes impact society, and how
people and communities can prepare for and mitigate the impacts of hurricanes.