* 1129730
* Prediction and Mitigation of Beach Overwash and Resultant Urban Flooding in Coastal California
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Brett Sanders, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2015
* USD 302,960.00

This project will involve field studies and modeling to improve the prediction
of wave-driven flooding at the scale of land parcels in urban areas. Recent
research has shown that parcel-scale flood prediction is possible with modern
data (e.g., lidar) and modeling resources, but urban coastlines remain a major
challenge due to complex infrastructure and the difficulties posed by wave-
driven flooding. A promising class of debris flow models will be applied to
simulate swash zone dynamics and quantify sea wall and beach dune overtopping
rates, critical forcing data for urban flooding models. We will also deploy wave
gages and a terrestrial lidar system to monitor the erosion of protective sand
berms that are constructed before winter storms. We seek an improved
understanding of berm performance that can be used to improve emergency
preparedness as well as the reliability of short-term coastal flooding
forecasts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trends of higher sea level, increased storm
activity, and urbanization all point to a growing risk of coastal flood damage
and the combination of these trends raises the possibility of a major disaster
in developed coastal lowlands of California. A study by the USGS suggests that
an atmospheric river event lasting several weeks is capable of $725 billion in
flood losses across the State, several times the expected losses from a major
southern California earthquake of the same probability. To plan a sustainable
future, coastal communities need to examine many different adaptation measures
in search of a mix that balances the economic, environmental and social
priorities of the region. In addition, coastal communities need reliable flood
forecasting systems to minimize losses during extreme events. This work will
advance a fundamental understanding of processes, data and models that is needed
to address these needs in southern California. These advances will position
engineers and coastal managers to build more resilient communities for the
present, and plan more sustainable coastal communities for the future. Moreover,
a detailed investigation at Newport Beach offers the potential for a coastal
adaptation paradigm that benefits communities across the Nation and beyond.