* 1129303
* Collaborative Research: Physiological and Genetic Characterization of C02 Concentrating Mechanisms in  Marine Diatoms
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Christopher Dupont, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2014
* USD 306,671.00

Approximately 50% of the photosynthesis on Earth occurs in the oceans, and
diatoms are thought to be responsible for around half of this marine
photosynthesis. The molecular machinery involved in the capture of light energy
for photosynthesis is evolutionarily ancient and well conserved. However, the
pathways for supplying the inorganic carbon that is fixed (i.e. incorporated
into carbohydrates) during photosynthesis are quite diverse. These pathways,
which evolved in response to a decrease in global carbon dioxide concentrations,
elevate the concentration of carbon dioxide around the primary carbon-fixing
enzyme RubisCO, which is both inefficient and located within the chloroplast.
The goal of the proposed research is to identify and characterize the molecular
components of the carbon dioxide concentrating mechanisms in Phaeodactylum
tricornutum and Thalassiosira pseudonana, two marine diatoms for which whole
genome sequences and genetic manipulation systems are available. A research
focus will be bicarbonate transporters and carbonic anhydrases, which are known
to be essential components of the carbon dioxide concentrating mechanisms. While
these have been identified in the P. tricornutum and T. pseudonana genomes using
computational approaches, there is little cytological or functional verification
of the computational predictions. A variety of methods including microscopy,
immunolocalization, over-expression of native protein-fluorescent protein
fusions, RNA interference based expression knockdown, and membrane inlet mass
spectrometry will be used to connect cytological and functional information to
genomic entities. Such information will facilitate an extension to other diatoms
as genomes or transcriptomes become available. The data will be used to test and
refine conceptual models of the function of the carbon dioxide concentrating
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student
and undergraduate students will be trained at the intersection of phytoplankton
physiology and genetics. The wider community will be engaged through a
collaboration with the Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence-South
East in which the investigators will collaborate with K-12 teachers and outreach
specialists to develop materials on ocean acidification for use in K-12
classrooms.