* 1129062
* CCSS: Collaborative Research: Stochastic Modeling and Optimization for Cognitive Radio Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Yuguang Fang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 240,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop network protocols and optimization
techniques to efficiently utilize the spectrum white spaces for cognitive radio
networks. The proposed approach is based on a novel cognitive radio network
(CRN) network architecture under which effective design methodologies can be
developed to take better advantage of cognitive radio technologies in harvesting
and managing unutilized spectrum for better service provisioning.

The PIs will first study the proposed CRN architecture to enable collective
spectrum sensing and let the secondary service provider manage the harvested
spectrum for better spectral efficiency while shifting the design complexity
from the user side to the system side. They will then investigate how to split
traffic over harvested spectral bands to balance the risk and reward, how to
optimally utilize the spectral resource by jointly designing frequency
allocation and routing while supporting traffic demands, and how to maximize the
throughput by joint link scheduling and routing. The proposed research outcome
will lay the solid foundation for practical implementation of CRNs, which could
potentially revolutionizes the way how cognitive radios should be more
effectively used.

The research outcome will significantly advance the state of the art in CRNs,
opening a new avenue to designing smart living environments for public safety,
disaster rescue, mobile healthcare and online social networks to improve peoples
quality of life. Research findings will be disseminated through publications and
talks, and in classroom teaching. This project will also actively recruit and
train minority students for future workforce and mentor junior faculty.