* 1129421
* A Blueprint for Communicating Science, Engineering, and Technology Topics to Broad Audiences through Entertainment Media
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Gary Kreps, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 07/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

This engineering education research project will fund a workshop to bring
together individuals from the entertainment and media industries with
engineering researchers to strategize about how to utilize public service
messages to education Americans about science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics education; focusing particularly on engineering. The organizers of
the workshop have prior experience in using media for health messaging, and it
is anticipated that this workshop can outline how to adopt a similar strategy to
address systemic issues in STEM education.

The broader significance and importance of this project will be to leverage
existing media to more broadly engage the United States population on the
opportunities in, and need for, more engineering-savvy citizens. Given the focus
on the importance of technical innovation for future societal needs, informing a
larger portion of the population about the long-term benefits of engineering or
themselves pursuing engineering careers can have a significant positive impact.
This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers
through preparation of an engineering workforce with new capabilities and
expertise. Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for society is enabled by
building the capacity of the nation's citizenry for addressing societal
challenges through engineering.