* 1129728
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food Sovereignty and Social Justice in Post-Katrina New Orleans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Hilda Kurtz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 02/28/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research will examine how marginalized communities
perceive and assert their rights over access to adequate food in the city of New
Orleans. Racial and economic disparities in access to nutritious food have
become prominent concerns in U.S. cities, including New Orleans, especially
after the devastation of Hurricane Katrina exposed the city's pervasive racial
and class inequalities. Despite greater attention to these inequalities, low-
income residents of New Orleans continue to struggle to obtain sufficient fresh
food, and the impacts of racism are pronounced. Movements that are concerned
about disparities in access to food have combined with those interested in
working toward a food system that is environmentally sustainable and
transparent, and from this has emerged a "food sovereignty" movement that is
activist and democratically controlled. This project will examine food
sovereignty activism in the city of New Orleans since Hurricane Katrina and how
it is perceived and understood by both community members and activists. The
theoretical basis of this research is a combination of urban geography, critical
race studies, and agro-food studies and the project will examine how food
activism both constructs and contests race in an urban context. The methods used
in this project include interviews, participant observation, and focus groups.
The research will situate food sovereignty activism in New Orleans within a
broader national context to better understand how ideologies of justice and
racial equality within the food system are translated, interpreted, and enacted
at the local level within New Orleans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
draw crucial linkages between theories of urban space, racial and socioeconomic
disparities, and the food system. Additionally, this study will add to the
growing body of research on post-Katrina New Orleans Findings from the research
in New Orleans will offer insight into the potential for racially-sensitive food
activism in other U.S. cities. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;