* 1129760
* Program for the Advancement of the Discipline
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Roberta Spalter-Roth, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,898.00

Program for the Advancement of the Discipline SES - 1129760 Roberta Spalter-Roth
American Sociological Association

Abstract The Program for the Advancement of the Discipline, better known as the
Fund for the Advancement of the Discipline (FAD) is a jointly-funded program by
the National Science Foundation and the American Sociological Association (ASA).
The peer-reviewed awards, selected by the FAD Principal Investigator and a
seven-member Advisory Panel composed of eminent senior members of the
discipline, provide seed money for substantive and methodological breakthroughs
that challenge the discipline and stimulate new lines of scientific inquiry. The
ASA provides for the costs of administering the program including reaching out
to the target population, selecting the awardees, monitoring awards, and
evaluating the program?s outcomes.

The FAD program has been in existence for almost one-quarter of a century. Since
its inception, more than 1,100 PhD-level scholars have applied to the program
and more than 300 have received funding. The program has four purposes: to
advance the development of scientific knowledge in sociology by supporting
small, groundbreaking research initiatives; to hold conferences and other
activities that develop new research agendas and networks; to develop the
discipline?s infrastructure including usable datasets, archive materials, and
computer software; and to encourage the development of fundable proposals. The
measurable scholarly impact of FAD-funded proposals include scholarly
presentations, peer-reviewed publications, data sets available for public use,
media mentions, policy suggestions, and acquisition of additional research
funds. Over time, the project has been highly successful in advancing these
outcomes. Modest investments in research projects result in high payoffs
including scientific and educational contributions (with an average of four
types of contributions per project). Small amounts of funding provided at early
stages of the research process result in added funding for those that submit
proposals to other funding sources at the rate almost $12 for every $1 provided
by FAD during the last three-year project cycle. Overall, the rate of additional
funding was $4.75 for every $1.00 invested.

Broader Impacts Broader impacts include training undergraduate and graduate
students, developing new courses and curricula, and making findings available to
a broader public through press releases. Although open to all scholars with
PhDs, the program provides a process that encourages scholars in the early
career stage, who do not yet have a long track record of receiving awards. Thus,
broader impacts of this project include the guiding and mentoring of early-
career faculty members, as well as faculty outside of research-intensive
institutions such as master?s comprehensive and baccalaureate-only institutions.
This guidance also improves the respective researchers? ability to develop
subsequent successful proposals.