* 1129778
* RAPID Grant Proposal:  The Sociolinguistic Significance of the Post-Secondary School Stage in the Longitudinal Development of African American English
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Walter Wolfram, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2014
* USD 40,783.00

With RAPID Grant Supplement support from National Science Foundation, the Frank
Porter Graham Child Development Institute is extending the data collection and
analysis of a longitudinal study of African Americans to include interviews
during the post-secondary phase in their life cycle. Starting in 1990, a group
of 68 African American youth have been followed longitudinally as they develop
and use African American English during childhood and adolescence. The rate of
retention (68 of 88 study youth selected in 1990-91 at 6-12 months of age) for
the sample population is exceptional, particularly given the background
demographics of the cohort group. Language samples were collected progressively
from the children at one or two-year increments and interviews were conducted
with the children's mothers as well as peers starting in Grade 6. In addition, a
battery of standardized and nonstandardized tests were administered, and
background information was collected for each child throughout the study to
examine a variety of educational and at-risk factors for African American youth.
Data were collected for more than 120 demographic, social, psychological, and
educational variables for each participant during the study. The data on
language development and change during adolescence, the data on family, peer,
and school environment, and the data on metalanguage, literacy, and academic
achievement measures have resulted in a unique, comprehensive database. They
have also led to a number of new, empirically based descriptive, theoretical,
and descriptive insights on the early development and progression of African
American English and its social and educational
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RAPID grant extends the collection of
data to the post-secondary phase in incipient adulthood, a critical stage in the
career development of African American young adults. Study participants now
range from high school dropouts who are unemployed to those currently enrolled
at Historically Black Colleges and Universities or predominantly white
universities and to those with professional careers. Sociolinguistic interviews
are being conducted with participants, and background social and educational
data are being collected from subjects as they transition into adulthood so that
this landmark longitudinal study can be extended to include a crucial stage in
early adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the longitudinal study of
language use by African Americans have significant implications for the
examination of language in society and for understanding the role of language
differences in education. The use of African American English and its role in
the social, personal, and educational lives of young adults adds a critical
perspective on the shifting role of language through childhood, adolescence, and
adulthood.