* 1129198
* UBM Group: Biomathematics Research and Training for Undergraduates at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Zoi Rapti, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 239,520.00

This project is providing undergraduate students with early research experiences
at the interface of biology and mathematics and developing a biomathematics
training program to persist beyond the duration of this grant funding. The
program is recruiting annual cohorts of ten students and features four major
components: i) a fall-term project-based course in which students work on a
number of different group projects and acquire a common set of skills; ii)
original research projects - starting in the spring and continuing through the
summer - in which mixed teams of mathematics and biology students do research
under the joint mentorship of biology and mathematics faculty; iii) a research
seminar where students and faculty report regularly on their ongoing research
projects; and iv) program assessment activities designed to determine the
effectiveness of the different program components and mentoring activities, the
impact of the overall program on student education and the extent to which the
program can be institutionalized at the University of Illinois and other
universities. The intellectual merit of the project lies in the way the
interdisciplinary research projects are grounded in the students' experiences in
the core project-based class where they encounter a range of topics that reflect
modern research approaches that lie outside the normal "coverage" in either
discipline. The students also read and discuss classic papers in mathematical
biology, which in turn helps prepare them for the subsequent research seminar.
The broader impacts of the project are felt through the participation of the
undergraduate researchers as presenters in the annual Illinois Science Olympiad
where they interact with and serve as role models for potentially hundreds of
secondary school student attendees. The project is also carrying out a
comprehensive assessment whose findings hold promise to help inform other
institutions that are interested in developing and sustaining similar intense
undergraduate research opportunities.