* 1129112
* Net Biological Oxygen Production Using O2 Measurements on Argo Floats
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Steven Emerson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2015
* USD 786,013.00

It is now possible to envision global-scale measurements of accurate, seasonal
variations of oxygen concentrations in the upper 2000 meters of the ocean by
improving the quality of in situ oxygen measurements. These measurements can
presently be made remotely by floats, moorings, and gliders. Analysis of data
returned so far from oxygen sensors on Argo floats indicates that accuracy of
these measurements is presently not sufficient to solve the pressing problems of
air-sea oxygen exchange and slow decadal-scale O2 change in the thermocline.
However, recent work with oxygen measurements on moorings and gliders suggest
that it is possible to determine oxygen concentrations using available sensors
to better than +/- 0.5 % accuracy if calibration protocols are established,
which would be sufficient to address these problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, researchers at the University of Washington hope to demonstrate
this using float-based Aanderaa Optode sensors calibrated before and during
float deployment in a location of strategic oceanographic interest -- the
Northwest Pacific Kuroshio Extension. This is a region of intense pCO2 draw down
in winter caused by a combination of physical and biological processes. The team
will evaluate the relative importance of biological processes in creating the
carbon sink by determining the net biological oxygen production from O2 data
determined on floats and on a surface mooring in the area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project thus has two main goals: (1) to test the
procedures necessary to improve accuracy of in situ oxygen measurements on
profiling floats so that a protocol for future expansion of O2 sensor deployment
can be developed; and (2) to determine the role of biological production in
controlling the dramatic wintertime draw-down of surface ocean pCO2 in the
Northwest Pacific Ocean. The team will deploy 10 Argo floats (constructed at
Argo expense) with oxygen sensors in the Kuroshio Extension region. An oxygen
sensor and gas tension device will also be deployed on an existing surface
mooring in the region to derive a much more detailed data time series to compare
with the float measurements. The oxygen sensors will be calibrated both in the
laboratory before deployment and in situ in the ocean after deployment by
comparing their output to measurements by Winkler titration. The floats will be
programmed to make measurements in the atmosphere when they surface to transmit
data to shore via satellite as a means of in situ calibration. With this
calibration redundancy they will be able to determine the protocol necessary to
achieve accurate in situ O2 data on a much broader scale with less extensive
calibration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Broader impacts to the
marine research community include development of a protocol for calibration of
O2 sensors so they can be used more broadly in situ on autonomous platforms.
Broader impacts to education involve a "student cruise" on the University of
Washington research vessel RV T.G. Thompson. This cruise will expose 10-15
undergraduate students to the experience of field oceanography and marine
research, while fulfilling their required capstone research for the
undergraduate oceanography degree. The University of Washington has committed
twelve days of the ship time to accommodate the educational aspects of the
study.