* 1129412
* U.S. Australia International Research Experiences for Students (IRES): Materials for Energy Technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Juan Nino, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 09/30/2014
* USD 146,880.00

1129412&lt;br/&gt;Jones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This International Research
Experiences for Students (IRES) award is made to Professors Jacob Jones and Juan
Nino in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of
Florida in Gainesville. The 15 participating U.S. undergraduate students will
collaborate for 10 weeks each year over a period of three years with researchers
in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of New
South Wales (UNSW) in Sydney, Australia. Their foreign collaborators at the
School are Professor Mark Hoffman and his colleagues at the many labs within the
School. The proposed program will educate and train the undergraduate students
on topics related to materials for energy technologies. Energy production,
storage, conversion, and efficiency are key strategic areas for the U.S. and the
World. Examples of the areas the students will be involved in include
thermoelectric materials for thermal energy conversion, piezoelectrics for
energy transduction, metal hydrides and battery materials for energy storage,
and lightweight metals for energy efficiency. The student?s individual projects
will reinforce personal responsibility while the group experience is fostered by
the overall research theme. The proposed work will develop human capital in the
sustainable energy sector and will engage international collaboration to promote
progress on sustainable energy solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
sufficient overlap of interests between researchers in the U.S and Australia to
indicate that they can successfully pursue the activities proposed, and that the
interaction will benefit both sides. The University of New South Wales is one of
Australia?s leading research and teaching institutions and consistently ranks
high in international university rankings. The students will also have use of
the neutron diffraction instruments available at the nearby Australian Nuclear
Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO). This IRES project will provide the
students with additional academic and cultural experiences, and also promote
teaching, training, and learning. It is anticipated that the students will
maintain contact with the Australian collaborators for additional research
projects in the future. Underrepresented groups will be included when the
selection of students is made each year.&lt;br/&gt;