* 1129111
* Workshop to Identify Major Research Initiatives in Sedimentary Geology and Paleontology
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Judith Parrish, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2012
* USD 23,030.00

Over the last three decades, scientists who study the Earth?s sedimentary crust
and the history of life have conducted innumerable workshops and produced dozens
of white papers outlining critical research opportunities in the disciplines.
This community may represent the most integrative part of the earth sciences.
The community addresses issues of the history of life on Earth and the dynamics
of evolution and extinction, the history of climate and climate dynamics, and
the history of sedimentation and the dynamics of sedimentary basins. The entire
record of climate and life is preserved in sedimentary rocks, and is understood
through integrated studies of tectonics, climate, life, and sedimentology. Our
sample of modern processes is limited yet understanding of these processes is
important to many societal concerns. Fundamental knowledge about these processes
is recorded in the sedimentary record. Without understanding the full range of
process behavior we do not truly understand processes such as climate change,
extinction, and resource distribution and quality. This workshop will integrate
research opportunities identified by the community over the last several years
in order to provide a framework for moving forward with major research
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The consolidation of the common
themes put forth by the sedimentary geology and paleontology community will
provide focus for a major research initiative in critical
areas.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Much of the community?s work is focused on
societal concerns such as earth resources, climate change, and extinctions. This
work can be carried forward with much greater impact if the initiatives to be
framed here go forward.