* 1129651
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Non-citizen Participation in Civic Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Thomas Swerts, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2012
* USD 7,804.00

SES-1129651&lt;br/&gt;Andreas Glaeser&lt;br/&gt;Thomas
Swerts&lt;br/&gt;University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation
Research: Non-citizen Participation in Civic
Organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to global migration patterns,
undocumented immigrants have established a tangible presence in countries across
the Western world. They are excluded from conventional political participation
because of their status as non-citizens. However, over the last decade, many
have been eager to claim civil rights in both American and European cities.
While the cultural, social and economic problems related to irregular migration
have been the object of sociological research, less attention has been paid to
their efforts toward political incorporation.&lt;br/&gt;By comparing
undocumented immigrants in Chicago and Brussels, this project will show how they
become politically incorporated in different structural urban environments.
Within these urban contexts, the focus will be on their interactions with civil
society organizations. Eight civil society organizations in the two cities have
been selected to represent four different types of organizations which have been
active in the political incorporation of undocumented immigrants.
&lt;br/&gt;Different patterns of structural interaction between these
organizations and undocumented immigrants are expected depending on the type of
organization. These patterns of interaction in turn, should influence how the
immigrants become politically active. We expect that diverging trajectories of
political incorporation will be discovered, depending on the specific qualities
of the urban context and the structures of interactions with civil society
organizations. Data will be based on interviews, organizational ethnographies
and discourse analysis. &lt;br/&gt;The research design of this study allows for
comparison across national contexts (US - Belgium), cities (Chicago - Brussels),
civil society organizations (self-organizations, first-line organizations,
second-line organizations and churches), migrant groups (Mexicans and Moroccans)
and individual migrant trajectories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;The effort which undocumented immigrants make to serve their
communities is seldom highlighted in public discourse. This study demonstrates
that undocumented immigrants are actively engaged in community building efforts
through their participation in civil society organizations. These organizations
are critical in the political incorporation and integration of immigrants.
Moreover, the data gathered in this study can uncover the substantial social and
emotional barriers faced by undocumented immigrants and can make a substantial
impact on the public perception of irregular migration.