* 1129622
* Will rising pCO2 levels in the ocean affect growth and survival of marine fish early life stages?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Christopher Gobler, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2015
* USD 649,856.00

Intellectual merit: Ocean acidification has the potential to affect a broad
spectrum of marine organisms and thereby transform the composition and function
of our oceans. In contrast to calcifying marine invertebrates, marine fish are
widely believed to be unaffected by the CO2 concentrations projected for the
future. While this may be so for juvenile and adult fish stages, the fate of
fish embryos and larvae in high CO2 oceans is less certain as CO2-sensitivity
data for these stages are largely unavailable. Recognizing this knowledge gap
and inspired by the findings of two recent studies on clownfish and sea bass
larvae (Munday et al. PNAS 107 (2010); Checkley et al. Science 324 (2009)), the
investigators performed a series of experiments exposing eggs and early larvae
of inland silversides (Menidia beryllina) to elevated CO2 levels while strictly
adhering to current "best practice" guidelines for ocean acidification research.
At 1,000 ppm CO2, average M. beryllina survival ~1wk post-hatch significantly
and consistently (five experiments) declined by ~75% compared to current day CO2
levels (390 ppm), while average length of newly hatched larvae decreased by 22%.
Together with prior studies, these results suggest a surprisingly high
susceptibility of fish early life stages to the CO2 increases that are projected
to occur this century. Given that the abundance of many fish stocks, including
most commercial species, is often regulated by processes affecting early life
history growth and survival, ocean acidification may impact the dynamics of
future fish populations and become yet another challenge to sustainable
fisheries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators believe that there is now a
pressing need to better understand how CO2 affects the viability of fish embryos
and larvae in the ocean. This requires novel approaches involving longer-term,
larger-scale experiments across multiple species. The investigators will
comprehensively examine the impacts of current and future CO2 levels (400 -
1,000 ppm) during the egg and larval stages of three model fish species:
Atlantic silversides (M. menidia), inland silversides (M. beryllina) and
sheepshead minnows (Cyprinodon variegatus). They will also investigate
populations of the same species (M. menidia) from differing latitudes. These
species/populations are ecologically important due to their intermediate trophic
position, have comparable life histories to commercial marine fish, offer
differences in genetic growth capacity and presumed sensitivity, and are highly
amenable to laboratory experimentation. Survival and growth (weight- and length-
based) will be measured in experiments performed at different CO2, temperature
(21, 27Â°C) and feeding conditions (low, ad libitum), thus permitting the affects
of CO2 to be considered in parallel with thermal stress and food limitation.
Quantification of feeding rates, gross growth efficiency, and oxygen consumption
will characterize the physiological costs of high CO2 environments. Changes in
calcification of larval fish otoliths and skeletal elements will be determined
from weights and a Ca45 radiotracer approach. Finally, surviving M. menidia (or
M. beryllina) will be reared to maturity and their offspring will be challenged
with differing levels of CO2. Repeating this approach over several generations
will demonstrate the extent to which CO2 resistance may evolve through natural
selection. Collectively, this study will make significant advances toward
understanding how ocean acidification may challenge the world's most valuable
marine resource, fish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This investigation
will serve as the dissertation topic for a doctoral student at Stony Brook
University and will support a female post-doctoral researcher. The PIs have a
strong record of supporting diversity in education and in enriching
undergraduate and secondary school education and research and will continue
these practices for this project. A novel outreach program has the potential to
reach one million aquarium patrons during the project.