* 1130748
* Collaborative Research: Iron Regulation of the Food Quality of Phytoplankton In Acidified Eastern Boundary Upwelling Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Mark Wells, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2015
* USD 178,062.00

Within the next century, Eastern Boundary Current upwelling systems, which are
home to some of the major fisheries that support humans worldwide, are expected
to undergo extreme acidification (pH falling to 7.3 or lower) because of
increasing atmospheric CO2. Impacts on trace metal (especially iron) and
nitrogen bioavailability are likely, and consequently changes in phytoplankton
species composition and physiology are also to be expected. One understudied
aspect of ocean acidification is its impact on the production of phytoplankton
lipids and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) such as eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and other essential fatty acids (EFA) upon
which higher trophic levels depend.

In this project a research team from San Francisco State University, University
of Hawaii, and University of Maine will study the effect of extreme ocean
acidification (OA) under iron replete and deplete upwelling conditions in regard
to changes in species composition, total lipid production, and the specific
production of PUFAs. There are two guiding hypotheses: (1) Extreme ocean
acidification will increase lipid synthesis and EFA production in phytoplankton
through the imbalance between carbon uptake and decreased nitrogen uptake; and
(2) Extreme ocean acidification in natural upwelling regions will change the
amount and composition of PUFA and EFA produced due either the direct effects of
acidified seawater on cell physiology or to marked shifts in phytoplankton
community composition. Current Fe-replete and Fe-deplete upwelling zones in the
California upwelling region will be investigated to illustrate these impacts.
The team will use controlled laboratory monoclonal, semi-continuous culture
experiments to subject representative coastal phytoplankton isolates to varying
pH and Fe availability to characterize tolerance/success under extreme pH
environmental conditions and to quantify cellular physiological response to the
combined stressors. In the third year of the project, community-level responses
to the same set of stressors will be studied.

Broader Impacts: Because of the global importance of marine fisheries and the
as-yet modest understanding of the potential threats of ocean acidification, the
topic of this study spans a variety of disciplinary, institutional, academic-
government, and national boundaries. Researchers at all three participating
institution will lead a variety of public educational outreach activities for
the benefit of K-12 students and for society at-large. Graduate and
undergraduate students will also be an important part of the research effort.