* 1130006
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site at the University of Houston: Innovations in Nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Frank Claydon, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 07/31/2016
* USD 429,288.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at the University of Houston (UH) entitled, RET in Engineering and Computer
Science Site at the University of Houston: Innovations in Nanotechnology, under
the direction of Dr. Frank J. Claydon. This is a request to support a six-week
summer program to infuse 12 middle and high school STEM teachers from the
greater Houston area, each year for three years, with enthusiasm for the field
of engineering and knowledge about nanotechnology research that will be
subsequently shared with their respective middle and high schools classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cullen College of Engineering seeks to give Houston-
are middle and high school STEM teachers the opportunity to collaborate with
highly experienced and nationally recognized faculty in the field of
nanotechnology. Their participation in the program will not only make important
contributions to ongoing research efforts at UH but also will result in
learning-theory based secondary school instruction related to nanotechnology.
The project team will work with the RET teachers in developing K-12 engineering
modules based on the How People Learn learning theory to ensure that teachers
develop and implement nanotechnology modules appropriate to the grade level and
subject being taught. Sustained follow up will be achieved through classroom
visits by research mentors and the program PIs campus visits to UH, and an
annual RET Celebration Conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in the UH
Innovations in Nanotechnology RET program will conduct research under nationally
recognized experts in the field of nanotechnology. Teachers will be recruited
from the Houston-metro area. This recruitment plan will yield not only a diverse
group of teacher participants, but also promises to impact ethnically and socio-
economically diverse students in the participants middle and high school
courses. The program works with the Houston Independent School District, which
has a very high percentage of minority and/or low-income students.