* 1130876
* Fundamental Study on the Etching Mechanics of Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching of Silicon for 2D and 3D Nanomanufacturing Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* C. Wong, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

The proposed research seeks to understand the fundamental mechanisms involved in
catalyst motion in Metal-assisted Chemical Etching of Silicon(MaCE). MaCE is a
new, novel method to etch complex 2D and 3D shapes such as subsurface cycloids
and 3D spiraling structures while maintaining tight feature resolutions on the
order of 1 nm even with aspect ratios > 50:1. These capabilities are enabled by
the fact that the metal catalyst that defines the etching profile travels into
the silicon as the silicon is etched by a galvanic reaction across the catalyst,
resulting in etching profile is tightly maintained over the entire etch length
along with the ability to etch 3D structures by controlling catalyst motion.

While the stoichiometric chemistry of MaCE has been reasonably established, the
fundamental kinetics and forces involved in particle motion have remain unknown
and unstudied. The proposed research will examine how etchant composition,
catalyst shape, catalyst composition and external fields affect the kinetics and
forces of MaCE to determine etching rate, resolution, morphology and direction.
Also, analytical and computational models of the electric fields, forces,
catalyst motion and etching morphology will be developed. The kinetic and
morphological effects of new catalyst materials will be examined and
incorporated into the models. This research will provide a greater understanding
on how the kinetics of MaCE along with the catalyst particle shape interact to
create 3D nanostructures with the ultimate goal of providing precise control
over etching direction.

The considerable interest in nanomaterials and nanotechnology over the last
decade is attributed to both the desire by industry for lower cost, more
sophisticated devices and the opportunity that nano-technology presents for
scientists to explore the fundamental properties of nature at near atomic
levels. In pursuit of these goals, researchers around the world have worked to
both prefect existing technologies and also develop new nano-fabrication
methods; however, no technique exists that is capable of producing complex, 2D
and 3D nano-sized features with high aspect ratios, smooth walls, and at low
cost. Current nanofabrication methods face two important limitations. First, 3D
geometry is difficult if not impossible to fabricate requiring multiple
lithography steps that are both expensive and do not scale well to industrial
level fabrication requirements. Second, as feature sizes shrink into the nano-
domain, it becomes increasingly difficult to accurately maintain those features
over large depths and heights. The ability to produce these structures
affordably and with high precision is critically important to a number of
existing and emerging technologies such as metamaterials for high-band with
communication devices, nano-fluidics for advanced bio-on-a-chip devices to
detect cancer and other disease at low cost, nano-imprint lithography for rapid,
low cost fabrication, and more.

The proposed research seeks to develop the fundamental understand of MaCE as a
new method to create 2D and 3D nanostructures with high feature fidelity even at
high aspect ratios and a low cost. Scientists around the world are looking to
use nanomaterials to reduce the environmental impact of human activities and the
proposed research will help enable the technology needed to achieve this goal.