* 1130837
* GOALI: Developing Piezospectroscopic Sensing Systems in Adhesives and Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Axel Schulzgen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 09/30/2015
* USD 498,157.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to enable a high spatial resolution sensing system to
accurately measure stress distributions within polymer materials for structural
integrity monitoring in adhesives and coatings. This will be achieved through a
measurement technique using photo-luminescent nanoparticles of alumina as stress
sensors in a matrix material for the detection of changes in stress, real-time
and non-destructively. Bulk and nanoscale studies of alumina-epoxy composites
will be performed under load testing and nano-manipulation methods respectively.
The studies will focus on establishing material-sensor configuration and
uncovering stress-optic or piezospectroscopic relationships that will provide
the basis for sensitive, high spatial resolution optical stress monitoring. This
will be validated with the governing theory on load transfer between alumina
nanoparticles in a matrix material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the
novel studies, if successful, will lead to sensor-based discovery of failure
mechanisms in adhesives and strengthening mechanisms with nanoparticle
reinforcement for advanced adhesives and coatings. The significance of the
research is in the potential for enabling a new class of advanced sensing
systems to be introduced as practical non-destructive methods for structural
adhesives integrity testing. Through the advancement of next-generation high
spatial resolution sensing materials, the research has the potential to
contribute to the understanding and advancement of self-diagnostic sensing
materials with optimized strength and fracture toughness. Research goals will be
integrated with efforts aimed at fundamental studies on a novel optical stress
sensing material system to be applied in an industrial laboratory setting. This
will provide an enhanced educational and research environment to inspire a
"vision to reality" approach in leading basic research towards the applied
setting.