* 1130808
* Collaborative Research: Biophysical alteration of wetland geomorphology in response to rising sea level
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Steven Pennings, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 158,781.00

Collaborative Research: Biophysical alteration of wetland geomorphology
in&lt;br/&gt;response to rising sea level&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our objective is
to examine the evolution of networks of tidal creeks in salt marshes
as&lt;br/&gt;they respond to rising sea level. We have documented rapidly
growing creeks, incising into the&lt;br/&gt;marsh at 1-2 m per year, in coastal
marshes throughout the South Atlantic Bight and in
similar&lt;br/&gt;environments worldwide. Understanding the mechanisms driving
the evolution of these drainage&lt;br/&gt;networks is crucial for predicting
marsh responses to sea level rise under different conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The
study will examine the physics of tidal flows and sediment erosion, while also
considering&lt;br/&gt;the significant impact of marsh plants and animals (e.g.
crabs) on these processes. Using a&lt;br/&gt;combination of field measurements,
mesocosm experiments, and numerical modeling, we will 1)&lt;br/&gt;evaluate the
physical mechanisms underlying sediment erosion in creeks, including variation
in&lt;br/&gt;flow speed and processes changing the strength of the marsh soils,
2) test the hypotheses that&lt;br/&gt;crabs facilitate growth of creeks by
loosening sediment through burrowing and removing&lt;br/&gt;stabilizing
vegetation; and that hydrological conditions at creek heads are preferred by
crabs, and&lt;br/&gt;3) develop a numerical model of creek evolution to test the
importance of different parameters&lt;br/&gt;such as vegetation type, faunal
density, tidal range and sediment supply on the
morphological&lt;br/&gt;evolution of creeks. The model will help us to integrate
our observations and generalize our&lt;br/&gt;findings over a range of
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Salt marshes provide valuable ecosystem services to
humanity, but these productive habitats are&lt;br/&gt;threatened globally by
accelerating sea-level rise. Understanding the impact of sea-level rise
on&lt;br/&gt;the physical structure of a marsh is crucial to predicting both the
response of marsh ecosystems&lt;br/&gt;and the larger-scale morphological
response of the coastline. The impact of increasing water&lt;br/&gt;levels on
marshes depends on complex feedbacks between physical and biological
processes.&lt;br/&gt;Initial studies of this issue focused on interactions
between water depth and marsh elevation,&lt;br/&gt;which affect sediment
deposition and plant growth. Recently, increasing attention is
being&lt;br/&gt;directed towards the manner in which creek networks evolve as
they respond to the larger&lt;br/&gt;volume of water they must convey during
each tidal cycle at higher sea levels. The evolution of&lt;br/&gt;creek networks
is a critical component of marsh response to sea-level rise, because
creek&lt;br/&gt;morphology affects the amount of water and sediment delivered to
the marsh surface, and the&lt;br/&gt;drainage of the marsh, and thus, the length
of time the marsh is waterlogged. In turn, the flooding&lt;br/&gt;and drainage
of the marsh influences the health of plants and animals in this ecologically
vital&lt;br/&gt;environment. The ability of creek networks to respond to
increasing sea levels depends, in part,&lt;br/&gt;on how easy it is to erode the
marsh surface, which depends on both sediment type, and
on&lt;br/&gt;stabilization or loosening associated with flora and fauna.
Uncovering the linkages between&lt;br/&gt;geology and biology will have bearing
on the fields of geology, ecology and climatology, as well&lt;br/&gt;as those
interested in coastal protection and salt marsh evolution. The project will
develop a new&lt;br/&gt;modeling tool to examine response of marshes to sea-
level rise, which will be broadly applicable&lt;br/&gt;to many salt marshes in
the U.S. and globally.