* 1130095
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Variability, Functional Redundancy, and the Maintenance of Ecological Processes: Experiments in a Model Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Mark Denny, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2016
* USD 361,518.00

Functional traits of species are those that determine either species-specific
responses to environmental conditions or their influence on ecological
processes. Current theory suggests that communities with many species that
perform a given function in a similar way but have different sensitivities to
environmental conditions will exhibit greater temporal stability of ecosystem
properties. So-called functional redundancy should lead to compensation among
species, as some will do better when others do worse in response to
environmental variability. Anthropogenic global warming is a major driver of
current and anticipated changes in population dynamics, species interactions,
and community structure from local to global scales. Resulting changes in
biodiversity therefore have the potential to significantly alter important
ecosystem properties such as productivity, nutrient cycling, and resistance to
disturbance or invasion. Although ecologists have typically emphasized the
response of populations and communities to changing climatic averages (e.g.,
increasing temperature and rainfall), global circulation models also predict
significant increases in the intensity, frequency and duration of extreme
weather and climate events in many parts of the world; that is, increases in the
variability of the physical environment. Unfortunately, our current knowledge
about the effects of increasing climatic variation on natural ecosystems is
generally quite poor. Predicting how communities will likely respond to changing
environmental variability has therefore been recognized as a critical research
priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance our understanding of how projected changes in temperature variability
will affect the behavior, demography, and interactions of key taxa on rocky
shores ? a model system for testing theoretical ecological predictions with
field experiments. Environmental temperatures strongly influence the physiology,
behavior, and demography of most organisms, and changes in average temperature
have already been implicated in geographic range shifts of many species. A novel
manipulative technique will be used to test the effects of changes in thermal
variability on performance by a guild of congeneric grazing limpets, the
productivity of their benthic microalgal food, and the resulting interaction
strengths between the two taxa. Energy transfer among trophic levels is a key
ecosystem process linked to local food-web support and rates of nutrient
cycling. This research will evaluate not only species-specific effects of
thermal variability on limpet survival, growth, and grazing activity, but also
the potential for functional redundancy among limpet species to maintain that
ecosystem function over time as environmental variability increases. Data
generated from this study will provide a framework for future investigations of
the consequences of climate change in this diverse and productive
habitat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will
significantly enhance the infrastructure of research and education at California
State University, Long Beach (CSULB) - a minority (Hispanic) serving,
predominantly undergraduate institution. At least two master's students and
twelve undergraduates from CSULB will participate in this study over the three
years of funding. Each student will spend ten weeks living and working during
the summer at Hopkins Marine Station, gaining an intensive hands-on research
experience. This project will also provide training for a postdoctoral scientist
at Stanford University, who will gain research experience and proficiency by
actively participating in the development and implementation of all aspects of
the proposed study. Both PIs are especially committed to providing research
experiences and opportunities to women and minorities traditionally
underrepresented in science: one of Denny's current three students is a woman,
and of the four undergraduate students working in Allen's lab, three are women
and one is a Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Research
Fellow. The LSAMP program (funded in part by NSF) is designed to increase the
quality and quantity of underrepresented students successfully completing
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) baccalaureate degree
programs, and to increase the number of students interested in, academically
qualified for, and matriculated into programs of graduate study. Denny will use
data and insight from this project as part of a week-long "biomechanics module"
he teaches annually in an intensive summer field program run by the Ocean
Discovery Institute (formerly Aquatic Adventures). This program (also funded in
part by NSF) seeks to interest inner-city high school students from San Diego in
science, and to provide them with the skills needed to gain access to 4-year
colleges.