* 1130948
* IDR: Engineering Electroactive-Polymer-Based Phononic Crystals as a Sustainable Energy Source
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,095.00

The objective of this Interdisciplinary Research (IDR) grant is to explore a
novel hierarchical approach that incorporates design of non-conventional lattice
topologies with geometric nonlinearities and buckling-induced softening to lower
the operational phononic frequency range for effective energy harvesting. The
need for efficient and reliable electrical power sources for micro-electro-
mechanical systems, wireless sensors and electronic portable devices, calls for
innovative electromechanical structures and material systems capable of
harvesting electrical energy from low frequency environmental mechanical
vibrations. Unfortunately, a material's density and modulus become a pair of
competing design constraints that prevent the realization of energy harvesting
device with low operational frequencies. Through synergized approach among
multiscale modeling, design optimization, micro-fabrication and experimental
validation, this grant supports the bold effort in achieving superior
electromechanical energy conversion of electroactive polymer based phononic
crystals featuring simultaneous energy harvesting and vibration isolation
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will reveal the
energy harvesting mechanisms of microstructured phononic metamaterials through a
deep understanding of the interplay between phononic bandgaps and the
mechanical-electrical coupling in the electroactive polymer materials. The
extension of level-set based topology optimization to multi-functional and
multi-material design will help establishing a rigorous and computationally
viable design framework accounting for the highly nonlinear and coupled
mechanical-electrical phenomena of electroactive polymers, while enabling two-
way communication between manufacturing and design. The integrated micro-
fabrication procedure with rapid prototyping capability will offer "hardware-in-
the-loop" proof of concepts using fully functional prototypes. The fruition of
this research is expected to be the forging of boundaries between the
multidisciplinary researchers from science-based mechanics of materials, design
optimization, photonic and phononic metamaterials and micro-fabrication for
advancing the field of "phononic metamaterials-based energy harvesting," while
training the next generation of scientific and engineering leadership in an
interdisciplinary learning environment.