* 1130755
* Large Stroke Microscale Actuators Based on Electrowetting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Alex Volinsky, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 388,921.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypothesis that lumped
parameter models and basic scaling laws can predict the dynamic forces applied
by microscale electrowetting actuators. To realize this goal, the forces applied
during droplet actuation must be characterized. The approach used in this work
is to separately characterize the force and electrical characteristics of the
actuation system under static conditions. These responses will be combined into
equivalent energy storage and damping effects that are analogous to dynamic
models of conventional mechanical actuators. The models will be evaluated and
refined using dynamic testing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Microscale positioning and
actuation methods are limited by the relatively large size of the actuators and
the challenge of grasping and releasing small objects without damaging them.
Current methods of positioning and actuating small objects are limited to small
motions and/or require bulky macroscale components. This project will enable the
use of small droplets to move parts by adapting methods for moving individual
droplets from microfluidics. If successful, this work will provide new methods
for positioning sub-millimeter parts and actuating microscale devices with high
speed and precision. However, electrowetting can readily actuate large distances
using only easily manufactured substrates and an electrical source. This
capability will facilitate the manipulation and actuation of many microscale
systems. It may be particularly suited for the assembly of small parts made from
different processes and/or materials into systems with higher levels of
performance than can be achieved through in-situ manufacturing. Potential
applications include the assembly of energy harvesting devices, small scale
robots, and other microelectromechanical systems. The knowledge from this
proposal will also benefit other applications of electrowetting including low
cost medical diagnostics and display applications.