* 1130745
* Integrating Flexible Discrete Choice and Revenue Management Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mark Ferguson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 325,000.00

Many industries use traditional revenue management (RM) systems to forecast
demand for products and to determine product prices and availabilities. However,
traditional RM systems were designed before the internet was a dominant
distribution channel and during a period in which customers had limited
knowledge of all of their product offerings. Choice-based RM systems use
discrete choice models to forecast demand in a way that better reflects today's
purchasing environment. Although much has been done on the optimization of
choice-based models, little research has been undertaken on how to estimate the
model using demand data from a single firm. This research focuses on estimation
of parameters for choice-based RM systems using marginal versus expected log
likelihood functions. The marginal formulation has a similar mathematical
structure as limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) estimators, which
have previously been developed in the transportation planning field but have not
yet been applied to RM. Sequential estimation techniques such as LIML show
strong promise as a framework that enable researchers to solve open research
questions related to the incorporation of more realistic product substitution
patterns and competitors product information. The primary research goals are to:
(1) integrate nested logit and choice-based RM models and incorporate
competitive information; (2) understand data requirements for choice-based RM
models; and, (3) validate these new models on industry datasets.

If successful, the results of this research will help shape the vision for the
next-generation RM systems by advancing theories needed to estimate RM choice
parameters. Through testing and validating models on industry datasets, this
research will be able to develop recommendations on data requirements and
relevant industry settings needed to successfully estimate choice-based RM
parameters. The results of this research will lead to increased profits for
firms and better product and service offerings for customers. Previous research
has suggested incremental revenue gains ranging from 1-10 percent may be
possible with choice-based RM systems; thus, potential impacts of this research
are substantial. The results of this research will also be applicable to other
disciplines that face censored data, e.g., when retail sales are censored due to
stock-outs.