* 1130322
* 22nd Annual Workshop on Interconnections within High-speed Digital Systems:  Support for Student Participation, May 8-11, 2011 Santa Fe, NM.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2011,06/30/2011
* Zhaoran Rena Huang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 06/30/2011
* USD 5,000.00

The objective of this activity is to provide support for five students from U.S.
universities to attend the 22nd Annual IEEE/LEOS Workshop on Interconnections
within High-Speed Digital Systems and participate in the academic poster
session. The workshop will be held May 8 - May 11, 2011 at the Eldorado Hotel
&amp; Spa in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The workshop agenda includes tutorials,
invited talks, interactive problem solving sessions, and an academic poster
session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The exponential growth in data
traffic and ever increasing demand for high bit-rate communications and
e-services has accelerated research and development in the area of
interconnection technology. The paradigm shift in computing towards parallel
multicore processing requires an integrated design approach to address
interconnect bottlenecks from chip-scale to system-scale architectures in
networking, communications, and high performance computing. This workshop
addresses the multi-disciplinary nature of these interconnection challenges by
bringing together key researchers and industry experts from a variety of fields,
including semiconductor devices, computing architectures and algorithms, 3D
packaging, and opto-electronic integration. An academic poster session includes
contributions from a selected number of high quality student
papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This workshop will have
significant impact on high-speed interconnection technology discussing novel
approaches to break bandwidth bottlenecks in computing networks and
communication systems. Junior researchers from the U.S., including graduate
students and post-docs, will benefit from the interdisciplinary and interactive
workshop format, training them to provide the next generation of high
performance interconnection solutions. The workshop includes a strong outreach
component through interactions with academic organizations and minority-serving
institutions.