* 1130929
* International Research Experiences for Students: A Program for Undergraduates in Kruger National Park, South Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,998.00

The NSF IRES grant to the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) at Duke
University will provide 15 U.S. undergraduate students with a six-week, field-
based opportunity over the course of three summers to acquire science and
research skills working on a significant wildlife management issue in South
Africa. OTS has been offering semester programs in South Africa since 2004,
providing undergraduate students from the U.S. and South Africa with holistic
science training through experiential learning. The students participating in
this NSF-funded, hands-on, research experience are selected competitively from
OTS' semester-long program on "African Ecology and Conservation," thus
leveraging their 15-weeks of prior training and experience to participate in
this intensive field-based program. Approximately one quarter of U.S.
undergraduates participating in OTS' undergraduate programs are from groups
underrepresented in the sciences; through OTS' active recruiting program, we
expect a similar portion will be part of this research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The OTS undergraduate
program takes place within Kruger National Park, South Africa, where students
are given privileged access to conduct research in a major national park and, in
working in close collaboration with the South African Parks Service (SANParks),
can make meaningful contributions through their research to wildlife management
issues. In point of fact, the NSF IRES grant will enable five students each
summer for three years to focus specifically on research studying elephant
impacts on savanna ecosystems. Kruger National Park (KNP) is home to an elephant
population of about 15,000 individuals. Because of long-term changes in land use
outside the park, the elephant population density, distribution, and movement
has changed through time. At present, elephants are known to have both positive
and negative impacts on biodiversity. A critical scientific research question
with important management implications concerns how elephant feeding behavior is
changing natural vegetation and associated faunal communities. The SANPark?s
mandate is to protect biodiversity in all of its "facets and fluxes" and, with
the uncertainty around elephant impacts, KNP management is debating whether or
not to institute a new elephant policy. Central to the debate and legitimacy of
the policy is the provision of scientific evidence on the effect elephant
populations are having on the functioning of savanna ecosystems, both directly
and indirectly. Through the IRES grant, students will conduct research on the
effect of elephants on plant communities, assessing the resiliency of individual
species and plant communities impacted by elephant feeding. Secondly, students
will conduct biodiversity surveys (birds, bats, ants, small mammals, and dung
beetles) within the park at a range of sites that vary in vegetation structure
to understand how a change in vegetation structure might affect resident faunal
community composition and diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Students participating in the IRES program, including students from groups
under-represented in the sciences in the U.S., will gain an international
research experience by studying the impact of a keystone species on a protected
park's ecosystem; will learn how to communicate research outputs meaningfully
through participation in a final park-wide symposium; and will discover how
their findings can influence complex science- and environmental-related
decision-making processes. As future researchers and science leaders who
undoubtedly will face the controversy of balancing human and environmental
needs, exposure to such multi-dimensional scientific inquiry represents an
excellent opportunity to see science in action and the role it plays in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.