* 1130254
* IRES: US-MEXICO Border Water &amp; Environmental Sustainability Training (UMB-WEST)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Enrique Vivoni, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,989.00

This three-year International Research Experiences for Students project will
provide US undergraduate students and graduate students with an international
collaborative research experience in water resources management. Under the joint
mentorship of Enrique R. Vivoni of Arizona State University and several U.S. and
Mexican research partners, participants will spend four summer weeks
investigating hydrologic science in the US-Mexico Border regions of Arizona and
Sonora. Students will collect field hydrologic measurements useful for water
resources management, examine local water resources infrastructure, meet with
local decision makers, and apply data analysis techniques to hydrologic modeling
experiences. Each year, students will conduct a two-week field campaign during
which they deploy instrumentation, conduct field sampling, visit water
infrastructure projects, and interact with local water managers. These
activities will be conducted in the Sonora River basin and neighboring regions.
In each of the three years the participant cohorts will include approximately
two graduate students and approximately eight undergraduate students, for a
total of ten participants per year. The program will train students how to
measure hydrologic processes through field instrumentation and remote sensing
imagery, and it will show them how to translate hydrologic information and model
outputs into water resources information that is useful and relevant to local
water managers. The goal of this project is to develop US scientists and
engineers who can appropriately address cross-border water management problems
in Mexico and the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the broader impacts of this
IRES program are the promotion of international research collaborations;
involvement of undergraduates in an active research environment with graduate
students, US faculty, and foreign faculty; access to water resources decision-
makers; and field research experiences for underrepresented groups that should
help increase the success of these students in graduate programs in the
sciences. The project will also further research collaborations between U.S. and
Mexican scientists.