* 1130468
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Nanowire-Base Sensing Systems from Integrating Flow-Guided Assembly and Synthesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 11/30/2015
* USD 299,380.00

Nanowires, made of metal, semiconductor, or conductive polymer, exhibit
promising potentials in the next generation sensors and other electronic
systems. Compared to their planar counterparts, nanoscale junctions can
efficiently regulate the accumulation or depletion of charge carriers and
significantly increase the sensitivity up to single molecule level. However,
large scale manufacturing of nanowire-based sensing systems is impeded by: (1)
the lack of a low-cost, reliable, and efficient way to direct nanowires to
desired locations; (2) the large measuring noise resulting from the random
stacking or aggregates of nanowires. This project is to develop a new scalable
nanomanufacturing process in the production of well aligned and patterned
nanowire electronic systems. DNA assemblies will first be guided to desired
locations to create well-defined nanoarchitecture. Their negative replica,
nanochannels, will then serve as the sacrificial templates to produce highly
ordered nanowires through chemical or electrochemical deposition. In this way,
the difficulties for individual nanowire isolation and alignment existing in
most template synthesis approaches could be largely eliminated. The structural
defects commonly seen in biological template synthesis are also avoided. In this
project, metallic and conductive polymer nanowire field emission transistors
(nanoFETs) and nanojunction thermopiles (nanoTPs) will be fabricated and tested
for DNA and protein detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this new approach, the
synthesis, alignment, and patterning of nanowire lattice can be done in a
reliable and efficient manner and with high throughput. Its success may
revolutionize current nanowire-based sensing system manufacturing. The produced
sensors can be broadly used in clinical diagnosis, environmental monitoring,
security screening, and biowarfare defense. Accompanied by its research
activities, this project will also offer interdisciplinary opportunities for
engineering students to gain hands-on research experiences in materials,
biology, and multiple engineering disciplines. Relevant education materials and
resources will be cost-effectively disseminated by globalized educational tools
and pipelines to benefit all-level students, particularly those from
disadvantaged groups. These efforts are expected to help strengthen the
quantity, quality and diversity of the US science and engineering workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;