* 1130146
* Collaborative Research: Discovery, sampling, and quantification of flows from cool yet massive ridge-flank hydrothermal springs on Dorado Outcrop, eastern Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,09/30/2016
* Charles Wheat, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2016
* USD 159,618.00

Pristine fluids from a typical ridge-flank hydrothermal system have never been
sampled, mainly because it has not been possible to locate a site of focused
discharge where representative samples could be collected. The PIs have located
a small basement feature, Dorado outcrop, on 23 m.y.-old seafloor on the eastern
flank of the East Pacific Rise that they plan to sample to determine the fluid
composition, and to assess the rate of discharge from the outcrop, so that they
can quantify the chemical impact of this hydrothermal system. They plan an
18-day expedition that combines the surveying capabilities of the AUV Sentry
(bathymetric, sub-bottom sonar, photo mosaics, water column anomalies) and an
ocean-class vessel capable of collecting high-quality multi-beam data and CTD
samples, and supporting the survey and sampling capabilities of the ROV Jason II
for collection of spring and plume fluids, heat flow data, sediment push cores,
and still and video photography. These data and samples will be combined
hopefully to generate the first well-constrained estimates of hydrothermal flows
from Dorado outcrop. This expedition will result in the collection of samples
and data from a ?fire hose? of ridge-flank, hydrothermal system, challenging the
commonly held view that discharge from ridge flank hydrothermal systems occurs
primarily from diffuse seeps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate students and a junior faculty member will
gain experience by participating in this program. Wheat and Hulme are developing
hands-on science-technology packages to engage K-8 students during week-long
learning opportunities that include three technology-based activities per grade
level and meet national science, mathematics, and language arts standards.