* 1130191
* Collaborative Research:  Advancing Environmental Equity Research: Vulnerability to Air Pollution and Flood Risks in Houston and Miami
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Jayajit Chakraborty, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2015
* USD 180,902.00

This project aims to address several limitations associated with current
environmental justice research and practice, and advance knowledge of social and
spatial influences on residential exposure to environmental hazards. The
research involves parallel analyses of two high-impact hazards?air pollution and
flooding?conducted in the two largest urban areas on the U.S. Gulf Coast:
Houston, Texas and Miami, Florida. Key questions to be investigated include: How
do factors such as risk mitigation, locational benefits, and household decision-
making processes, which have received little attention in environmental justice
research, influence relationships between social vulnerability and hazard
exposure? How do hazard attributes and contextual factors influence
relationships between social vulnerability and hazard exposure? A quantitative
phase of research will integrate data from a social survey of 1,000 households
with neighborhood level data to examine multilevel determinants of hazard
exposure. A qualitative phase will rely on interviews with a subset of survey
participants to provide insight into decision-making processes that underpin
patterns of hazard exposure. A comparative phase will replicate analyses for
multiple air pollution and flood risk variables to specify the influence of
hazard attributes (e.g., frequency/magnitude, suddenness of onset) on spatial
relationships between social vulnerability and hazard exposure. A final
contextual phase will analyze each city?s historical geography to facilitate
explanation of differences in findings between the study sites. The project will
provide a comparative, multilevel, multi-method framework for modeling
residential exposure to environmental hazards, and transform current
understandings of factors contributing to environmental and social
injustices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project will enhance public
knowledge of environmental risks, inform practitioner communities, contribute to
education, and increase the participation of underrepresented groups in hazards
research and practice. Education and research training opportunities will be
provided to students from underrepresented groups at the University of Texas at
El Paso and the University of South Florida at Tampa. Project data and findings
will be disseminated via multiple outlets in English and Spanish. Partnerships
with the Houston and Miami geographic education communities will be formed and
project data and results will be translated into learning modules for use in
high school geography classrooms. Finally, press releases will ensure broad
utilization of project data and products, which will be made accessible via a
project website.