* 1130012
* Multivalued Decision Diagrams in Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* John Hooker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 324,963.00

The objective of the research is to develop multivalued decision diagrams (MDDs)
as a novel tool for discrete optimization. MDDs, and binary decision diagrams in
particular, are well known as a technique for circuit verification and product
configuration. They also present an attractive approach to optimization, because
they combine strengths of mathematical programming and constraint programming.
Mathematical programming relies heavily on linear and other continuous
relaxations of the problem. MDDs likewise provide easily solved relaxations, but
the relaxations are discrete and do not require linearity or inequality form.
They can also be strengthened in a process analogous to cutting plane
generation. Like the constraint store in constraint programming, MDDs allow
domain filtering to reduce the solution space, but the filtering is more
effective because it operates on a richer data structure. The research therefore
aims to develop MDD-based relaxation and filtering
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is part of a larger research program
that attempts to unify optimization methods. The eventual goal is to develop a
general-purpose solver that seamlessly combines techniques from mathematical and
constraint programming, and perhaps global optimization and local search, by
viewing them as special cases of an overarching solution methodology.
Unification would bring optimization technology under one roof and make it more
attractive to users, who would no longer be obliged to move from one solver to
another to try different approaches. More importantly, recent research suggests
that unification can yield orders-of-magnitude speedups in solution speed by
exploiting complementary strengths of the various methods. Because MDDs knit
together key concepts from mathematical and constraint programming, they fit
naturally into this research program and could become a component of the next
generation of solvers.