* 1130068
* International Workshop/School on Tracer and Timescale Methods for Understanding Complex Geophysical and Environmental Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Thomas Haine, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2012
* USD 35,700.00

Intellectual Merit: Understanding advective-diffusive transport and
production/destruction processes of dissolved constituents in natural fluid
flows is an important challenge in Earth and environmental sciences with many
diverse applications. Moreover, geophysical and environmental models routinely
produce huge amounts of data. To make sense of these data novel diagnostic
methods are required. Among these methods an increasingly popular and powerful
approach uses real (or hypothetical) passive tracers to tag fluid masses and
estimate transport pathways and timescales, such as tracer ages, residence time,
and transit time. These timescales lead to insightful diagnoses that are
increasingly applied in interdisciplinary environmental studies.

The International workshop/school on Tracer and Timescale Methods for
Understanding Complex Geophysical and environmental Processes will review and
explain what has been achieved so far in this field and suggest new
developments. This is one-time event, held in August 2011 in Belgium. All junior
scientists (PhD students and post-docs, especially) with interests in
environmental tracer theory, modeling and observations are encouraged to
participate. Tutorials will be delivered by members of an international
scientific committee of experts in tracer techniques. In addition, student oral
papers or posters will be presented with model studies, theoretical
developments, field measurements ? for model validation or other purposes ? or
numerical model studies, be they Eulerian or Lagrangian. The diagnostics may
concern air, water, passive/inert tracers, biogeochemical variables, sediment
particles, etc.

Broader Impacts: The field of tracer timescale methods in environmental flows
will be advanced through scholarly discussions at the workshop and
collaborations that ensue. The workshop will also contribute to the education of
a new generation of young researchers who will be able to use in tracer
timescale methods for a broad range of environmental problems.