* 1130454
* DDEP: In Situ Ultra Fast Time-Resolved Infrared Spectroscopic Study on Shape Controlled Pt Nanoparticles
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2011,11/30/2013
* YuYe Tong, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 11/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Enhancement Project (DDEP) award will support the
research of Ph.D. student Ms. Augusta M. Hofstead-Duffy on electrocatalysis
relevant to the direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC). The latter is a promising
clean energy alternative to fossil fuels and has advantages for large-scale
commercial implementation. The focus of the study is to gain further mechanistic
insights on the methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions through in
situ time-resolved infrared spectroscopy on shape controlled Pt nanoparticles.
The study will be performed under the guidance of Dr. Shi-Gang Sun of Xiamen
University (China) as a supplement to the US-China collaborative project
Nanoscale Single-Crystal Ensemble Electrocatalysis for Fuel Cell Applications.
There are a variety of powerful spectroscopic techniques available in the host
laboratory combining electrochemistry and vibrational spectroscopy that expose
valuable chemical information during the course of the electrocatalytic
reaction. The mechanistic information expected to be obtained during this study
will provide a better understanding of activities and mechanisms as it relates
to electrocatalyst shape and size during the aforementioned
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a systematic and
detailed analysis of the molecular-scale processes occurring on the fuel cell
anodes. The project will allow the PhD student gain meaningful international
experience. Successful development of improved DMFCs could provide considerable
economic and environmental benefits.