* 1130724
* Collaborative Research:  Hybrid Control of Gear System Vibration with Time-Varying Dynamics via Piezo-Composite Array
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jiong Tang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 188,279.00

The research objective of this collaborative project by University of
Connecticut, University of Tennessee and Tennessee State University is to create
new theories and a potentially transformative technology to effectively control
the gear system-induced vibration propagation. In gear systems, multi-tonal
vibrations are induced as a result of parametric variations in tooth mesh
stiffness caused by kinematic variations in the number of teeth in contact and
tooth flexibility. In this project, we plan to develop a multi-layered, hybrid
control methodology to enable multi-tonal vibration suppression of parametric
time-varying gear system dynamics via simultaneous passive isolation and active
control. Specifically, we will develop bi-periodic extension-twist coupled
piezoelectric / composite struts with tunable frequency stop-bands to block high
frequency vibration propagation, and in the meantime employ the piezoelectric
transducers in the struts to realize a dual-loop adaptive feedforward / time-
varying feedback control strategy based on Floquet decomposition that provides
active suppression of self-exited vibrations. With these innovations, the new
methodology will rigorously address the major challenges in gear system
vibration control, e.g. wide spectrum multi-tonal vibrations, time-varying
dynamics with parametric excitations, and non-stationary responses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gears are critical components in many energy, aircraft,
automobile, and marine/ship systems. If successful, the outcome of this research
can lead to not only increased durability, reliability and efficiency of those
systems, but also improved human operating and living environment. Particularly,
reduction of gear-induced vibration and associated noise emissions can play a
critical role in wind energy development. By carrying out the educational tasks,
the PIs will disseminate the research findings through classroom teaching,
community outreach, and involving under-represented and minority group students
in capstone projects, thereby contributing significantly to workforce training.