* 1130214
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Globalization, Migrant Workers, and the Changing Textile and Clothing Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Tu Lan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project seeks to investigate the role played
by migrants in the increasingly globalized textile and clothing (T&amp;C)
industry. The project will contribute to a better understanding of the complex
interaction between economic globalization and labor migration, as well as flows
of capital, and commodities, by considering the role of Chinese migrants in
maintaining Italy's clothing industry. Italy is well-regarded in the T&amp;C
industry for its brand of fine clothing, and has become the largest host of
Chinese immigrants in Europe, where these skilled migrants and entrepreneurs
have become key to its T&amp;C industry. It therefore provides an opportunity
for the investigation of the role of immigrants in the maintenance of an
industry of national importance. The influx of Chinese migrants has brought
about a restructuring of the T&amp;C industry as Chinese firms, operating
locally and often in collaboration with Italian ones, are increasingly used to
"in-source" production as an alternative to out-sourcing it to China.
Specifically, this project seeks to understand the positions that Chinese
apparel firms occupy in the Italian T&amp;C production network. In particular,
it will identify the major reasons why Italian firms are willing to conduct
transactions with local Chinese firms, instead of directly outsourcing to China.
It also considers the extent to which the competitiveness of Chinese apparel
firms is supported by a variety of ethnic business networks in Italy, and by
migrant workers and fabrics from China. Methodologies include surveys,
interviews, and participatory mapping exercises with entrepreneurs in Italy and
in China. &lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the fields of
globalization, migrations studies and economic geography. The research will
inform new theories on in-sourcing and questions about the sustainability of
assembly production in high-cost and high-value regions, which is of interest to
industrialists and policy makers. Academic dissemination and outreach
presentations of this research are planned. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.