* 1130027
* Fundamentals of Bonding in Kinetic Consolidation Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Teiichi Ando, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,483.00

This grant provides funding to explore and elucidate fundamental bonding
mechanisms that occur between particles in kinetic consolidation processes, such
as ultrasonic fabrication and cold spray deposition. The developed models will
describe physical aspects of particle interaction affecting structure,
properties and performance of consolidated materials. In addition, specific
bonding criteria will be pursued in a range of materials systems to improve
current techniques as well as critical design tools for usage of new materials.
Computational simulations of particle impact during cold spray will identify
distributions of stress and temperature. These data will be correlated with
high-resolution metallographic observations on particles experimentally impacted
under identical conditions. Further, parallel microscopic studies on specimens
produced via ultrasonic consolidation will provide data to explore similarities
between the two techniques as well as test modeling predictions with a more
controllable particle stress state. Mechanical characterization will be explored
on all specimens to develop interfacial structure-property relationships and
explore deformation and failure criteria in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
lead to improvements in the design of kinetic consolidation processes for
currently-used materials such as aluminum, magnesium and copper alloys as well
as establish process conditions to enable new materials systems to be produced.
The primary goal of this work is to determine how contacting particles develop
strong bonds when subjected to supersonic impact or ultrasonic vibratory
conditions. Results may then guide industrial practice in input parameters, tool
design, material selection, and pre-/post-processing techniques. In turn, this
could improve fabrication efficiency and mechanical behavior, or accelerate
insertion of these materials into new applications. The proposed work will also
expand understanding of metallurgical thermodynamics and kinetics under high
plastic strain rates.