* 1130924
* A Novel Non-Contact Technique for Dynamic Loading of Thin Film Materials Using Finite Amplitude Mechanical Stress Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Oluwaseyi Balogun, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 11/30/2015
* USD 300,306.00

This project seeks to develop a new laser based technique for the generation of
finite amplitude surface acoustic stress waves. The proposed technique would
facilitate the understanding of the nonlinear elastic response of thin film
materials at ultrasonic frequencies. This development would lead to quantitative
measurement of various nonlinear elastic properties including; decohesion and
fracture strength of thin film interfaces, using nonlinear elastic stress waves.
The technique uses a laser source focused to line on a sample surface to
generate plane surface acoustic stress waves through the thermoelastic effect.
The laser generated stress waves are monitored using a path stabilized Michelson
interferometer. By scanning the laser line source on the sample surface at the
phase velocity of the surface wave, the stress wave amplitude is amplified
continuously with distance. The technique would enable loading thin film
materials with strain amplitudes of the order of 0.01 with strain rates greater
than one million per second. The contact-free nature of the technique allows for
accurate modeling of the processes of stress wave generation and propagation,
leading to reliable extraction of thin film material
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the project is successful, the proposed
technique would enable the quantitative assessment of the mechanical reliability
and stability of film based small scale structures including MEMS and NEMS
devices. These properties are critical to their successful integration into more
complex microelectronic devices. Furthermore, the project is integrated with
various educational activities including, graduate course enrichment, graduate
student training, and outreach activities to high school students.