* 1130882
* High Fidelity Numerical Investigations of Tailored Magnetic Fields for Defect Reduction in Continuous Casting of Steel
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Brian Thomas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,964.00

This grant provides funding for the investigation of strategies to improve the
quality of continuous-cast steel by applying tailored magnetic fields to alter
fluid flow in the mold region to reduce the formation of defects. Magnetic
fields apply additional forces to the steel flow which change the velocities
that affect the transport of inclusions and level fluctuations that produce most
of the defects in the current process. To accomplish this, high-fidelity
computer models will be developed based on accurate modeling of the turbulence
and its interactions with the magnetic fields. Advanced parallel computers based
on graphics processing units will be used to reduce the computational times and
increase the mesh resolution. The computer models developed will be applied to
study flow fields in model and industrial geometries to characterize the effects
of different magnetic field configurations. The ultimate objective is to obtain
the most desirable configuration for performance and practical
viability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project will reduce defects
and reduce the waste of energy, material and resources during the continuous-
casting of steel, a process which is used to produce over 90 percent of the
steel in the United States and globally. The principal investigators have close
interactions with several steel producers through the Continuous Casting
Consortium at the University of Illinois which provides an industry perspective
as well as the means to implement results into practice. The research is
expected to contribute to the fundamental understanding of turbulent flows in
complex domains subjected to varied magnetic field configurations. The use of
graphics processing units for fluid flow simulations has recently enabled
significant advantages in speed and accuracy and this work will also be extended
to clusters of multiple graphics processing units.