* 1130359
* Spatial patterns of coral-vermetid interactions: short-term effects and long-term consequences
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Craig Osenberg, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

Intellectual Merit. Ecological surprises are most likely to be manifest in
diverse communities where many interactions remain uninvestigated. Coral reefs
harbor much of the world's biodiversity, and recent studies by the investigators
suggest that one overlooked, but potentially important, biological interaction
involves vermetid gastropods. Vermetid gastropods are nonmobile, tube-building
snails that feed via an extensive mucus net. Vermetids reduce coral growth by up
to 80%, and coral survival by as much as 60%. Because effects vary among coral
taxa, vermetids may substantially alter the structure of coral communities as
well as the community of fishes and invertebrates that inhabit the coral
reef.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a suite of
experimental and observational studies that: 1) quantify the effects of four
species of vermetids across coral species to assess if species effects and
responses are concordant or idiosyncratic; 2) use meta-analysis to compare
effects of vermetids relative to other coral stressors and determine the factors
that influence variation in coral responses; 3) determine the role of coral
commensals that inhabit the branching coral, Pocillopora, and evaluate how the
development of the commensal assemblage modifies the deleterious effects of
vermetids; 4) determine how vermetid mucus nets affect the local environment of
corals and evaluate several hypotheses about proposed mechanisms; and 5) assess
the long-term implications of vermetids on coral communities and the fishes and
invertebrates that depend on the coral.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
This collaborative research program will facilitate a broader understanding of
coral reef ecology and the factors that impinge on the health of these highly
valued, but imperiled, ecosystems. The investigators will continue our
involvement in the Plan de Gestion de l'Espace Maritime, a management plan and
network of marine protected areas around the island of Moorea. For example, by
incorporating studies of vermetids into the assessment of the Moorea MPA network
the work also will provide knowledge about possible deleterious effects of MPAs
mediated through the reduction in harvest of vermetids. Project personnel will
interact with local Polynesian community groups (e.g., Te Pu 'Atiti'a) to
benefit from their traditional knowledge and to inform them of the research
program. One supported student will lead up an effort to link with area schools
(to be designed in collaboration with participants in the 'Atiti'a group). Team
members include researchers and students from three countries: USA, New Zealand,
and France. Two US-based graduate students and approximately four undergraduate
students will be involved each year, and will benefit from working with
scientists from these countries as well as with local teachers and elders.
Regular exchanges between participating academic institutions (e.g., interfacing
with the "Ocean Bridges" program) will enhance the interdisciplinary research
and cultural experiences. This research will be conducted at the Moorea Coral
Reef LTER site and will contribute to process-oriented studies that complement
sampling conducted by MCR-LTER, as well as research conducted at the nearby
French laboratory, Le Centre de Recherches Insulaires et Observatoire de
l'Environnement (CRIOBE).