* 1130711
* Collaborative Research: Interwoven biogeochemical cycles and biological transformations of mercury and selenium in the upper ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* William Fitzgerald, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,150.00

Researchers from the University of Connecticut, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, and Harvard University plan to address three questions related to
the global biogeochemical mercury (Hg) and selenium (Se) cycles, namely (1) what
are the abiotic and biotic mechanisms for formation of methylated Hg and Se
compounds in the upper ocean?; (2) what is the role of photochemical reactions
in air-sea exchange of Hg and Se?; and (3) how are the biogeochemical cycles of
Hg and Se related? To attain their goal, the scientists will participate in a
cruise of opportunity to the Tropical North Pacific, as well as carry out
laboratory culture and controlled incubation experiments. Samples collected
during the cruise will be used to determine the speciation of Hg and Se, as well
as obtain measurements of photochemical status (i.e., UV, ozone, light levels,
chemical (i.e., natural organic matter, redox metals), and biological (i.e.,
chlorophyll a, phytoplankton composition,proteomics, estimates of carbon
mineralization) properties. The laboratory culture and controlled incubation
experiments will be used to determine the specific pathways for Hg and Se
compound formation and degradation, especially the role of photochemical
transformations, as well as assess the importance of Se as a binding ligand for
Hg in the marine environment. Lastly, the researchers will continue to develop
the oceanic sub-model of the GEOS-Chem global biochemical Hg model to include
the cycling of Se and will use the model to ascertain the importance of various
processes of conversion and evasion in the global cycles of these two elements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, this study has societal
benefits because it would improve our understanding on how mercury enters
seafood which impacts human health. Results from the research would be included
in curriculum material. One graduate student from the University of Connecticut,
one postdoc from Harvard University, and one graduate student from Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution would be supported and trained as part of the project.