* 1130994
* International:  Student Exchange for Research on Nano/Biotechnology
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Alan Johnson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2016
* USD 136,710.00

A workforce capable of interacting across national borders is critical, not only
to the future health of our economy, but also to continued innovation and
leadership in science and technology. NBIC/MINATEC Student Exchange for Research
on Nano/Biotechnology will develop a cadre of young scientists with the skills
and experience to engage globally in science and engineering research and to do
so in the context of a synergistic research platform. The program is a two-way
student exchange and research collaboration between the Nano/Bio Interface
Center at the University of Pennsylvania (NBIC) and the Micro- and
Nanotechnologies Innovation Campus in Grenoble, France (MINATEC).
Nanobiotechnology is an inherently multidisciplinary field that addresses
fundamental concepts and technological applications of some of the most critical
issues of our time. These range from biomedical sensors and targeted drug
delivery, to energy harvesting and energy efficiency, to monitoring and
remediation of air and water quality. Educating students in the fundamental
principles of nanobiotechnology prepares them to contribute across boundaries in
these evolving fields. A partnership with Alabama State University will extend
these opportunities to its diverse student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this program is based on the increased understanding of fundamental
issues that will result from the research. Specifically, the electron transport
mechanisms in new DNA hybrid nanostructures, the effect of surfaces on cell and
protein interactions, and the behavior of biological colloids in fluidic
environments. The ability to understand and control these processes will enable
new strategies for biomolecular electronics, biosensors, and medical
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this program are several fold. A new population of students will be trained
in the cross-disciplinary field of nano biotechnology. These students will have
developed the additional skills necessary to interact effectively in a multi-
cultural global environment. Furthermore, the recruitment strategy and
partnerships will lead to a diverse student group with the skills to take
leadership positions in a variety of career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE) and the NSF Directorate for Engineering (ENG), Office of the Assistant
Director (OAD), and the Engineering and Education Centers (EEC).