* 1130000
* Design and Development of Fire-Resistant Ferritic Steels for Structural Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Dieter Isheim, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,932.00

The research is to integrate two novel scientific concepts in the design and
fabrication of fire-resistant steels. First, instead of carbon, nanosized
coherent copper precipitates will be used for primary strengthening. The low
carbon content makes the steel readily weldable without pre- or post-heat
treatment. Coherent precipitates tend to coarsen slower with increasing
temperature, resulting in less strength degradation at higher temperatures.
Second, either Nb or Ti will be used as an alloying element to delay the
transition to the high-temperature regime in which rapid grain growth,
precipitate coarsening, and dislocation recovery may occur, and to promote
secondary strengthening by the formation of metal carbide precipitates.
&lt;br/&gt;The research provides the intellectual basis for designing stronger
fire-resistant steels that meet tougher standards, with results that are readily
portable to other high-temperature applications such as boilers, turbines and
powertrains for enhanced efficiency. Further, this research addresses nanoscale
structure-property relationships in ferrous alloys that are often considered to
be mature and old-fashioned, an erroneous impression that permeates throughout
the community. Outreach activities conducted by the principal investigators will
represent the first step to addressing this fallacy, resulting in students who
can think about nanotechnology in broader terms, in industrial scientists and
engineers who are better informed about modern advances in metallurgy, and in
government agencies willing to take a lead in technology developments. With
millions of tons of steels being used in buildings, highways, and bridges every
year, many opportunities await the development of inexpensive, easily produced,
high-performance steels.&lt;br/&gt;