* 1130035
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Worldwide Rise of Private Higher Education
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Francisco Ramirez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 10/31/2012
* USD 8,864.00

SES - 1130035&lt;br/&gt;Francisco Ramirez (PI)&lt;br/&gt;Elizabeth Bruckner (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research: The
Worldwide Rise of Private Higher
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Private higher education is
now the fastest growing segment of higher education. The massive expansion of
private higher education institutions (PHEI) is a relatively new, and somewhat
unexpected, phenomenon in the history of higher education. This dissertation
examines the growth of private higher education worldwide, and asks: What
explains the worldwide expansion of private higher education? Specifically,
under which conditions do nation-states shift responsibilities for structuring
educational opportunities away from the state towards the market?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To that end, the project focuses on the role of
international governmental organizations (IGOs) in the diffusion of global
models for higher education policies. My project relies on a combination of
sources: It draws on policy documents produced by various stakeholders to
examine dominant models for higher education systems. It also examines the
effect of national budgets as well as international pressures on the decisions
of nations to promote the expansion of the private higher education sector.
Finally, the dissertation includes an explicitly comparative case study of
nations that have predominantly public higher education systems with nations
relying primarily on private non-profit, and private for-profit institutions.
This project will be the first of its kind to apply a combination of qualitative
and quantitative, longitudinal analysis to investigate the factors that have
furthered the privatization of higher education around the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this
research may advance our understanding of how complex globalization dynamics
affect social policies pursued by nation states. In addition, this research
project will produce original dataset to be disseminated not only in the
academic community, but also among national and international policy makers. By
collecting never-before-compiled data on the year of privatization, the dataset
will be the first step towards conducting causal analysis of the effects of
privatization on outcomes such as access and equity. As such, findings from this
research will provide insights for international and national policies that may
ultimately contribute to improve access and equity in systems of higher
education worldwide.