* 1130655
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Alternative Agrifood Politics in Massachusetts: Social Movements and Policy Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Deborah Martin, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The alternative agrifood movement is a broad-based social movement that is
working to build more sustainable and socially just agriculture and food systems
in the United States. The movement is gaining influence among policy-makers,
both at the municipal and state levels through new institutional structures such
as Food Policy Councils, and at the national level, in debate concerning U.S.
agricultural policy. Alternative agrifood movement politics emphasize the
advantages of localized or regionalized agrifood systems, yet the imaginaries of
local places that form the foundation for these alternative visions remain
understudied. This doctoral dissertation research project works with the leaders
of alternative agrifood movement organizations in one state (Massachusetts) to
answer the following questions: (1) How do alternative agrifood movement actors
envision future agrifood systems?; (2) What spatial imaginaries are present in
narratives of agrifood system change?; and (3) How are alternative agrifood
movement ideals communicated to policy makers? In-depth, narrative interviews
with organization leaders and documentary analysis of organization publications
will be used to conduct a thematic analysis of the objectives and visions for
change present within the movement, and will focus on the role played by
imaginaries of local places in the formation of these political objectives. In
addition, focus groups will be used to bring movement leaders together to
produce scenarios for future agrifood system change. The findings will
demonstrate whether and how individuals and groups of actors within the
alternative agrifood movement draw on imaginaries of "local" places to develop
visions for future agrifood system change, and the ways in which these visions
are communicated to policy-makers. The investigators expect to find a wide
variety of visions for the future of agrifood systems and anticipate that this
research will generate an improved understanding of the dynamics of such place-
based politics and their role in contemporary debates surrounding sustainability
and justice in the agrifood system.

Drawn from geographic theories of place and place-based politics, political
ecology, and narrative approaches to social movement theory, this research will
build a place-based analysis of visions for agrifood system change with the
alternative agrifood movement in Massachusetts. The focus on movement narratives
draws attention to the shared generation of meaning that is used to develop and
communicate political goals to the public and to policy-makers. Contemporary
alternative agrifood movement narratives are overwhelmingly place-based,
focusing on a vision of small-scale, rural agriculture that is accessible to
consumers and integrated into communities. The analysis conducted for this
research will examine the ways in which such place-based narratives are
constructed, and the ways in which movement organizations work to translate
these political visions of agrifood system change through policy reform at the
state level. This doctoral dissertation research project also contributes to an
emerging national research agenda that seeks to better understand visions for
transformative change in agrifood systems, and by focusing on the connection of
agrifood politics to constructions place, will provide new tools for dialogue
between policy-makers and the alternative agrifood movement.