* 1130589
* Collaborative Research:  Ion Irradiation-Induced Nanocrystallization of Metallic Glasses and Its Effects on Their Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Lin Shao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2016
* USD 190,000.00

The main objectives of this collaborative research project are to develop an
understanding of the mechanisms responsible for nanocrystal phase formation when
metallic glasses are subjected to ion irradiation, and to quantify the resulting
effects on the materials' mechanical behavior. The project will employ monomer-
ion irradiation, ion irradiation at elevated temperatures, and cluster ion
irradiation to promote direct crystallization of cascade regions so as to
achieve tunable crystal densities, sizes and distributions. This portion of the
work will contribute to fundamental understanding of radiation responses of
metallic glasses including details of ion irradiation induced structural
evolution occurring over different time scales involving damage cascade
creation, thermal spike formation, and structural relaxation. The project will
utilize nanoindentation and micro pillar compression experiments to quantify
resulting hardness, elastic modulus and ductility. This portion of work will
identify the roles of nanocrystals on the mechanical response of metallic
glasses, and contribute to fundamental understanding of shear band nucleation
and propagation, and deflection and attenuation by nanocrystals of different
mechanical strengths and interaction cross sections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
expected that this study will contribute to new fundamental understanding of the
mechanisms responsible for the creation of nanocrystals in metallic glasses by
ion irradiation, and the role of the altered structures in the modification of
the materials' mechanical response. Ion irradiation will be used as a method to
precisely introduce excessive free volume into a metallic glass, and will
therefore provide a means to understand its intrinsic properties, i.e., the role
of free volume in determining amorphous-to-crystalline transitions. With
nanocrystals embedded in an amorphous matrix acting as stress release centers,
the ion beam modified surface is expected to demonstrate enhanced ductility for
a wide range of materials applications in harsh environments. The study
represents a strong collaboration which reaches across both institutional bounds
(university and government laboratories) as well as interdisciplinary bounds
(materials science, nuclear engineering, mechanical engineering and applied
physics). In addition, the nature of this cross-disciplinary collaboration and
the involvement of researchers from several disciplines support the broad
dissemination of research results. The proposed effort also includes the
integration of our research findings into existing courses at participant
universities, and the development of an e-learning module on relevant topics.
The project is planned to promote research involvement of underrepresented
groups, both as graduate students and undergraduates.