* 1130019
* Quantifying Thermal and Chemical Conditions within Active Seafloor Vent Deposits
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Margaret Tivey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,637.00

A wide variety of unique chemosynthetic microbes live in the steep thermal and
geochemical gradients present in seafloor hydrothermal vent chimney walls, some
of which have the potential for producing unique biochemicals that can be used
for various health and pharmachological purposes. These microbes and others
survive in hydrothermal systems without the benefit of light from the sun and
feed off hot, reduced fluids spewing out of the subsurface on mid-ocean ridges.
The thermal gradients in waters coming from these vents change from temperatures
up to 400C to 2C on the order of a few centimeters. Due to these steep
gradients, it is not presently possible to make quantitative physical
measurements of the geochemical characteristics of these resulting
microhabitats. This in turn makes it difficult to understand how the various
unique microbial life forms that live in these extreme environments carry out
their metabolic processes and interact with one another and their changing
geochemical environment. This research solves the problem by creating a user-
friendly modeling code, based on reversible and irreversible thermodynamics and
incorporating the effects of advection and diffusion, that can be used to
determine specific geochemical characteristics of hydrothermal fluids in vent
chimneys given various chemical, thermal, and physical boundary conditions. The
code will be tested using the characteristics and measurements that have been
made at five well known hydrothermal vent sites. Broader impacts of the work
include building infrastructure for science through the creation of a user-
friendly bioenergetics code with a companion user manual that will be made
publicly available on the Internet. The code has crossover potential into the
field of microbiology and fields associated with examining life in extreme
environments and bio-prospecting, both of which have implications for
pharmacology and discovering new compounds to improve human health. In addition,
the work also supports a female research scientist as well as trains a female
graduate student in computational geoscience.