* 1130590
* Structural Composites with High Biobased Content
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Chad Ulven, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 306,000.00

Materials derived from renewable resources have increasing interest today since
they can help reduce our dependence on petrochemical based materials. With any
new composite material system, understanding the properties as a function of
matrix resin structure and composition as well as fiber type, surface
functionalization, and fiber loading is critical. Thus, the focus of the project
is to understand the impact of critical design variables on performance of
composites using a new biobased resin system in combination with natural fibers
as reinforcement. Preliminary experiments using this new resin system along with
natural fibers have shown that the composites have promising structural
properties and can lead to a biobased composite system with high biocontent, 60%
or greater. Structure-property studies of the matrix resin system will be
carried out to understand the impact of variables such as epoxy functionality,
anhydride crosslinker, catalyst and loading, and curing conditions on properties
such as modulus, impact resistance, glass transition temperature, thermal
stability, water sorption, and durability. Composites with glass fiber
reinforcement along with natural fibers will be prepared and the effect of fiber
treatment, fiber loading on the properties will be evaluated. The durability of
the matrix resin and resulting composite systems will be explored. Structure-
process-property relationships will be established for the biocomposites
produced with regards to durability for use as a structural construction grade
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of materials derived largely from
agricultural products is a key component of a sustainable future and can lead to
a reduction of dependence on petrochemical derived materials, reduced energy
usage, and a reduction in carbon emissions. The scientific results of this
project can lead to the development of a new biobased structural composite
material system meeting the goals of sustainability as well as the performance
requirements for structural applications. The focus of the project is to
understand the influence of each component of the biobased composite system
(resin, fiber, and resin-fiber interface) on important properties of the
composite as they relate to structural performance and durability. &lt;br/&gt;