* 1130996
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Woody Plant Encroachment in Semiarid Rangelands of Argentina: Changes in Carbon Stocks, Albedo, and Radiative Forcing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Jennifer Swenson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze the consequences of
woody plant encroachment on ecosystem carbon stocks and albedo changes at
regional scale in the Western Pampas grasslands, Argentina. Land cover change
dynamics alter ecosystem and climate functioning primarily through changes in
matter cycles and energy fluxes. Woody plant encroachment in semiarid rangelands
is a global process of land cover change driven primarily by changes in land use
practices. The widespread increase in woody plant cover alters ecosystem
distribution of carbon and other nutrients and influences the radiative balance
due to the different reflective properties of grasses, soil and woody plants.
Despite the fact that rangelands comprise almost 45% of the global land surface,
our understanding of the process of encroachment is limited, in most cases, to
fine resolution studies of the northern hemisphere. In this study a space-for-
time substitution approach will be used to analyze changes in C stocks in the
woody plant, grass, litter and soil organic carbon pools and changes in albedo
along an encroachment gradient. Field measurements along this gradient will be
scaled up with the use of sub-pixel woody plant cover estimates derived from
moderate resolution satellite imaginary. To understand the temporal component of
the process of encroachment, woody plant cover change dynamics will be analyzed
between 1880, 1960 and 2009. Historical land surveys (1880) will be digitized
and sampling and statistical procedures will be used to develop estimates of
woody plant cover. Aerial photographs (1960) and high resolution panchromatic
satellite images (2009) will be processed using spatial wavelets and texture
analysis, and moderate resolution images (2010) using multi-date spectral
mixture models, in order to assess the changes in woody plant cover over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be among the first to investigate
spatio-temporal dynamics of woody plant encroachment and its consequences on C
stock and albedo at a regional scale in the southern hemisphere. Results will be
critical for more complete accounting of C and the radiative forcing associated
with woody encroachment in semiarid rangelands across the globe. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.