* 1130275
* Mechanics of Intraocular Pressure Increase Associated with Genetic Factors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Julia Richards, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2015
* USD 401,920.00

The research objective of this award is to use information emerging from
glaucoma genetics to inform understanding of the biomechanical processes by
which eye pressure is maintained. An interdisciplinary approach combines
engineering analyses and molecular genetic tools to study how molecular genetic
processes can affect the mechanics problem that leads to elevated eye pressure.
The research includes molecular analysis of circulatory fluids from cultured
media and donor eyes. Of particular relevance is quantification of myocilin, a
protein made by ocular tissues that has been implicated in traits that involve
elevated eye pressure. This information will be incorporated in
mathematical/computer models to study a key aspect of the eye?s circulation
system- the interaction of ocular fluid and fine meshwork tissues through which
the fluid percolates. The fluid-solid interaction results in forces and
pressures that can: (1) alter the tissue?s shape and flow and thereby produce
increased pressure and (2) provide stimulus to initiate a biological signaling
process to alter the flow, and thereby control
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on the mechanobiology of ocular tissue
and elevated eye pressure has direct application to both ocular hypertension and
glaucoma. Ocular hypertension affects about 10% of the population over age 40.
Millions of people worldwide eventually develop glaucoma, making it one of the
leading causes of irreversible blindness, at great personal and societal costs.
The knowledge gained will also be relevant to organs such as the kidney, the
liver and the lymphatic system, having mesh-like tissues similar to the
trabecular meshwork of the eye. The education plan includes training of 3
graduate and 6 Research Experience for Undergraduate students. These will come
from the two UM campuses and from neighboring institutions to expand the
project?s impact. Since the project combines cutting-edge research from diverse
technical fields, it offers the students an opportunity to work in a unique,
interdisciplinary setting.