* 1130340
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Holocene Climate and Environmental Change in the Great Basin of the Western United States: A Paleolimnological Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* David Porinchu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,984.00

Recent research in the Great Basin has demonstrated the need for quantitative,
high-resolution temperature reconstructions that extend understanding of past
thermal regimes further into the last 10,000 years. This doctoral dissertation
research will assess recent environmental change and human-related influences on
a suite of lakes in the central Great Basin, and it will develop high-resolution
temperature reconstructions spanning the past 8,000 years, with an emphasis on
the two most recent warm intervals, the Medieval Climate Anomaly and the
Holocene Thermal Maximum. The doctoral student will gather data from a network
of sites will be collected in the central Great Basin and analyze these
materials in search of signals of past climatic changes. Lake sediments
collected from this network will be measured for a variety of physical and
biological indicators to include sub-fossil chironomids, sediment organic
content, biogenic silica, mercury concentration, spheroidal carbonaceous
particles, grain size, and macroscopic charcoal. These indicators will be used
to characterize the recent temperature changes and pollution loadings along with
long-term changes to productivity, temperatures, and fire histories in the
region. Accurate chronological control will be ensured through lead-210 dating
the recent sediment and accelerator mass spectrometer radiocarbon dates on
sedimentary charcoal and identifiable plant remains. The results from the
research will be compared with other paleoclimate reconstructions to gain a
better understanding of the spatial and temporal climatic changes in the Great
Basin.

The results of this project will facilitate a more thorough examination of the
influence of temperature on effective moisture and aridity in the Great Basin
over the past 8,000 years. This will further contribute to basic understanding
of the response of aquatic ecosystems to past and possibly future environmental
change. Project results also should help identify how various human-related
factors have influenced the structure and composition of these lakes during the
most recent centuries. An ever-increasing supply of freshwater is required for
the urban areas in the Great Basin, which have experienced dramatic population
growth in recent decades. This research will help understand the long-term
natural variability of thermal and moisture regimes for this region. The project
also should help enhance decision making with regard to water policy and assist
in adaptations to future climate variability and change. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.