* 1130028
* Phase Change Materials in Concrete: A New Strategy to Improve the Thermal Damage Resistance and Thermal Energy Efficiency of Concrete Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Narayanan Neithalath, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 352,004.00

This research develops a single-point solution to simultaneously address issues
of energy efficiency and thermal damage linked deterioration of concrete
elements through phase change effects. The incorporation of phase change
materials (PCMs) with a suitable phase transition temperature and enthalpy
allows a passive system such as concrete to provide temperature-linked storage
and release of thermal energy. This phase change behavior is beneficially
harnessed to: (i) limit temperature rise and associated deformations and
stresses to reduce the risk of thermal cracking in concrete elements and (ii)
facilitate the regulation of the internal ambient temperature in buildings
through heat absorption and release from PCMs. A suite of interrelated studies
at the material-scale comprises the characterization of heat signatures related
to cement hydration and phase transformation, delivery strategies for the chosen
PCMs in concrete and its survivability, and the thermo-mechanical evaluation of
the composite as a function of PCM type, volume and extent of dispersion. At the
system-scale, studies will evaluate the ability of PCMs to limit thermal
cracking in restrained concrete members and enhance the energy efficiency of
concrete enclosures. A detailed understanding of the material- and system-level
interactions will help correlate structure-engineering property relationships
for the PCM-concrete composite. The multi-physics design approach provides a
better understanding of the material response and facilitates the deployment of
these novel multi-functional materials in concrete applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides dynamic solutions to the energetic
challenges of the built environment. Reductions in building energy consumption
and the resultant shift of the buildings HVAC loads from peak to off-peak hours
enables and rationalizes power-grid efficiency. Auto-adaptive, phase change
solutions are harnessed to limit thermal damage caused by environmental forces
in restrained concretes resulting in improved structural service-life and
durability. By making holistic contributions towards the energy efficiency and
durability of infrastructure, this research drives a new paradigm in ensuring a
sustainable built environment. From an educational perspective, this research
will train graduate and undergraduate students on important multi-disciplinary
problems pertaining to energy-efficient and damage-resistant material design.
Modules on energy efficient construction materials will also be developed for
middle and high school students. Rapid dissemination of the research to the
broader research and practicing community will be accomplished through
scientific publications and presentations, industrial workshops and professional
education courses. &lt;br/&gt;