* 1130081
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Farmer-Herder Conflict, Environmental Change, and Institutional Response in Mali
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Leif Brottem, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 07/31/2012
* USD 11,940.00

In dryland sub-Saharan Africa, local institutions will play a critical role in
climate change adaptation yet little is known about how they mediate issues
relating to resource access, competition, and conflict in vulnerable areas. A
crucial climate change adaptation strategy in these areas is agropastoral
mobility, which demands sophisticated institutions that function across spatial
scales. The premise of this project is that the Republic of Mali, as a model of
democratic decentralization, provides an excellent case for addressing these and
other critical issues relating to resource-dependent livelihoods in rural
dryland areas. The research objective of this project is to examine the
connections between changing systems of local governance, resource access,
conflict, and environmental change in Mali by answering three interrelated
questions. These questions focus on three specific areas of change: 1) the
influence of decentralization on shared resource access arrangements between
settled farmers and mobile herders; 2) the impact of land cover and vegetation
change on livestock movements; and 3) how these institutional and environmental
changes are affecting farmer-herder relations. In order to answer these
questions, this project integrates three components of multi-temporal
institutional and biophysical analyses of dryland resource access. First, it
utilizes longitudinal comparative analysis of four Malian municipalities that
are following divergent institutional trajectories vis-a-vis resource access.
The second is a multi-scale participatory land use and cover change (LUCC)
analysis that focuses on broad scale agricultural expansion linked to village-
scale changes in the spatial patterning of cropped fields. The last component
focuses on the measurement and interpretation of inter-annual trends in
vegetation phenology. This activity includes a participatory exercise with
livestock herders designed to understand the implications of changing phenology
patterns for their livelihoods.

The trans-disciplinary and place-based approach of this project not only
contributes to the scholarship on dryland agrarian livelihoods; it also opens
new theoretical avenues for the study of coupled social-ecological systems more
generally. This enables the project to critically engage with the hypothesis
that changing environmental conditions are a potential driver of political
conflict in sub-Saharan Africa. Engagement with the scholarship on resource
conflict will also produce relevant insights for the study of decentralized
governance and common property resource management. The project outcomes will
have direct relevance for the livelihoods of smallholder farmers and herders
through its investigation of how equitably local institutions provide resource
access to competing user groups. A related impact comes through its study of how
effectively these institutions manage everyday disputes over resource access and
prevent them from escalating into larger social conflicts. These are two of the
most pressing challenges facing local authorities across dryland sub-Saharan
Africa.