* 1130856
* Collaborative Research:  Mechanics of Growing Bodies: A Riemannian Geometric Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Arash Yavari, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2015
* USD 230,000.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate a differential/Riemannian
geometric formulation for the mechanics of growing bodies. The proposed work is
based on the concept of a changing material manifold whose dynamics predicts the
evolution of the relaxed state of a material body. This theory is applicable to
biological tissues in which growth and remodeling are coupled with large
deformations. To achieve the research objective of this proposal, a theory of
continuum mechanics based on a dynamic material manifold is introduced that
couples the growth/remodeling of biological tissues with their large
deformations. The proposed research will put growth and similar nonlinear
problems into a unified geometric theory that has a dynamic material manifold.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of this project is to promote the use of
geometric techniques in the mechanics community by demonstrating some of their
advantages and applications. The results of this project will be presented in a
language accessible to engineers, and they will demonstrate the conceptual
clarifications and modeling advantages brought by the geometric approach. A
major educational impact of this research is the establishment of a general
framework for learning and teaching growth mechanics in biology using the
language of mathematics and mechanics, a context, which is currently missing in
the biophysics. This project will foster opportunities for collaborative
research between the University of Maine and Georgia Institute of Technology and
facilitate broadening the participation of undergraduate students in the cutting
edge research in the field of biomechanics.