* 1130402
* IRES: Development of Global Scientists and Engineers by Collaborative Research on Variation-Aware Nanometer IC Design
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This project will provide U.S. students with the opportunity to gain
international research experience in verifying and designing nanometer silicon-
based nanometer integrated computing and communication systems. U.S. students
will spend four weeks per year at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China. This
project will support the collaborative research and education activities between
the MSLAB Lab at University of California at Riverside and the Design Automation
Lab (EDA) at Tsinghua University of China. The team will jointly tackle the
challenges of verifying and designing silicon-based nanometer VLSI systems. The
collaborative research projects will focus on the efficient statistical full-
chip power estimation considering process variations with spatial correlations
and chip yield improvement techniques due to power and timing variations. U.S.
students will jointly develop new statistical leakage, dynamic and total power
estimation techniques and statistical chip yield optimization techniques for
design and optimization of nanometer high performance integrated computing and
communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The proposed
collaborative educational and research activities will provide unique training,
mentoring, networking and intellectual development opportunities for U.S.
students. Such international engagement will benefit the students' entire
careers and help improve their competitiveness and competency as scientists and
engineers. Finally, the joint research will strengthen existing computer
engineering research and education programs, and broaden the collaborative
research works at UC Riverside in synergy with one well-recognized and funded
research program in China. The curriculum and textbook development will boost
the VLSI design technique research at UC Riverside and promote the statistical
VLSI performance modeling and estimation field as a scholarly discipline.