* 1130825
* Collaborative Research:  Processing and Properties of Cellulose Films for MEMS Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Christopher Kitchens, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,729.00

The objective of this grant is to investigate the feasibility of cellulose
nanocrystals as an alternative to silicon for microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS). The structure, mechanical properties, surface chemistry, and ability to
self-assemble into well defined architectures over multiple scales make
cellulose nanocrystals particularly attractive building blocks for advanced
materials. In this research, cellulose nanocrystals with controlled size
distributions and surface chemistries will be processed to form dry films and
fabricated into devices using conventional MEMS fabrication techniques such as
lithography and etching. Finally, the properties of the resulting devices will
be characterized to yield an interrelation between the cellulose nanocrystal
MEMS device properties, the cellulose nanocrystal dispersion microstructure, and
film processing conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research
will enable renewable cellulose materials to be used as an inexpensive
alternative to the high-cost electronic grade silicon, which is currently the
industry standard for advanced sensor platforms. Results of this research have
the potential to transform the MEMS industry, as well as other silicon based
technologies. This would have considerable economic impact; Yole Developpement
projects the MEMS industry will exceed $13 billion in 2012. Even if the full
potential of this research is not realized, it will provide fundamental insight
into the processing of nanocylinders for advanced materials applications. The
research will also enhance a strong collaboration between Chemical Engineering
faculty at Auburn University and Clemson University. The research will
contribute to the education and training of two Ph. D. students, one post
doctoral researcher, and four undergraduate researchers. Graduate student
rotations in each of the PIs laboratory will provide a diverse perspective and
training for the advanced materials workforce. The research team will also
engage in outreach activities to foster the development of the next generation
of scientists and engineers.