* 1130395
* Operation of a Marine Atmospheric Sampling Facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Anthony Knap, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2014
* USD 234,818.00

The marine troposphere plays important roles in the global geochemical cycles of
many elements, in the global radiation budget, and in the global distribution of
organic compounds, nutrients, microbes, and pollutants. Our ability to sample
this space between the atmosphere and the sea is central to improving our
understanding of this dynamic zone. By virtues of its location in the western
North Atlantic Ocean, Bermuda has been a key location for numerous field studies
on the marine troposphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support through this grant,
researchers at the Bermuda institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS) will continue to
maintain and operate a state-of-the-art Tudor Hill facility for three more years
(September, 2011 through August, 2014). Operations will include the collection
of continuous meteorological data and weekly bulk aerosol samples and rainwater
samples. These data and samples will be archived at BIOS and made freely
available to the scientific community, as well as the collection of samples and
data for a variety of external research projects funded variously by NSF, NOAA,
NASA, and other agencies. Modest user fees will be requested for the collection
of samples or data in addition to those specified above or for other research
use of the facility. Anticipated net revenue from these user fees (ca. $10,000
per year) will be used to defray costs of site maintenance, equipment
replacement, and additional technician support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: In general terms, the continued operation of the Tudor Hill facility
will facilitate and augment research into the physics and chemistry of the lower
marine troposphere and ocean-atmosphere exchange processes in the North Atlantic
Ocean Basin -- topics that are of central importance to international research
initiatives such as GEOTRACES, COLAS, and IGAC. Regionally, this facility will
complement other ongoing time-series research in the Sargasso Sea, including the
Bermuda Atlantic Time Series (BATS), Hydrostation S, and the Ocean Flux Program
(OFP). As in the past, data and samples will be made available to support
graduate student research as well as undergraduate educational activities and
research.