* 1130284
* Chemical Defenses in a Toxic Dinoflagellate: Mechanisms and Constraints
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Hans Dam, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2015
* USD 468,979.00

Intellectual merit: Species of the dinoflagellate genus Alexandrium occur around
the globe, and some species, because of their toxin production, have been
hypothesized to be keystone species. Alexandrium produces chemical compounds
that appear to target different consumers. Neurotoxins such as PST target
metazoan grazers. In preliminary experiments in their laboratory, the
investigators also verified the presence of reactive oxygen species that target,
at a minimum, protistan grazers. Such compounds reduce grazer fitness, and, at
least in the case of PST, have been shown to have profound evolutionary effects
on grazers. Grazer adaptation, in turn, can affect Alexandrium population
dynamics. A common assumption is that production of toxic compounds in
phytoplankton represents an adaptive defense. However, unequivocal experimental
evidence in support of this hypothesis is scarce. This project will be a
rigorous experimental test of the chemical defense hypothesis. The project's
investigators will invwestigate a series of experimentally falsifiable
hypotheses with both metazoan and protistan grazers challenged with Alexandrium.
This project will provide novel understanding of, and insight into, the factors
that determine grazer-induced toxin production, the relationship between degree
of chemical defense and susceptibility to grazing, and the costs and tradeoffs
of the purported mechanisms of chemical defense in Alexandrium. Verification or
refutation of the chemical defense hypothesis is essential to conceptual models
of the formation, control and persistence of toxic algal blooms, and chemically-
mediated predator-prey interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: There
is an immediate and urgent need to improve the public's awareness of publicly
funded science and the world's oceans. To help fill this need, the investigators
will work with professional educators to translate results from this study into
prepared curricular materials that meet national science standards. They will
make the results of this and related studies available to secondary educators
through their website "Predators and toxic prey," where educators will find
materials that can be incorporated into high school curricula. The investigators
also will present the website contents at workshops specifically targeted at
secondary school educators, and at meetings of professional educators. The lead
investigator and his team will continue to extend the results of research to lay
audiences, as well, through the website, lay articles and the "Aquakids" TV
series. This project will train one Ph.D. student and one or two undergraduates.
In addition, the proposed work will engage graduate and undergraduate students
in several areas of research from physiology to ecological and evolutionary
processes. In the process, these students will effectively be studying the
emergent properties that lead to adaptability and apply such perspectives to
oceanography.