* 1130500
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Stability and Disruption in Transnational Families
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Ruben Rumbaut, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2012
* USD 9,500.00

SES - 1130500&lt;br/&gt;Rub√©n G. Rumbaut (PI)&lt;br/&gt;M. Kathleen Dingeman-
Cerda (co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;University of California,
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research: Stability and
Disruption in Transnational
Families&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Since 1996, immigration and
deportation policies in the United States have grown increasingly restrictive.
As a result, deportations have increased more than sevenfold between 1995
(50,924) and 2009 (387,790). In response to this drastic increase in
deportations, human rights organizations have begun to document the consequences
for transnational families experiencing separation due to deportation. The
unintended consequences of family disruption on family members, especially U.S.
citizen children left behind in the U.S., turn out to parallel those experienced
by children with incarcerated parents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
examines how families affected by deportation cope with such separations and try
to mitigate the negative impact of family separation. In the process, the
research examines the effects of deportation on family dissolution (divorce,
abandonment), emigration, and other reconfigurations in transnational space. In
that sense, the project examines the degree to which transnational families can
play a proactive rather than merely reactive role in a fluid immigration and law
enforcement context. Data collection strategies draw on semi-structured life
history interviews conducted in the U.S. and El
Salvador.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
factors that help make families stable -- and, inversely, factors that lead to
family dissolution -- remains an important social issue of significant interest
to policy makers and the general public. Findings from this project may also be
of interest to social workers and law enforcement professionals in both the U.S.
and El Salvador and will be disseminated accordingly. Because of its explicit
cross-national component, the project will help build bridges between the
University of California and non-profit migrant rights organizations in Southern
California and El Salvador. Dissemination of research findings will include
presentations at sociological conferences, publication in social science and
general print media.