* 1130088
* Predictors of Success in Postsecondary STEM Education and Employment for Students with Autism
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Jose Blackorby, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 04/30/2016
* USD 449,966.00

The "Predictors of Success in Postsecondary STEM Education and Employment for
Students with Autism" study is providing the research in disabilities education
field with knowledge about promoting the success in STEM for students with
autism. The study is built on a conceptual model which postulates that STEM
success is influenced by a complex interaction between the individual and their
social contexts. Longitudinal analyses will enable the characterization of
academic and career trajectories and examine correlates of successful outcomes
for students with autism in STEM. The project team is analyzing data from the
U.S. Department of Education's National Longitudinal Transition Study-2 (NLTS2)-
a nationally representative dataset of students with autism and other disability
groups - to build an evidence base of factors associated with the postsecondary
education and initial employment experiences of young adults with autism in STEM
fields. The dataset was collected between 2001 and 2009, with a sample of more
than 11,000 students with disabilities. A secondary analysis of 900 students
with autism is being conducted to address four goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To
ascertain the prevalence and individual-level correlates of STEM-related college
majors among students with autism relative to those with other
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To examine the association between STEM
experiences and other services during high school with later STEM-related
academic achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To characterize the supports and
services received in colleges by students with autism in STEM majors, student
perception of those supports, and how they relate to STEM persistence and
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. To analyze patterns of employment in STEM-
related jobs among young adults with autism and correlates of postsecondary
degree completion and services received with successful career
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being evaluated by an independent
external evaluator, Dr. Leslie Cooksy, from the University of Delaware.
Dissemination activities target researchers, educators, administrators, people
with disabilities and their families, policy makers, and advocacy organizations.
Peer-reviewed journal publications will also advance dissemination to a broader
stakeholder group.