* 1130414
* RUI Collaborative Research: Spatial Realism in the Mussel Bed Disturbance Paradigm
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Patricia Halpin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2015
* USD 124,675.00

Our understanding of how physical disturbance shapes the structure of
populations and communities owes much to field studies of wave-generated gap
formation in mussel beds. Prior studies depict mussel beds as a non-equilibrium
system, in which disturbance is spatially unpredictable, generating a random
patchwork of mussel cover and gaps. This project will test assumptions and
predictions of an alternative view -- that disturbance shows predictable
landscape patterns that depend not merely on spatial distribution of external
forcing (wave stress) but also on biological processes determining the structure
of the aggregation. Specifically, spatially varying mussel productivity
(recruitment and growth), physiological stress, and predation interact to
produce landscape patterns in the structure of the mussel cover. Certain regions
of the mussel bed develop as mono-layers attached directly to the rock,
resisting disturbance. Other regions develop in multi-layered configurations
that when very deep force superficial mussels to attach solely to adjacent
mussels instead of the rock surface, and cause interior mussels to only weakly
attach to either rock or one another, favoring propagating disturbances.
Therefore, spatial patterns of gap formation and recovery emerge from a unified
landscape process.

Field work for this project emphasizes construction of a detailed GIS database
using some innovative sampling methods applied to >10 mussel bed sites in
Barkley Sound, British Columbia. GIS data layers for each site include wave
force, topography (tidal height, slope, and aspect), mussel size structure,
mussel bed thickness, differentiation of layering, and size-specific attachment
strengths stratified by layer. GIS interpolations and regression analyses will
be used to first examine assumptions of the hypothetical landscape process and
then test specific predictions regarding spatial patterns in the occurrence of
disturbance and recovery. Finally, controlled field experiments will test the
key proposition that different mussel bed structures cause different resistance
to-, extent of-, and recovery from disturbance.

Intellectual Merit: The landscape disturbance hypothesis includes several
processes that differ from previous conceptualizations of disturbance in this
system: steady state (equilibrium) structures influence the likelihood that
hydrodynamic stresses initiate a disturbance and whether once initiated the
disturbance will propagate. Thus, equilibrium processes condition essential
features of the disturbance process. Disturbance is predictable within
probabilistic limits, and the landscape patterns of disturbance reflect in
considerable measure the biological characteristics of a foundation species.
This reframing of the disturbance paradigm may apply to a diverse array of
layered ecosystems subject to perturbations (e.g. biofilms, coral reefs,
forests).

Broader Impacts: The project forms an alliance among a Minority Serving
Institution (Cal State LA), a comprehensive university with a unique center for
marine spatial analysis (Cal State Monterey Bay) and a Tier 1 Research
Institution (UCLA). The partners have considerable mentoring and outreach
support systems to draw upon. The project creates a co- mentoring program for
Cal State LA students, providing an intensive introduction to spatial analysis
of marine ecosystems, an unmatched field research experience, and exposure to
research labs of a PhD granting institution, including potential PhD advisors.
Numerous educational enrichment and training activities are planned for the
three campuses and the field venue, Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre. The project
will broaden participation of underrepresented minorities in biological
oceanography on the West Coast, and provide a unique resource in that regard.
Additional outreach to the public and K-12 teachers will be done through COSEE-
West.