* 1130367
* Supporting the Research of PUI Faculty and Undergraduates at the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology National Meetings
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Joseph Provost, American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 42,250.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The American Society for Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology (ASBMB) began explicitly including undergraduate research in
their national meetings, with an undergraduate poster competition over fourteen
years ago. Four years ago, with previous funding from NSF, this program was
expanded to include an undergraduate and Primary Undergraduate Institution (PUI)
faculty oral session. In the past three years, instead of an exclusive
undergraduate research session, undergraduate students and faculty from PUIs
have been integrated into the main scientific sessions, which have resulted in
broader exposure of their work to a much larger audience. The goal of this
proposal is for the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology to
increase the visibility of high quality, outcome-oriented undergraduate research
in the fields of biochemistry and molecular biology. To do this, the Education
and Professional Development Committee (EPD) of ASBMB, in collaboration with the
Undergraduate Affiliates Network Committee (UAN) will organize the following at
their national meeting in each of the next two years:&lt;br/&gt;* Select six
faculty members+ per year, from primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs), to
present their research in platform sessions at the annual national ASBMB
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;* Select three undergraduates per year to present their
research in platform sessions at the national ASBMB meeting and facilitation of
maximal scientific understanding by undergraduates of sessions they
attend.&lt;br/&gt;The location of the two events will be San Diego, CA for April
21-25, 2012 and Boston, MA in April 20-24, 2013.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The award will contribute to the professional development of
the PUI faculty involved by providing them the opportunity to keep current with
cutting edge science and allowing them to present their research and obtain
feedback. The meeting will also enhance the science education of the
undergraduates involved by increasing their knowledge and enhancing their oral
communication skills. In addition, ASBMB will work to have a balance of
underrepresented students and faculty represented at the two meetings. The
ASBMB's track record in this area is strong with 54-71% of those invited, within
the years 2007-2010, being women or underrepresented minorities.