* 1130245
* Collaborative Research: Management and Implementation of US GEOTRACES Eastern Pacific Zonal Transect
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2016
* USD 561,412.00

The mission of the International GEOTRACES Program (www.geotraces.org), of which
the U.S. chemical oceanography research community is a founding member, is "to
identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of
these distributions to changing environmental conditions" (GEOTRACES Science
Plan, 2006). In the United States, ocean chemists are currently in the process
of organizing a zonal transect in the eastern tropical South Pacific (ETSP) from
Peru to Tahiti as the second cruise of the U.S.GEOTRACES Program. This Pacific
section includes a large area characterized by high rates of primary production
and particle export in the eastern boundary associated with the Peru Upwelling,
a large oxygen minimum zone that is a major global sink for fixed nitrogen, and
a large hydrothermal plume arising from the East Pacific Rise. This particular
section was selected as a result of open planning workshops in 2007 and 2008,
with a final recommendation made by the U.S.GEOTRACES Steering Committee in
2009. It is the first part of a two-stage plan that will include a meridional
section of the Pacific from Tahiti to Alaska as a subsequent expedition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for management of the
U.S.GEOTRACES Pacific campaign to a team of scientists from the University of
Southern California, Old Dominion University, and the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution. The three co-leaders will provide mission leadership, essential
support services, and management structure for acquiring the trace elements and
isotopes samples listed as core parameters in the International GEOTRACES
Science Plan, plus hydrographic and nutrient data needed by participating
investigators. With this support from NSF, the management team will (1) plan and
coordinate the 52-day Pacific research cruise described above; (2) obtain
representative samples for a wide variety of trace metals of interest using
conventional CTD/rosette and GEOTRACES Sampling Systems; (3) acquire
conventional JGOFS/WOCE-quality hydrographic data (CTD, transmissometer,
fluorometer, oxygen sensor, etc) along with discrete samples for salinity,
dissolved oxygen (to 1 uM detection limits), plant pigments, redox tracers such
as ammonium and nitrite, and dissolved nutrients at micro- and nanomolar levels;
(4) ensure that proper QA/QC protocols are followed and reported, as well as
fulfilling all GEOTRACES Intercalibration protocols; (5) prepare and deliver all
hydrographic-type data to the GEOTRACES Data Center (and US data centers); and
(6) coordinate cruise communications between all participating investigators,
including preparation of a hydrographic report/publication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is part of an international
collaborative program that has forged strong partnerships in the
intercalibration and implementation phases that are unprecedented in chemical
oceanography. The science product of these collective missions will enhance our
ability to understand how to interpret the chemical composition of the ocean,
and interpret how climate change will affect ocean chemistry. Partnerships
include contributions to the infrastructure of developing nations with
overlapping interests in the study area, in this case Peru. There is a strong
educational component to the program, with many Ph.D. students carrying out
thesis research within the program.