* 1130156
* IRES: Tropical Ecology Mentorship Program of CSU Dominguez Hills
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Terry McGlynn, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 02/29/2016
* USD 149,626.00

This three-year International Research Experiences for Students project will
provide undergraduate students, graduate students, and K-12 teachers with an
international collaborative research experience in a tropical rainforest
setting. Under the joint mentorship of Terrence P. McGlynn of the California
State University Dominguez Hills and several U.S. and international research
partners, participants will spend eight summer weeks investigating contemporary
hypotheses in the field of trophic interactions by addressing the transfer of
energy and nutrients across trophic levels. Projects will address spatial
heterogeneity in resources and the consequences for ecological processes at the
community and ecosystem levels. These experiments will take place at La Selva
Biological Reserve in Costa Rica, in cooperation with Dr. Deedra McClearn of the
Organization for Tropical Studies. In each of the three years the participant
cohorts will include at least one graduate student, several undergraduate
students, and an inner-city teacher. Each cohort will also be joined by up to
two research recruits, talented students from underrepresented groups who are
unable to commit for a full summer, but who would benefit from exposure to
scientific research. The goal of this activity is to train talented students
from underrepresented groups to become field ecologists with experience in
international settings. To accomplish this goal the senior investigators will
mentor the students in their long-term tropical-field research projects, first
during an eight-week session at the tropical rain forest field station. The
students will then continue their research at their home institutions in a year-
round mentored research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the broader
impacts of this IRES program are the promotion of international research
collaborations; the creation of mentorships in the sciences for undergraduates
from underrepresented groups; involvement of undergraduates from primarily
undergraduate institutions in an active research environment with graduate
students, postdoctoral researchers and faculty; and extensive field research
experiences for minority undergraduates that should help increase the success of
these students in graduate programs in the sciences. The project will also
further research collaborations between U.S. and Costa Rican scientists and
other international researchers pursuing ongoing projects in Costa Rica.