* 1130160
* Reference And Extended Command Governors for Constrained Control: Theory and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ilya Kolmanovsky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 339,037.00

The objectives of this research are to advance Reference and Extended Command
Governor control theory and algorithms for systems, such as downsized systems,
that can presently fail to perform optimally due to lack of ability to handle
stringent state and control constraints. The Governors are predictive control
algorithms that augment high performance feedback loops and modify reference
commands to protect the system from constraint violation. In this research,
Reference and Extended Command Governor methods are developed for: (a) systems
with fast and slow dynamics, (b) linear systems with nonlinear constraints, (c)
systems with dynamics evolving on Lie groups, (d) systems with dynamic
disturbance models, and (e) for the case when Governors are placed inside
intentionally or unintentionally created feedback loops. The research progresses
from developing the theory and algorithms, to treating high impact automotive
and aerospace applications using simulations and experiments, to disseminating
research results for academic and industrial audience, and to incorporating
research results into courses to enhance student education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has a potential to benefit automotive and
aerospace transportation, energy efficiency, environment, defense, and
maintaining space infrastructure. Specifically, the advances made will: (a)
enable higher levels of automotive engine downsizing and vehicle fuel economy
improvements, (b) allow for a more aggressive use of aircraft gas turbine
engines during emergency maneuvering which will increase aircraft safety, (c)
extend the safe range and mission duration of very flexible aircraft (for a
variety of commercial and military use), (d) enhance attitude control and safe
rendezvous and proximity maneuvering capability for autonomous spacecraft, (e)
improve energy management of automotive and aerospace hybrid powerplants with
small energy storage. The research results disseminated through publications
(including a monograph), and implemented in a Matlab toolbox, will support
researchers, students and practitioners alike in their activities to develop and
implement the Reference and Extended Command Governors.