* 1130482
* A New Minimization Quantity for Global Active Structural / Acoustic Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Kent Gee, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 09/30/2014
* USD 342,047.00

The research objective of this award is to develop an active noise control
method that senses and controls a structure in a manner that minimizes acoustic
radiation. There are numerous applications where it is desirable to reduce noise
radiated from vibrating structures into an enclosed acoustic field, such as a
vehicle cabin. The research builds on a newly developed measure of vibration
that is referred to as composite velocity. The use of standard vibration
measurements for active control systems does not result in a minimization of
acoustic radiation, since the structural vibration and the radiated power are
not directly correlated. However, composite velocity is directly correlated with
acoustic radiation. Furthermore, the composite velocity is quite uniform across
the structure, making the method less sensitive to sensor location. These
properties will be exploited in complex structures, and the method will be
developed for structures including ribbed plates and cylindrical shells, which
are typical for important applications such as vehicles and aircraft
fuselages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
provide a compact, efficient solution for reducing noise exposure in numerous
applications, such as vehicle cabins (automobiles, locomotive engines, and heavy
equipment cabins) as well as aircraft cabins. The advantage of this active
control approach is that there is little sensitivity to sensor location (meaning
the sensor can largely be placed wherever convenient), the system is compact,
and the method achieves global reduction of the enclosed sound field. This will
result in improved communication, increased comfort, reduced noise fatigue, and
improved safety for vehicle occupants. Graduate and undergraduate science and
engineering students will benefit through involvement in the research and
classroom instruction based on the research. Results will be disseminated to the
scientific community, allowing others to explore and further develop the method,
as well as providing opportunities for commercial development.