* 1130541
* Evolution of Deep Sea Molluscs II
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ron Etter, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,339.00

The first explicit model of population differentiation and speciation in the
deep-sea fauna, the depth-differentiation hypothesis, was formulated in the
early 1990s. According to this theory, the potential for population
differentiation decreases with depth because the bathyal zone (200- 4000 m) has
stronger selective gradients and more opportunity for geographic isolation to
impede gene flow than does the more extensive and environmentally uniform
abyssal plain (>4000 m). To determine whether depth-related variation is
genetic, and therefore a consequence of evolutionary change, the PI has
developed new methods to extract and sequence mitochondrial DNA from archived
deep-sea molluscan species collected in earlier expeditions that had been fixed
in formalin and preserved in alcohol. These preliminary studies supported the
depth-differentiation hypothesis. They also revealed the limitations of using
preserved material. For this project, the PI describes 2 hypotheses about
evolution in the deep sea that emerged from the previous work: 1) The depth
differentiation hypothesis suggests population divergence decreases with depth;
and 2) A strong break in population structure at 3300 m might represent an
unrecognized phylogeographic barrier.

The PI will test each of these hypotheses with multiple independent loci using
deep-sea protobranch bivalves and recently developed statistical phylogeographic
and phylogenetic models. The aforementioned work relied on formalin-fixed
tissues, restricting analyses to a single locus (mtDNA). Nuclear loci are
essential as independent measures of population structure, gene flow and
historical influences, but are also critical to establish whether some of the
remarkable divergences the PI documented represent cryptic species. The new
material collected during the previous round of funding allowed the PI to
develop the necessary nuclear loci and assess their utility for this work. The
primary focus of this proposal is to use these new markers to test each of these
hypotheses and distinguish intra- versus inter-specific variation.

Intellectual Merit: The deep-sea supports one of the most diverse and unique
marine communities, the evolutionary and historical development of which is
virtually unknown. The proposed research will contribute very significantly to
answering the two most basic questions about evolutionary diversification in
this vast and remote environment: Where does it occur, and how? Analysis of the
strong bathymetric divergence in Deminucula atacellana will provide the first
detailed investigation of potential incipient speciation in a deep-sea organism
(apart from reducing environments) and possibly identify the scales and
mechanisms involved. It will also create a solid conceptual and methodological
context for future evolutionary studies in the deep sea and lay the groundwork
for understanding bathymetric and geographic variation at much larger scales
(e.g., among ocean basins or pan-Atlantic).

Broader Impacts: The research program will train undergraduate and graduate
students and public school teachers. At UMass-Boston, students and faculty have
outstanding opportunities to be directly involved in science education and
public outreach at all levels. Currently, the biology Department has an NSF-
Research Experiences for Undergraduate program, an NIH Initiative for Maximizing
Student Diversity (IMSD) Program, a Bridges to Baccalaureate Program, and an NSF
Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology program. All are oriented
toward underrepresented minorities, and students from each of these initiatives
have and will continue to be been involved in the PI's research. The campus has
a Boston Science Partnership Grant to upgrade high school science curricula and
is a Center of Ocean Science Education Excellence to foster public awareness of
ocean science. The PI will recruit undergraduates, graduate students, and
teachers into this research program, and topics in deep-sea biology will be
incorporated into university and high school curricula. The research also has
broad relevance for conservation and sustainable development of the deep-sea
ecosystem. Genetic population structure is a crucial component of biodiversity,
and has important implications for extinction potential from deep-sea
exploitation.