* 1130099
* Collaborative Research:  Next-generation Global Altimetric Maps of Internal Tide Energy Flux and Dissipation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,09/30/2016
* Harper Simmons, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2016
* USD 206,055.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Breaking internal tides are known to be a major
driver of deep-ocean diapycnal mixing. However, much of the energy input into
them is in the first few modes, which can propagate 1000's of kilometers before
breaking. As a result, little is known about where and how they break, in spite
of the known sensitivity of global circulation models to the geography of
mixing. Therefore, this study will construct a global map of low-mode internal
tide energy flux and dissipation by application of state-of-the-art techniques
to a combination of satellite altimetry, moorings, and a numerical model. The
approach captures both the non-uniform barotropic-to-baroclinic tide conversion
near rough topography as well as patchiness due to the non-uniform dissipation
of low-mode internal tides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global coverage of
satellite altimeters makes them the only practical observational tool available
for the task. However the poor spatial resolution of any single satellite, and
the inability of altimetry to detect temporally incoherent signals, have
hampered the interpretation of past altimetric estimates of low-mode internal
tide energy and energy flux. This study addresses these shortcomings in order to
produce the needed global maps:&lt;br/&gt;(1) To address the low-resolution
problem, the team will expand on their previous work (in which they used the
T/P-Jason tandem mission) by combining multiple satellite altimetric data from
T/P- Jason, T/P-Jason tandem, GFO, and ERS. The multi-satellite technique was
recently demonstrated in the North Pacific, and showed that spatial resolution
is improved to the point where the altimetric estimates agree with high-
resolution numerical models.&lt;br/&gt;(2) To understand the loss of coherence
of internal tide propagating in an ever-changing ocean, the PIs will analyze a
new high-resolution global simulation that includes a realistic internal tide
field as well as realistic meso- and large-scale ocean circulations. The model
estimate of how the non- uniform moving ocean makes internal tide incoherent
will be validated by the analysis of several long moored time series collected
around the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With these improvements, the techniques
should now be up to the task of mapping the low-mode internal tide's energy flux
and dissipation on the globe. In doing so, this project will lead to a better
understanding of the processes that affect the propagation and dissipation of
internal tide on a global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact of this work will be an improved
understanding and a parameterization of the magnitude and geography of
dissipation, of known importance to general circulation models. In addition, the
team will provide maps of altimetrically-observed internal tide quantities to
all researchers as well as the public via a website and/or direct communication
with the PI's. In addition to being of great use in planning experiments, such
maps will be of relevance for a variety of physical and biogeochemical studies.
The maps and the model simulations will be used in community outreach programs
such as APL's K-12 volunteer list and Seattle's Pacific Science Center. The
study will also educate three undergraduate students as part of the Washington
Space Grant program, a joint program between Washington State and NASA seeking
to encourage students at the University of Washington to pursue science careers.