* 1130793
* Collaborative Research: Development of a high-resolution real-time polarization image sensor for marine deployment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Molly Cummings, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2016
* USD 550,326.00

The PI's request funding to develop an integrated instrument package including a
polarized imaging sensor capable of measuring all Stokes parameters of the
optical field with high temporal and spatial resolution. This instrument package
will be deployed underwater and will be programmed to automatically record
measurements of the near-surface polarized optical field at regular time-steps
while re-orienting over the full solid angle. These measurements, used in
combination with measurements of the associated water's Inherent Optical
Properties and Monte Carlo based radiative-transfer modeling, are expected to
lead to enhanced understanding both of optical radiative transfer relevant to
remote sensing, and also of the adaptation mechanisms employed by biological
organisms, either to enhance their contrast for communication or to conceal
themselves against the polarized optical
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the PIs will have developed an underwater polarimetric camera that
can be deployed in variety of ocean conditions. This could lead to new
discoveries in engineering, oceanography, biology, geology, and physics. The
instrument itself may also lead to advancements in biomedical imaging, where
polarization has shown significant promise. The interdisciplinary nature of the
research will certainly appeal to a large number of groups, and is prime for
educational outreach for all age groups. All three PIs are actively engaged in
educational and community outreach programs.