* 1130364
* Collaborative Research:  Measurements and Implications of Graphene Adhesion - A Coherent Study via Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Nadya Mason, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 215,052.00

This grant provides funding for characterizing and manipulating the adhesive
properties of graphene, a single layer of carbon atoms densely packed into a
honeycomb lattice that have been shown to have extraordinary mechanical,
optical, thermal and electronic properties. Adhesion dictates graphene
morphology on surrounding materials, which is in turn closely tied to the
electronic and mechanical properties of the graphene. However, the adhesive
properties of graphene are largely unexplored, partly because the traditional
metrologies of adhesion become unsuitable when dealing with samples of extremely
small dimensions. This project bypasses previous limitations by extracting
adhesive properties directly from the morphology of graphene placed on patterned
substrate surfaces and nano-scale scaffolds. A metrology will be developed to
measure the adhesion between graphene and a wide-range of materials,
particularly using morphological changes on non-flat substrates. The material,
morphological, and environmental factors that influence graphene adhesion to
surfaces will be determined. Methods will be developed to manipulate the
mechanical properties of graphene using surface structures. Results will be
achieved through a research framework that integrates experiments (e.g., atomic
force microscopy, electronic transport, Raman spectroscopy) and theory (e.g.,
multi-scale theoretical and numerical modeling). There is currently great
interest in exploring applications for graphene in next-generation electronics
and advanced composite materials. Adhesion plays a pivotal role in the interplay
between graphene and other materials, so is a key to the success of future
graphene devices and applications. If successful, this project will contribute
to an understanding of the interplay between graphene adhesion and morphology
which could also have implications for other graphene properties. The energetic
framework and experimental protocols developed in this project can be readily
adapted to other ultrathin films, and thus have the potential to impact
metrology techniques for a wide range of other functional materials.