* 1130276
* FASEB SUMMER CONFERENCE "NAD METABOLISM AND SIGNALING" to be held September 409, 2011 in Lucca, Italy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Frances Lund, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 10,750.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The FASEB Summer Conference II will be held on the
Ciocco Resort in Lucca Italy, September 4 - 9, 2011. This is the second
conference that rotates between the US and Europe. The first conference was held
in 2009. This initial conference spurred considerable interdisciplinary cross-
talk and spawned new collaborative studies between scientists working in areas
that have been historically studied separately. There aren't any other
conferences that focus on the NAD metabolome as a whole. The major areas of NAD
metabolism and signaling research will be represented. The following nine
sessions will be covered: NAD Biosynthesis and Metabolism (2 sessions), NAD
metabolites and signaling, NAD dependent protein deacetylation by sirtuins,
Poly-ADP-ribose metabolism, NAD crosstalk and biology, Mono-ADP ribosylation,
Mechanisms of NAD-dependent gene regulation and Translational studies of NAD
metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The 2011 FASEB
Summer conference on NAD Metabolism and Signalling will bring together a highly
diverse group of scientists working in all areas of NAD-related metabolism and
biology and provide a forum for exchange of information and data. The topics and
themes that will be covered in this meeting will be global in nature, allowing
for a unique interdisciplinary scientific experience that is not provided by
other more specialized meetings that focus on only one aspect of NAD metabolism.
Also, the conference will foster new interactions between scientists that do not
normally meet one another in the course of their work.