* 1130675
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multi-Scaled Ocean Governance in Micronesia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Rebecca Gruby, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 01/31/2013
* USD 11,990.00

Growing attention to declining ocean health has propelled marine governance to
the top of the international conservation agenda. Conservationists are
increasingly promoting the designation of marine protected areas (MPAs), a
relatively new variety of marine enclosure, or conservation territory. Most
recently, the parties to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity
called for a global network of MPAs to cover 10% of oceans by 2020. This
doctoral dissertation research develops new theoretical and empirical
understanding of the multi-scaled institutional dynamics that are shaping
contemporary efforts to protect the world's oceans. The project will use and
build theory on scale, narrative, and conservation territory to achieve three
objectives: 1) theorize the process through which new institutions for ocean
governance emerge; 2) investigate the discursive strategies used to promote and
legitimize new institutions for ocean governance; and 3) contribute
understanding of the conditions that affect implementation of multi-scaled
institutions for ocean governance. The research approaches these objectives
through a case study of interlinked international and national protected area
policies in marine biodiversity hotspots. The particular policies of interest
are the Micronesia Challenge, a commitment among five nations and territories in
Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau's national program for the implementation
of its commitment to the Micronesia Challenge. The Micronesia Challenge is
serving as a model for marine conservation in other oceanic regions (e.g., the
Caribbean and Indian Ocean), making the case more broadly relevant to
understanding new institutions for ocean governance. The study will yield fine-
grained knowledge on institutional dynamics in context through a multi-site
ethnography. Data will be collected through in-depth interviews, document
review, and participant observation. Data analysis will be guided by
constructivist grounded theory and fuzzy set Qualitative Comparative
Analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research brings historical, political, and
geographic perspectives to an empirical analysis of institutional dynamics.
Results will contribute to theory development and debates about new geographies
of environmental governance. The broader impacts of this project lie in its
commitment, first, to train and employ students to aid in data collection and
processing and, second, to refine policy processes. Policy relevant research
results will include increased understanding of the mechanisms for institutional
emergence; the strategic use of policy language and the implications thereof;
and conditions that facilitate and hinder the implementation of multi-scaled
institutions. Results will be broadly relevant to policy actors worldwide as
they design and implement policies to increase MPA coverage. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.