* 1130207
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the PETRA 2011 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2012
* USD 20,660.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) of approximately 10
promising graduate students from U.S. institutions of higher learning along with
9 distinguished research faculty, to be held in conjunction with the Fourth
International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive
Environments (PETRA 2011), which will take place May 25-27, 2011, on the island
of Crete, Greece (http://www.petrae.org). PETRA is the only annual conference
that brings together theoreticians and practitioners from a wide variety of
disciplines to focus on the application of pervasive technologies to assistive
environments. What connects different disciplines in this highly
interdisciplinary but topical conference is the ability to discover new
alliances, share data and design new methods that have real-world social impact
while also advancing each field scientifically. PETRA 2011 will address timely
computational challenges including integration mechanisms of diverse sensor
technologies, modeling heterogeneous data, synthesis and analysis of data
streams, privacy and security of information, ranking, cleaning, storing and
retrieving sensor data streams for pattern analysis and discovery, robust remote
rehabilitation mechanisms, correlating brain imaging with behavioral imaging,
handling intensive real time data in complex environments, and ways to interpret
seemingly meaningless data in order to derive meaningful human behavioral
patterns and/or to identify important "events" or changes. PETRA 2011 will also
study vital issues in privacy and security in monitoring ambient intelligent
environments with the goal of identifying and predicting risks, intrusions,
unauthorized access to information, or information leaking. PETRA projects
assume a human is at the center of "cyberphysical systems" where the digital
world merges with the physical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Doctoral
Consortium are to increase the exposure and visibility of the participants' work
within the community, to help establish a sense of community among this next
generation of researchers, and to help foster their research efforts by
providing substantive feedback and guidance in a supportive and interactive
environment from a group of senior researchers. Student participants in the
Doctoral Consortium will be drawn from diverse communities including computer
science, engineering, psychology, social science, neuroscience, human-computer
interaction, cognitive science and communication. They will make formal
presentations of their work and will receive feedback from a faculty panel; the
feedback is geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work
is positioned relative to other research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
The workshop faculty members will bring a wide spectrum of expertise, and
provide student mentoring and coordination. Doctoral Consortium attendees will
be asked to create and maintain "conference workbook" (webpage) where along with
their work they include feedback on papers they attended and observations that
they gathered (e.g., through meetings and discussions with conference speakers
and other participants) that will apply to and impact their work. Short papers
on the participants' work will be published in the Conference Proceedings (which
are included in the ACM Digital Library), and a summary report on the event will
be posted on the conference website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
PETRA 2011 Doctoral Consortium will bring together some of the best students,
researchers and practitioners in relevant fields, and will thereby afford the
younger participants a unique opportunity to gain wider exposure for their
innovative ideas while also receiving reinforcement for the importance and value
of conducting research with societal impact. The workshop will allow the junior
participants to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
colleagues. The organizing committee will make a concerted effort to attract
participants who are women, members of under-represented minorities, and persons
with disabilities.