* 1130564
* GOALI:  Dissimilar Metal Joining for Micro-Scale Medical Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Y Lawrence Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 10/31/2015
* USD 364,379.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to investigate a novel joining process, autogenous (no
filler material) laser brazing, for joining dissimilar biocompatible metals.
Specifically, the project aims to develop a fundamental understanding of
autogenous laser brazed joints by considering the thermal, kinetic, and
thermodynamic aspects of the process, to experimentally and numerically
investigate the effect of non-equilibrium processing conditions on the
thermodynamic properties of the weld metal mixture and their effect on the
resulting phases and interface microstructures, and to significantly enhance the
knowledge of intermetallic phase formation in dissimilar material pairs and
investigate potential avenues for their mitigation or elimination. The projected
approach to address this issue is by limiting mixing of the materials and
rapidly cooling the molten metal without the use of filler materials. Phase,
microstructure, and strength will be characterized. The results will validate
the modeling efforts which will consist of finite cooling rate phase formation
and spatially resolved composition calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
benefits of this project are expected to enable the design and fabrication of
innovative, implantable medical devices that selectively incorporate
biocompatible metals with unique properties to significantly enhance device
performance or introduce groundbreaking functionalities. The need to join these
materials stems from the desire to integrate their unique properties in a robust
and cost-effective manner. The main impediment to widespread use of dissimilar
metal joints, however, is the formation of brittle intermetallic phases within
the joints. The PI's strong support by a key industrial partner could lead to
rapid development of real life applications of these devices with broad societal
impact. The processing techniques, analysis methods, and predictive capabilities
developed for the biocompatible metal pairs addressed in this project can be
extended to other material pairs for aircraft structure and automobile battery
applications.