* 1130261
* Probing the Adhesive Properties of Graphene
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Rodney Ruoff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2014
* USD 469,477.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the adhesive interactions
between graphene and other materials that might be used in producing large areas
of graphene, one of the stiffest and strongest materials known to man. An
interfacial force microscope will be used to probe graphene on a variety of
substrates with a variety of probe materials. The response will be modeled by a
combination of molecular and continuum models to extract traction-separation
relations as the continuum representations of these interactions both normal and
tangential to the contact surface. The contact radii encountered in IFM
experiments are typically 50-100 nm. Scale up issues will then be addressed in
fracture experiments where substrate/graphene/substrate laminates are
delaminated in a variety of loading conditions, in order to examine the graphene
interfaces over larger domains. A special high vacuum fracture facility will
allow these interactions to be examined over a range of environmental
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will advance our ability
to tailor the adhesive characteristics, strength and durability of integrated
materials and structures that make use of graphene for novel applications. It
also lays the foundation for examining interactions among other types of
surfaces such as chemically modified graphene and functionalized carbon
nanotubes. Education and outreach activities will be integrated within the
proposed project to enhance its societal impacts.