* 1130819
* Collaborative Research:  Pattern Transfer Nanomanufacturing with Magnetically-Recorded Nanotemplates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Olin Mefford, Clemson University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 232,500.00

The ultimate goal of this collaborative research project is to test the
hypothesis that magnetic recording can be used to direct the assembly of
nanomaterials into complex 2D and 3D structures, and offers a promising route
towards rapid and low-cost nanomanufacturing. The approach is to use magnetic
recording media (i.e. platters found in modern hard drives) to direct the
assembly of magnetic nanoparticles. A thin polymeric film is then coated onto
the surface, and the deposited particles are lifted off while maintaining this
written pattern. This transformative approach to nanomanufacturing employs
nanoscale forces from magnetically-recorded patterns to assemble nanoparticles
from a carrier fluid into de-signed nanostructures on the surface of a disk
drive platter. The nanoparticle assembly is then spin-coated with a polymer and
the matrix is peeled from the disk surface, transferring the nanoscale patterns
to a flexible, transparent film. While this concept has been demonstrated, key
challenges to commercializing it remain. Control of this concept will be
extended by understanding how the assembly depends on the raw nanomaterials:
nanoparticle shape, size, magnetic moment, and surface functionalization, in
addition to the kinetics of the fluidic assembly process, variances in nanoscale
positioning, and the fundamental limits of the recording process. This
collaborative project is structured to allow continuous feedback between process
and raw materials to build stability needed for commercial launch. In addition,
novel extensions will be explored that add functionality, including assembly of
different nanoparticle species within a single layer, and combining multiple
layers and films into more complex, nanostructured materials. To accomplish
these goals the project is divided into three main task groups: 1. Nanoparticle
synthesis and assembly interaction control, 2. Assembly and metrology below 100
nm size scales, and 3. Directed assembly of complex systems, plus an additional
group focused on collaborative education and outreach. These components focus on
overcoming key roadblocks to the technology's scalability, developing the tools
for processing and process metrology, and creating novel, complex systems to
increase commercial relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build
understanding of this undeveloped technology to assess and overcome the major
hurdles to implementation in a manufacturing environment. By optimizing
commercial magnetic recording for bottom-up nanostructure assembly, an
innovative class of inexpensive techniques will be available to the wider
nanotechnology community for manufacturing new devices, including optoelectronic
components, novel biomaterials, and materials for future energy technologies.
Given the scale and cost at which magnetic recording components are presently
manufactured, the leverage to succeed in scaling this approach to commercial
nanomanufacturing is tremendous. The opportunity to apply current technology to
enable future manufacturing, combined with understanding the community
structures which inhibit nano-commercialization, offers a unique and broad
educational experience for the project researchers. Students at both USC and
Clemson, the primary research universities in South Carolina, will participate
through a recently piloted course that develops a technical and historical
perspective on manufactured technologies, to foster innovation and create new
ones.