* 1130533
* Expedition Objective Research: Investigating Antarctic Cryosphere Changes at Wilkes Land During the Oligocene and Presumed "Stable" Icehouse World  of the Late Miocene
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Stephen Pekar, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Critical pieces of Antarctica?s climatic and cryospheric history remain
uncertain owing to a lack of high quality climate data from this region. In
particular, sedimentary archives deposited during the Oligocene, which includes
the ?mid? Oligocene (a time of amplified climate-ice volume variability), and
the late Miocene when the relative stability of the ice sheet is still highly
debated, are major missing pieces in deciphering the climate history of
Antarctica. The goal of Integrated Ocean Drilling Program Expedition 318 to
Wilkes land was to investigate the glacial history of Antarctica from the
Greenhouse World, a time of global warmth, with little to no glacial ice, to the
Icehouse World, a time of continental size ice sheets. The Wilkes Land area is
critical in understanding this history as numerical models suggest that this
region was among the last areas of East Antarctica to become glaciated. This
makes this part of East Antarctica the most sensitive to climate changes in the
past and more vulnerable to future change. This research has two major foci.
First, determining the timing when the ice sheet and various ice streams reached
the Antarctic coastline during the Oligocene using high-resolution grain size
records to identify ice rafted debris (IRD) provenance records using Ar Ar
dating of hornblende grains from the IRD to constrain the source of icebergs.
Second, examining an oceanic warming event during the Late Miocene (12-11
million years BP) that appears to be synchronous with a significant glacial
retreat of over 300 km in Prydz Bay. This is will be accomplished by developing
paired high-resolution stable isotope and Mg/ Ca ratio records from benthic and
possibly planktonic foraminifers and foraminiferal biofacies from Late Miocene
strata from Site U1361 and then correlate them to the Prydz Bay records. The
results from this project will provide, for the first time, the requisite data
from a site proximal to Antarctica to test hypotheses and answer yet unresolved
questions related to the timing and extent of the Antarctic ice sheet during the
start of the icehouse world (Oligocene) and during a time interval when the ice
sheet was considered to be relatively stable (Late Miocene). Additionally, these
results will also be key for climate modelers in developing a better
understanding of ice sheet dynamics during these time intervals.&lt;br/&gt;The
main educational outreach goal of this project is to inspire and educate the
next generation of Antarctic researchers by developing an undergraduate research
and mentoring program for three undergraduate students and one graduate student.
This is in tune with a long-term commitment of the PI working in community and
educational outreach efforts. As part of educational outreach, the PI will host
post-cruise video conferences being organized by Ocean Leadership for schools
that participated in video conferencing during the expedition. Additional
outreach activities include giving presentations and hands-on demonstrations to
six major museums across the country.