* 1130147
* Novel Computational Methods for Solving Random Eigenvalue Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sharif Rahman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 280,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop innovative computational
methods for solving random eigenvalue problems commonly encountered in modeling
and simulation of high-dimensional stochastic dynamic systems. The proposed
effort will involve: (1) a new polynomial dimensional decomposition (PDD) method
for predicting the statistical moments and probability distributions of random
eigensolutions; (2) a solid theoretical basis by quantifying approximation
errors from the PDD and polynomial chaos expansion (PCE) methods; and (3) new
multiplicative PDD, hybridization, and respective error analyses. The new PDD
method will challenge or disrupt existing computational thinking, specifically
by addressing highly nonlinear input-output transformations, large number of
random variables, and arbitrarily large uncertainty of random input. Therefore,
a long-standing stochastic problem associated with the curse of dimensionality
will be alleviated to some degree, with positive ramifications in engineering
and sciences. Deliverables include development of fast and reliable stochastic
methods and algorithms, generation of modeling and simulation tools,
documentation of research results, engineering student education, and hands-on
experience for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will be applicable to a broad range of industrial applications,
such as civil, automotive, and aerospace infrastructure. Potential applications
include analysis and design of civil structures; noise-vibration-harshness and
crashworthiness of ground vehicle systems; and fatigue durability of aerospace
structures. Beyond engineering, potential applications include nuclear physics,
number theory, computational biology, among others, where random eigenvalue
analysis plays a vital role. The transfer of knowledge created by this award
will take place through organization of dynamics-related symposia, peer-reviewed
journal publications, presentations at major conferences, software development,
and student education. Educational goals include graduate student recruitment
from an underrepresented minority group, implementation of software tools to
upgrade existing courses at The University of Iowa, and active participation in
Iowa?s Project Lead the Way program for middle- and high-school students.