* 1130528
* Micro-Patterning Through Mechanics and Cracking of Drying Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Thomas Berfield, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate failure mechanisms of
solvent-filled thin films for use in micro-patterning applications. Solvent-
filled thin film systems such as sol-gels are frequently vulnerable to cracking
during the drying process, and failure is difficult to predict due to evolving
film mechanical properties. In this study, failure criteria will be determined
via two non-contact experimental methods specifically tailored towards ultra
thin film studies: laser spallation adhesion tests and fluorescence-based
digital image correlation measurements. Experimental results will then provide
the input data for a finite-element model to predict failure characteristics for
more complicated loading regimes.

A mechanics-based analysis for predicting failure onset for solvent-filled thin
film systems will provide valuable information to the multiple disciplines that
utilize microfabrication techniques. In particular, this work will improve
reliability assessment and failure prediction for industrial spray coating
applications. Additionally, the ability to control thin film crack formation,
width, and density will provide the foundation for a potentially transformative
micro-patterning method, offering a low-cost technique for creating
hierarchically distributed micro-scale networks. In addition to providing
educational development opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students through intensive research experiences, this work will be integrated
into a module for the INSPIRE Program at the University of Louisville, an
established summer enrichment program for local high school students targeted
towards groups currently unrepresented in engineering.