* 1130072
* RUI: Quantifying larval behavior to reconcile genetic connectivity with biophysical model predictions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Patrick Krug, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2016
* USD 359,012.00

Dispersal is a critical life-history trait linking ecological and evolutionary
processes. Transport of planktonic larvae affects colonization success and
population persistence for benthic animals, and influences genetic subdivision
of populations, local adaptation, and speciation. However, recent studies
question the long-held assumption that pelagic larval duration (PLD) determines
how far larvae are advected. This has applied significance, as oceanographic
models used to predict exchange among marine protected areas often use PLD as
the key larval parameter. The investigators' data for Caribbean gastropods show
genetic breaks that are not congruent with model predictions, and levels of
structure that are inconsistent with larval lifespan, highlighting a need for
new theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: This research will
integrate molecular and larval ecology to test the link between dispersal and
larval duration in a phylogenetic framework, and determine whether Individual
Based Models (IBMs) accurately predict exchange for Caribbean reef ecosystems.
The PI will collect multi-locus genetic data and quantify larval behavior for 14
related, ecologically similar species of sea slugs with PLDs from 0-30 days. The
PI predicts that larval behavior explains why some species are under- or over-
dispersed relative to their PLD; this work will reveal key parameters needed for
biophysical-coupling models to predict connectivity for coastal invertebrates.
The proposal will address 3 inter-related objectives: (1) Are genetic
connectivity estimates from mtDNA and nuclear markers congruent, and consistent
with model predictions? Data for mitochondrial and nuclear loci will be used to
test for selection on mtDNA, estimate rates of gene flow and times of
divergence, and assess levels of connectivity within each species. Matrices of
model-predicted exchange will be compared with genetic similarity matrices to
test whether breaks in gene flow occur where predicted. (2) Are genetic
connectivity and PLD correlated? More broadly, the PI will test the assumption
that larval period determines dispersal, using comparative methods in a
phylogenetic framework to correct for effects of relatedness among species. The
PI will compare models of trait evolution with Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods to determine if gene flow is correlated or uncorrelated with PLD,
using a molecular phylogeny and multi-locus genetic data. (3) Does larval
behavior explain genetic structure in species with long PLD? At least two of the
focal species selected for this study are under-dispersed, with genetically
isolated demes despite a 30-day PLD. Conversely, at least one short-PLD species
has no genetic structure over large regions of the Caribbean. The PI will build
on past work quantifying larval behavior to ask if species-specific differences
in larval swimming facilitate local retention, making species deviate from
expected connectivity patterns. The PI will also test whether pre-competent
larvae respond to habitat cues in a way that influences dispersal, as occurs in
fish. This work will reconcile life-history theory, oceanographic models, and
genetics by mechanistically explaining breaks in connectivity; the results will
deepen our understanding of how larval behavior can determine the pace of
divergence among populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Student
training is a major thrust of this proposal, based at a Hispanic-serving
institution. Funding will support undergraduate and M.S. students from under-
represented ethnic groups (5 of 9 current research students are Latino or
black). Krug will publish with graduate and undergraduate student co-authors,
and work to place students in Ph.D. programs; in the last funding period, 7
papers had student co-authors and two minority students were accepted into Ph.D.
programs. Through established partnerships, the PI will host one area high
school teacher and 3 students in the first year of funding for research
experiences. Continued outreach through COSEE-west will allow the PI-led group
to increase content knowledge for K-12 science teachers using examples from
marine ecology and evolution. Public outreach will include bimonthly segments on
the local NPR affiliate radio station (KPCC), and lectures at the K-12 and
community college level through programs aimed to broaden diversity in the
science and technology workforce.