* 1130706
* NCRN-MN: Data Integration, Online Data Collection, and Privacy Protection for Census 2020
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2017
* William Eddy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2017
* USD 3,029,171.00

This project will conduct research on three basic issues of interest related to
the conduct of censuses: privacy, costs, and response rates. The researchers
will address the practical problems of insuring confidentiality and privacy
while still producing useful data for public and private purposes. In terms of
cost issues, the researchers will investigate the use of administrative records
to create a basic census frame, saving the duplicated effort of gathering that
same information repeatedly, as well as other possible uses of administrative
records as part of the census. They also will investigate the use of online data
collection as a substitute for the traditional mail-out/mail-back census-taking.
With respect to response rates, the researchers will conduct experiments that
implement new ways of encouraging participation in an effort to reduce the
decline in (or perhaps even increase) response rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will explore the potential for a significant reduction in the costs of
conducting the 2020 census by demonstrating how information already collected by
the government can serve as a starting point for the census in lieu of having
the Census Bureau collect that information anew as part of the decennial census
process. By learning to effectively use the Internet for censal data collection,
the research should lead to a higher initial response rate, and hence lower
census costs overall, and a more accurate count. Better methods for
confidentiality protection and privacy notification not only will instill
greater public confidence in the Census Bureau, but they also will contribute to
better response rates and greater census accuracy. All of the technical
statistical tools developed by the project will have other uses, both public and
commercial. The project's educational and training initiatives aim to (1)
prepare an educated citizenry on census and related matters, (2) use research
issues under study at CMU and elsewhere as components in courses, and (3) train
a new generation of students to enable them to work in agencies such as the
Census Bureau in a diverse set of capacities, including the most technically
demanding ones. This activity is supported by the NSF-Census Research Network
funding opportunity.