* 1130910
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Natural Resource Management in Bhutan: From Traditional Ecological Knowledge to Gross National Happiness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Matthew Branch, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 02/28/2013
* USD 8,770.00

The country of Bhutan is well known for its development metric, Gross National
Happiness (GNH), which is an attempt to create both a quantitative index of
quality of life indicators, incorporating both economic development (as measured
through GDP) and more holistic conceptions of well-being. Bhutan's attempts have
garnered significant world-wide attention, and other countries are looking into
GNH as a potential sustainable development paradigm. However, GNH is grounded in
Buddhist beliefs and is quite specific to Bhutan. Of importance then is to
understand how GNH developed in Bhutan, how it influences natural resource
decision-making in that country, and what aspects of it might translate to
contexts outside of the country. This doctoral dissertation search will help to
better understand the ways that GNH as a development paradigm impacts
environmental decision making. The research asks four primary questions: 1) How
has the cultural, religious, and political context in Bhutan influenced the
development of GNH? 2) Who are the domestic and international actors central to
conservation and natural resource decision-making networks in Bhutan, and how
have their interactions influenced the application of GNH? 3) How, when, and why
is happiness linked to natural resources and the environment? and 4) How is GNH
operationalized? To do this, interviews with government officials, NGO employees
and others working at the intersection of GNH and the environment will be
conducted to better understand how GNH is related to environmental decision-
making. Additionally, a participatory video documentary project will be produced
in rural Bhutan to assess how GNH environmental policies are impacting daily
interactions with the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
examines what GNH is and how it is impacting environmental decision-making in
Bhutan. The findings will help to tease out what is meant by GNH, how it evolved
over time, when happiness is invoked in relationship to the natural environment
and how it is influencing people's interactions with the landscape. Since GNH
has recently gained international attention and is beginning to be adopted by
governments around the world, research into the genealogy and implementation of
GNH is important in order to understand which aspects are Bhutan-specific and
which aspects might be useful in other contexts. In recent years novel
development metrics have experienced exponential growth world-wide. This
research provides an opportunity to better understand them and to determine
their influence on development. This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award will enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.