* 1130662
* Novel Efficient Clustering Techniques for Data Mining, Ranking, Pattern Recognition and Segmentation of Large Scale Data Sets
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,11/30/2011
* Dorit Hochbaum, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 11/30/2011
* USD 325,000.00

The goal of this research is to investigate and develop discrete optimization
algorithms for problems of clustering, pattern recognition, data mining and
image processing. The research will address the theory and practice of such
discrete optimization techniques, and will compare them to traditional
approaches including variational models, spectral analysis, support vector
machines and Principal Component Analysis. Algorithms will be implemented and
their practical performance will be evaluated in applications of medical
imaging; security detection; and image segmentation. The theoretical analysis
will address the performance of algorithms for several clustering problems,
which cannot be solved efficiently and optimally. For such known hard problems
the performance will be evaluated in terms of how close the solutions attained
are to the optimum, or the worst case error ratio. Efficient implementations
will be developed to solve quickly pattern recognition and clustering problems
on a sequence of data-sets that differ slightly from each other (e.g. for
dynamically changing images, as in video). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research are expected to improve automated or semi-automated methodologies
for pattern recognition, image segmentation, clustering and co-segmentation. The
anticipated benefits include the reduction in cost and the frequency of human
error in image analysis. In particular, automatic identification of unusual or
pathological features is expected to improve diagnosis and reduce the cost of
evaluating medical images by introducing accurate and fast automated procedures.
The high speed of the proposed methodologies will permit real time deployment
and mayl contribute to speeding up the rate of research and development in
health-care, biological sciences and homeland security applications.