* 1130078
* Expedition Oriented Research: Sedimentation and tectonics in Kumano forearc basin evolution, NantroSEIZE study area
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Nicholas Hayman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,204.00

Many destructive subduction-zone earthquakes nucleate beneath the sedimentary
forearc basins above accretionary prisms. Such behavior certainly characterizes
the Nankai prism off Japan?s Kii Peninsula where the Kumano basin sits above an
out-of-sequence, or megasplay fault that is likely seismogenic. Nankai-prism
behavior is largely governed by the frontal thrust system, incoming trench-
sediment, and d√©collement zone. Yet, slope and forearc basin processes are also
likely important to the mechanics of the margin. Because of drilling during IODP
Expeditions 315, 316, and 319, it is possible to examine forearc basin evolution
at a level not previously attainable. IODP drilling has revealed that the base
of the Kumano basin roughly coincides with the Plio-Pleistocene boundary,
raising the possibility that a change in sedimentation patterns affected forearc
basin initiation. It is proposed to test the hypothesis that changes in
sedimentation patterns from trench-fed sediment into the frontal accretionary
prism to hinterland-fed slope and forearc basin deposition, coincide with
changes in accretionary wedge mechanics. If climate-controlled sedimentation
patterns do exert a large control on the Nankai margin tectonics, it would
provide a good example of the controversial link between climate-driven sediment
flux and tectonic deformation. We will test our hypothesis in the context of a
margin-evolution model. Our model predicts that during the Plio-Pleistocene
transition from low-to-high sediment flux, out-of-sequence thrusts and slope-
basins developed along the Nankai prism in an effort to return the wedge to
critical taper. The internal wedge deformation ultimately formed an incipient
forearc basin. During the Pleistocene, uplift of the Japanese Alps caused
significant sediment flux to the toe of the wedge and resulted in seaward
advance of the accretionary prism, sediment underthrusting, and formation of the
megasplay. Even greater sediment flux after the Mid-Pleistocene resulted in
rapid infilling of the Kumano Basin, and loading of the seismogenic plate
boundary. We will evaluate the key components of this descriptive model using a
kinematic restoration of 3-D seismic reflection data, down-hole and core
constraints on structural orientation and tilting histories, sedimentary
provenance of key sections, and Coulomb wedge analytical
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;Japan?s Nankai accretionary prism is the site of the 1944
and 1946 great earthquakes. Our work will generate needed datasets for the
NantroSEIZE experiment, which seeks to study and monitor seismic deformation
below the forearc basin, in contrast with predominantly aseismic deformation
near the prism?s toe. The focus of the proposed research is of great interest to
the GeoPRISMS program, leading to cross NSF programmatic impact. We will partner
with Japanese colleagues, enhancing the international impact. Our education and
outreach activities will be through support of a graduate student, and
generating learning modules from our research. These modules will build on
existing undergraduate tutorials, and be additionally tailored to UT-Austin
programs that cater to predominantly minority-serving public school teachers,
thereby increasing domestic public awareness about geological processes and
natural hazards.