* 1130397
* Experimental and Computational Simulation of Progressive Collapse of Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Halil Sezen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,010.00

The project involves physical testing of three existing buildings that are
scheduled for demolition on the campus of The Ohio State University in Columbus
to study the progressive collapse characteristics of building structures. To
study the building collapse vulnerabilities as recommended by the current design
guidelines, the structural columns in the first stories will be removed and
response of the buildings will be monitored. This study will provide much needed
experimental data on full-scale buildings to validate the results of
computational studies reported in the literature and to verify the methodologies
prescribed in the design guidelines. The project will improve understanding of
progressive collapse process by addressing: 1) redistribution of loads within
the building following loss of columns, 2) contribution of slabs and transverse
and longitudinal beams in bridging over the failed column, and 3) structural
system characteristics that determine how a structural collapse mechanism forms.
The experimental data will be used to validate and refine advanced nonlinear
analysis tools and to develop simplified models and analysis procedures that can
be used by practicing engineers. The results of this research will enable more
accurate assessment of collapse potential of buildings and, as a result, will
lead to more efficient design of new buildings and retrofit of existing
buildings. Simulation data will be used to evaluate the amplification factors
recommended by the design guidelines for linear static
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to provide scarce full-
scale experimental data of immense value to advance engineering understanding
about progressive collapse of buildings. The project will involve graduate,
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in science and technology
education. Hands-on demonstrations will be given and competitions will be
conducted at high school level.