* 1130495
* Collaborative Research: Microbial associations in zooplankton: significance for the marine nitrogen cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Mark Altabet, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 623,900.00

Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen (N2) fixation is a key biogeochemical
process providing new N for the marine ecosystem. Current estimates of the
global rates suggest that the inputs and outputs of N are not in balance,
leaving an apparent deficiency in N2 fixation in the oceanic N budget. Based on
recovery of N2 fixation gene fragments, however, numerous potential N2-fixing
microbes are present in the euphotic layer and below, yet evidence for their
contribution to N2-fixation is lacking. The goal of this study is to identify
and determine the importance of potentially diazotrophic, heterotrophic
prokaryotes occupying a previously unstudied niche in the upper
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project PIs hypothesize that N2 fixation in
zooplankton-associated microbial communities is an important source of new N in
the open ocean contributing to the oceanic N budget. In oligotrophic, N-limited
open ocean waters, zooplankton are faced with the same low N availability in
their diets that limits growth of primary producers and heterotrophic microbes
in the open ocean. Zooplankton guts would be a particularly suitable environment
for heterotrophic N2-fixers as the nitrogenase enzyme is inhibited by oxygen. In
many terrestrial insects, N2 fixation by gut microbes serves as a source of N.
The aim of this study is to investigate whether similar associations occur in
marine zooplankton that live on N-limited phytoplankton. The PIs will
investigate specific associations between copepods from N-limited and non-N
limited oceanic waters with microorganisms that are potentially or actively
fixing N. They will also investigate the fate of this N to study whether the new
N is incorporated into the zooplankton host. The main research objectives are to
determine whether:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. diazotrophic microflora exist in
copepods and what is their seasonal and spatial variability, &lt;br/&gt;2.
microbial communities associated with copepods are actively fixing N2,
&lt;br/&gt;3. diazotroph communities contribute to the N nutrition of their
zooplankton hosts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monthly samples will be collected in
the oligotrophic Sargasso Sea, in association with BATS sampling cruises. In
addition, experiments and field studies will be conducted in Bermuda during the
summer. For comparison to a site that is not severely N limited, and for methods
development, additional studies will be carried out in coastal Gulf of Maine
waters. Selected copepod species and their fecal pellets will be analyzed for
the presence of nifH genes and their expression using cloning and sequencing and
Reverse Transcriptase-PCR. Quantitative PCR will be employed to investigate the
seasonal distributions of dominant phylotypes. Anaerobic cultivation will be
used for the enrichment of the gut microflora. Zooplankton will be incubated
with 15N2 to quantify microbial N2 fixation activity and its fate of N through
zooplankton overall 15N content and nanoSIMS determination of 15N localization.
Products of this study will include novel microbial isolates or consortia,
evidence regarding taxa-specific expression of N2 fixation in these
microhabitats, and a first estimate for the importance of this process for the
oceanic N budget.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses fundamental issues regarding the sources of oceanic nitrogen and will
test hypotheses regarding previously overlooked diazotrophic niches. As open
ocean productivity is frequently N limited, characterization of new sources of N
will have global impacts. The PIs will engage students from K-12 to graduate
levels in this research. Graduate student at the UMD will develop their
dissertation research within the framework of the study, and several
undergraduate students will participate in field and lab components at UMD.
Marine microbiology course content will be built into the K-12 science
curriculum of the Ocean Explorium of the city of New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Part of the work will be performed as a collaborative project with L. Riemann,
Univ. of Copenhagen, thus strengthening international connections.