* 1130735
* Collaborative Research: IODP Expedition 329 Objective Research on Supply of H2 by Water Radiolysis in Subseafloor Sediment of the South Pacific Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Steven D'Hondt, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 185,507.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The South Pacific Gyre (SPG) contains the lowest
cell concentrations and lowest rates of microbial activity ever encountered in
shallowly-buried marine sediment. However, the electron donors that sustain its
subseafloor microbial ecosystem are not fully constrained. In recognition of the
importance of this natural laboratory, the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program
(IODP) selected the SPG as the target of its first riser-less expedition solely
dedicated to study of subseafloor life (Expedition
329).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Expedition Objective Research (EOR) proposal has
one fundamental objective: To quantify the extent to which subseafloor
sedimentary communities of the SPG may be supplied with H2 by water
radiolysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addressing this objective, the following
testable hypotheses are posed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) H2 is produced by water
radiolysis at significant rates relative to other electron donors&lt;br/&gt;in
the organic-poor subseafloor sediment of the SPG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) At
some depth below seafloor, the production rate of H2 by water radiolysis
exceeds&lt;br/&gt;the availability of other electron donors (organic matter and
reduced minerals).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these hypotheses, this work will
focus on four related activities:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Precise and accurate
quantification of radioactive element concentrations and sedimentary grain
size,&lt;br/&gt;(2) Quantification of alpha particle (4He) fluxes from the
sediment to the interstitial water,&lt;br/&gt;(3) Refinement of H2 yield
calculations by experimental radiation of representative SPG&lt;br/&gt;sediment
samples, and&lt;br/&gt;(4) Quantification of the potential importance of
radiolytic H2 to the subseafloor sedimentary communities by direct comparison of
calculated H2 yields to shipboard H2 concentration data and rates of organic
matter oxidation derived from shipboard data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will advance understanding of the subsurface world by (i) placing a clear
boundary on the extent to which subseafloor sedimentary life may be
energetically independent of the surface photosynthetic world and (ii) advancing
understanding of the sources of microbial energy in sediment of Earth?s largest
oceanic province. Because electron donor fluxes are so low in SPG sediment, this
research may also help to constrain the limits to
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts, Education, and Data
Management&lt;br/&gt;This project will fully answer one of the primary
objectives of IODP Expedition 329 by quantifying the production of H2 by water
radiolysis in SPG sediment. It will address another of the expedition's primary
objectives by advancing understanding of the habitats and rates of metabolic
activities in this very large low-energy environment. The project will heighten
collaborations between URI (an EPSCoR institution), BU, and our Exp. 329
collaborators from throughout the U.S., Europe, Asia and Australia. The project
will have strong training impacts. Graduate students will be integral project
members. Undergraduates will be included as thesis advisees, work-study
students, paid laboratory assistants, nationally competed NSF-sponsored GSO
Summer Undergraduate Research Fellows, and through our courses. The URI
Geobiology website will expand to include focus on this project. Results will be
presented to audiences via guest lectures and the Internet. Significant findings
will be submitted for publication beginning in the second year of the project.
To ensure accessibility to the scientific community and the public, data will be
deposited into the SedDB database and samples will be catalogued through SESAR.