* 1130780
* Predictive Modeling and Optimization of Machining Induced Surface Integrity with Applications in Titanium and Nickel-Based Alloyed End Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Tugrul Ozel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 06/30/2015
* USD 388,345.00

The research objective of this award is to establish an integrated physics-
based, predictive modeling approach to improve surface integrity and optimize
machining operations in the manufacturing of titanium and nickel-based alloyed
end products. The goal is to control surface integrity, machining-induced layer
thickness, depth-of-work hardening, tensile layer thickness, residual stresses,
and micro-hardness of the end product, as well as representing the cutting tool
parameter (material, coating and edge geometry) effects, and the effects of
cutting conditions on these results. The proposed research will be conducted in
a three-pronged approach, including physics-based modeling, experimental
analyses and validation, and probabilistic-predictive modeling on (1)
determination of detailed friction between tool and workpiece, and tool wear,
(2) physics-based finite element simulations using temperature-dependent flow
softening based constitutive material models to compute process outputs,
including surface properties, and validating them with experiments, and (3)
probabilistic predictive modeling and multi-criteria
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits and broader
impacts of this research will be the use of predictive and physics-based
simulation modeling approaches applied to machining-induced surface integrity
predictions in titanium and nickel alloys. It is expected that this award will
result in methods to improve surface integrity on machined titanium and nickel
alloy metal components used in aerospace, medical devices and other related
industries. This award will also provide exposure for graduate and undergraduate
students to methods of predictive modeling and physics-based simulation modeling
in manufacturing processes.