* 1130286
* Momentum Based Motion Planning for Manipulators with Heavy Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Emmanuel Collins, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2014
* USD 249,966.00

This research focuses on the development of computationally efficient motion
planning algorithms that enable a manipulator robot to dramatically increase its
lifting capacity over most current algorithms, which only enable a robot to lift
loads that can be supported statically at each point along the manipulator path.
In a more general sense, this research is concerned with momentum based motion
planning using dynamic models. The planning will be accomplished using a
recently developed motion planning algorithm, Sampling Based Model Predictive
Optimization (SBMPO), which may be viewed as a sampling-based generalization of
the A* algorithm to optimal motion planning using a dynamic model. The research
will develop answers to fundamental questions related to the use of SBMPO for
the direct development of trajectories that have appropriate momentum
characteristics. One is what model - for example the open loop dynamic model,
the closed loop dynamic model, or even an ?extended kinematic model? (i.e., a
kinematic model preceded by one or more integrators) - is the most effective at
incorporating information about the manipulator dynamics and torque limits? A
related critical issue is the development of ?optimistic A* heuristics? (i.e,
rigorous lower bounds on the chosen cost) that are not overly conservative and
hence can allow for efficient trajectory generation. . A major contribution will
also be the incorporation of learning, so that when a lifting or throwing
problems is encountered that is similar to a previously solved problem, the
planning algorithm executes more quickly based on the prior
experience&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manipulator lifting and throwing capabilities
are considerably underutilized because current planning algorithms generate
paths based on kinematic models that are not capable of modeling the torque
limitations of the motors or the inertial characteristics of the loaded
manipulator and hence cannot plan trajectories with the required momentum to
lift or throw heavy loads. This research provides motion planning algorithms
that increase the lifting and throwing capacity of any manipulator that has a
control system designed to follow trajectories characterized in terms of
acceleration, velocity, and position. A primary application of this is service
robots (e.g., humanoid robots), which are light weight and relatively weak
compared to their industrial counterparts. These robots will be able to perform
important lifting tasks such as the lifting of luggage, groceries, one gallon
milk jugs, and book bags in home environments. The research will also increase
the capacity of robots used to clear heavy outdoor debris such as logs, bricks,
and large rocks. It is expected that if a robot is given this increased
capacity, other applications will follow. This research will be applicable to
mobile robotics as well since environments with steep hills, viscous mud or deep
sand patches, and high stiff vegetation require momentum based planning. In
general, this research will help to connect the fields of control and planning
in new ways, with the primary motivation being the development of reliable and
computationally efficient trajectory generation algorithms for momentum based
planning.