* 1130382
* A Framework for Demand and Pricing Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Igal Hendel, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 393,117.00

Demand estimation is at the core of economic analysis in many different areas.
Examples include cost benefit analysis, antitrust evaluation, and computation of
price indices. Considerable progress has been made developing new tool for
demand estimation, but most of these tools and their applications have been in
static analysis. Demand for most goods, either due to product storability or
durability, is dynamic. Namely, intertemporal considerations play an important
role, possibly compromising static estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indeed,
intertemporal considerations are present in many decisions like schooling,
migration, as well as purchasing. In durable good markets falling prices and
improved quality provide incentives to delay purchases. In storable goods
markets, temporary price reductions create incentives to anticipate future
needs. While these dynamic effects are known, and in some cases the bias from
ignoring them is well understood, the use of the dynamic models has been
limited. Most dynamic methods (specially, those that can be applied to inventory
problems) are typically data demanding (require household level data) and
computationally intensive. As a result, in academic work as well as in policy
applications, dynamics are often neglected. However, neglecting dynamics even
when they are not the essence of the question can contaminate the estimates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the development of new tools to study
demand dynamics, as well as optimal seller behavior given such demand. The PIs
have a tractable model of consumer demand that can be estimated using market
level data. The proposed framework captures dynamic consumer behavior but,
unlike the typical inventory model, its predictions are very simple to
characterize (and thus, to estimate). The estimation method offered can be done
using standard software packages, without the need for time consuming parameter
searches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study have an impact in the
field of industrial organization, where demand estimation plays a key role both
in academic and policy work. The results also have implications for other fields
including macro and trade where recent work has focused on understanding micro-
level prices and how they respond to shocks such as exchange rate fluctuations
and monetary policy. Both trade and macro work has paid significant attention to
pricing in scanner data. One of the key issues faced by all these studies, when
using disaggregated high frequency data, is how to deal with temporary price
reductions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To show the performance of the method, the
model is applied to the soft-drinks industry and used to measure the long-run
preference parameters. The proposed demand framework leads to a simple solution
to the sellers' pricing problem. Preliminary estimates suggest that the typical
pricing patterns of storables, with constant prices and sporadic price
reductions, are dictated by intertemproal price discrimination. Intertemporal
pricing captures up to 40% of the potential gains from third degree price
discrimination between more and less price sensitive buyers. The estimates
suggest that both price discrimination and intertemporal price discrimination
are welfare enhancing, in a total surplus sense. Less price sensitive consumers
are worse off, but more price sensitive ones (shoppers) and sellers gain more
than the loss by non-price sensitive consumers.