* 1130381
* Characterization, Design and Modeling of Novel Shape Memory Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Charles Lu, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 331,693.00

This grant provides financial funding to design, fabricate and model the
behavior of structurally stable and strong shape memory composites that could
recover large deformations with temperature and/or magnetic field. Novel shape
memory composites will be composed of (conventional and magnetic) shape memory
alloys and shape memory polymers. A deeper understanding of temperature, stress
and magnetic field-dependent properties and reversible actuation mechanisms of
shape memory composites will be attained by systematic investigations of the
effects of pre-straining, mixture ratio, surface finish, volume ratio, size and
shape of alloys on the strength, ductility, recovery stress and strain,
interfacial strength, damping and stiffness properties of shape memory
composites. Moreover, a micromechanics-based analytical model will be founded to
explain and predict the behavior of shape memory composites and then calibrated
through the achieved experimental findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
novel composites that could demonstrate large reversible actuation with tunable
functional properties such as stiffness and damping as functions of temperature
and magnetic field will be fabricated. Fabricated composites can be employed as
high endurance, lightweight, higher strength, low cost and functionally tunable
composites to result in more efficient systems and mechanisms in actuator
applications. They can utilize their i) self-sensing ability to sense the
changes in environmental conditions (e.g. temperature, humidity) and adapt their
behavior accordingly; ii) high strength with reversible actuation capability to
be used as stents and drug delivery systems; iii) temperature and magnetic field
dependent damping properties for vibration isolation, iv) force generation
capability for self-healing in structures. Given the interdisciplinary nature of
the proposed research, this project will contribute significantly to the
scientific education of graduate/undergraduate university students, K-12
students, high school teachers and the public at large in the emerging field of
intelligent materials.