* 1130215
* Physics-Based Study of Graphene Colloidal Systems as Metal Working Fluids for Micro-Machining Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Nikhil Koratkar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 07/31/2015
* USD 393,775.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypothesis that the four key
graphene platelet design factors, namely, (1) platelet shape and size; (2)
number of graphene layers within a platelet; (3) interfacial surface chemistry
between graphene and the dispersion medium; and (4) graphene concentration, all
influence the lubrication and cooling efficiency of graphene-enhanced metal
working fluids. This objective will be achieved by four major research tasks,
namely, (1) manufacture of engineered graphene platelets and property
characterization of their colloidal dispersions; (2) micro-turning experiments
to study the effect of graphene platelet design factors on the performance of
the metal working fluid; (3) characterization of the impact dynamics and
evaporation of the graphene-laden micro-droplets; and (4) engineering the
graphene platelets for use in environmentally benign algae oil-based cutting
fluids.

If successful, this research will result in the improvement of the lubrication
and cooling performance of a wide variety of metal working fluids used by the
manufacturing industry in the United States. This is a multi-billion dollar
market that affects the cost of products used in key areas including defense,
aerospace, health care and consumer electronics. It will also advance
sustainable manufacturing initatives by providing the knowledge needed to design
graphene-based additives for use in high-performance environmentally-benign
cutting fluids. The outreach activities pursued as part of this research will
encourage both the New York state high school students as well as the Navajo
minority students in New Mexico, to pursue higher education in the fields of
science and engineering.