* 1130437
* Ionic Electroactive Polymer Actuators with Tailored NanoStructure Morphology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Brian Wardle, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 501,562.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the fundamental micro- and
nano-scopic processes that are responsible for the observed electromechanical
responses in ionic electroactive polymers (i-EAPs). Electroactive polymers,
because of their many attractive properties and characteristics including high
strain response, low density, fracture tolerance, and pliability, are suitable
for a broad range of sensing and actuating applications. i-EAPs that can be
operated under a few volts are particularly attractive because this allows
direct integration with advanced microelectronics, which opens up an entirely
new device paradigm for multifunctional large-scale integrations. However,
i-EAPs suffer relatively low efficiency as well as low actuation speed. The
porous electrodes in traditional i-EAPs have a random morphology that physically
impedes ion transport, resulting in slow response times and reduced efficiency.
The proposed study will exploit i-EAPs with uniquely controlled and tunable
nanostructure morphology and investigate ionic liquids that can maximize the
strain generated and actuation speed. Ion size, and its transport through
similarly sized (and controllable) nanoscale channels, has the potential to
uncover new physics limiting transport. By systematically tailoring the
nanostructure morphology, and varying the ionic liquids, we intend to unravel
fundamental processes controlling the electromechanical response in the i-EAP
materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
interdisciplinary collaborative effort will expand the known i-EAP materials,
allow the operation of i-EAP devices to much above the electrochemical window of
the electrolytes, develop an understanding of ion transport and storage in
nanocomposites with known nanostructure morphology, and provide structure-
property relations for different ions in i-EAP materials. This collaborative
program between Penn State and MIT will provide education and training of
graduate students and undergraduate in a multi-disciplinary exchange context,
ranging from nano-materials science and engineering, nanocomposites and MEMs
fabrication techniques, advanced nano-materials characterizations, through to
device-level integration. This program will pursue a proliferation of the broad-
impact results from this program by disseminating video features depicting the
broad energy applications of advanced materials and nanotechnology to high-
schools and county libraries and other institutions and two graduate courses
will be enhanced. The program will also actively disseminate knowledge through
public media outlets as appropriate, such as institutional press releases and
the Discovery &amp; Science Channels.