* 1130061
* Bayesian Network for Structural Health Monitoring and Decision
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Armen Der Kiureghian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 299,800.00

The purpose of the project is to develop a Bayesian network-based decision
making framework for effective utilization of structural health monitoring
systems with inherent uncertainties. The information gained from health
monitoring systems is often highly uncertain, leading to decisions about
inspection schedules, maintenance, repair, retrofit, or closure/continued
operation of a facility that are not completely clear. The Bayesian network,
extended with utility and decision nodes, will be used to provide quantitative
and graphical representation for near-real time information processing and
decision making about monitored structural systems. The proposed framework will
offer transparency in modeling and interaction with non-experts, modeling of
complex interdependent systems, and ability to learn from data to provide near-
real time decision making. The methodology will be applied to three
demonstrative applications: a monitored building structure subjected to a severe
earthquake for near-real time post-earthquake decision making; a continuously
monitored bridge for inspection and maintenance decisions to minimize life-cycle
cost; and selection of the best among a set of candidate structural health
monitoring systems based on the value of information they provide. The project
is expected to facilitate effective and objective use of health monitoring
systems in practice, leading to mitigate losses due to natural and man-made
hazards. The methodology will improve the ability of emergency responders to
make optimal decisions after a major hazard, such as a severe earthquake, or
managers of constructed facilities to implement inspection and maintenance plans
in order to minimize life-cycle cost, thereby benefiting society. The project
will provide multidisciplinary training to a graduate student and to
undergraduate summer interns, improve existing undergraduate and graduate
courses, and enhance international research collaboration with a European
country.