* 1130546
* Doctoral Dissertation Reserch:  The Spatial Ecology of Chronic Kidney Disease in Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sophia Giebultowicz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 0.00

The purpose of this doctoral dissertation research project is to investigate the
factors contributing to the development of CKD in Nicaragua from a spatial
epidemiological perspective. Renal insufficiency, or Chronic Kidney Disease
(CKD), has long been present in developed countries and it is primarily
attributed to hypertension and diabetes. A recent issue in public health,
however, is the reporting of abnormally high CKD rates in less-developed
countries where knowledge regarding the etiology of the disease is very limited.
The northwestern district of Nicaragua, where CKD is the number one cause of
death, presents one such setting along the Pacific coast of Central America, a
region with generally higher-than-expected rates. From the phenotypes observed
and the populations affected, environmental exposure is suspected as the main
contributing factor in this area. The study population is sampled from an
ongoing geographically-referenced health and demographic surveillance system in
the state of Leon. Data on each individual include CKD incidence, demographic
variables, lifestyle factors, and characteristics of the household of residence.
This information will be integrated into a geographic database of the study area
to first identify higher concentrations, or "clusters" of CKD incidence in the
region. The study area will be classified by land-cover type using satellite
imagery and data collected through field surveys. Upon integration of all data
within a geographic information system, each identified cluster will be
investigated using multi-level analyses to assess whether population-level
effects are the cause of spatial clusters. Those not due to the underlying
characteristics of the population will be further explored in relation to
location, environment, and surrounding spatial features using case-control
methods and distance-based regression models. It is hypothesized that proximity
to volcanic soils, agricultural land where pesticides are used, and contaminated
water sources will all be related to CKD incidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will inform understanding of CKD and its development in Nicaragua. This
is of particular importance because the cause of CKD in the developing world is
not well understood and because treatment and care is limited in poor countries.
This study can therefore be used to assist efforts in prevention of CKD in
Nicaragua and other developing countries. The approach taken in this project is
ecological, as it takes into consideration not only individual-level
characteristics, but also the environmental context in which the people with CKD
live. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.