* 1130483
* Beyond maternal effects: Transgenerational plasticity in thermal performance.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,05/31/2017
* Stephan Munch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2017
* USD 601,928.00

Many marine species are currently undergoing significant range shifts and
exceedingly rapid changes in phenotype driven, potentially, by warming, ocean
acidification, and human-induced evolution. Dramatic shifts in body size and
maturation have been observed in many marine fishes worldwide. There is
considerable debate over whether these changes are the result of rapid evolution
or physiological responses to changes in environmental variables. Attempts to
address these issues typically assume that thermal physiology is fixed or slow
to evolve. Transgenerational plasticity (TGP) occurs when the environment
experienced by the parents directly translates, without any changes in DNA
sequences, into significant changes in offspring. TGP in thermal performance
provides a mechanism for a rapid response to climate change that has, to date,
been demonstrated only in terrestrial plants. This project will provide the
first test of thermal TGP in marine systems and will explore its implications
for forecasting responses to human-induced evolution and climate change. First,
the PIs will test for thermal TGP in four taxonomically distinct fishes. Then,
using sheepshead minnows as a model, they will study the dependence of
transgenerational responses on the predictability of the thermal environment and
test whether disparate thermal environments select for different levels of TGP.
With these data they will develop the first stochastic population model
including TGP and use it to understand life history evolution and predict
responses to climate change.

Intellectual Merit: The existence of thermal TGP poses a serious challenge to
the idea that changes in thermal physiology are slow to evolve and can safely be
ignored in modeling population responses to climate change or harvest selection.
By extension, virtually all field estimates of heritability and physiological
measurements will need to be reconsidered in light of thermal TGP, as will
conclusions regarding rapid evolution in shifting environments. The research
team has made significant contributions to theoretical and empirical work on the
evolutionary, behavioral, and physiological ecology of growth in many different
species and environments. Together, the team has substantial prior experience in
all aspects of the proposed research and has worked together successfully for
many years.

Broader impacts: The research team is strongly committed to outreach and
mentoring students from diverse, under-represented backgrounds. Since 2000, they
have advised a total of 18 graduate students (45% women or minorities), and
mentored 37 undergraduates (54% women or minorities). They have presented their
findings in invited lectures, scientific meetings, and public lecture series.
The post-doctoral fellow will be active in Stony Brook's Center for
Communicating Science and will be a regular participant in the National Ocean
Sciences Bowl, aimed at enhancing high school marine education. The PIs will
work with UCSC's Institute for Scientist and Engineer Educators (ISEE) to
prepare graduate students for their role as future educators, and with UCSC's
NSF-supported Robert Noyce Teacher Scholars Program which funds scholarships for
students pursuing teaching careers in math and science. Research results will
also be brought to the public through the Seymour Discovery Center, a popular
public aquarium showcasing research conducted at the adjacent UCSC and NOAA
marine labs. The results will be important in conservation, resource management
and policy considerations, since they should provide insight into the capacity
for rapid adaptation to environmental change (in this case, temperature).
Finally, the results of this work could have commercial applications. One
example is the multi-billion dollar aquaculture industry, which currently
produces more than 50% of fish for human consumption and could benefit from
information on how to increase growth by manipulating parental temperature.