* 1130616
* Indirect Bridge Health Monitoring Using Moving Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jacobo Bielak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 505,248.00

The objective of this research is to provide accurate, rapid, nearly continuous,
and cost-effective assessments of a large population of bridges using the data
collected from a set of vehicles equipped with sensors able to capture the
dynamic interaction between the vehicles and the bridge. This grant provides
funding for the development of a new approach for assessing the health of
bridges that uses vehicles with on-board sensors to collect condition
information about the bridges over which they travel. The dynamic
characteristics of the bridge are affected by the damage in the form of cracks,
corrosion, and frozen bearings. The first premise of this research is that these
changes will be detectable from the dynamic responses collected from a large
number of vehicles travelling over the bridge. A second premise is that the
type, location and extent of the damage on the bridge will be classified. The
new approach will use multiresolution (MR) signal processing and pattern
recognition algorithms to detect and classify bridge
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will be
beneficial to bridge authorities by leading to the development of a new indirect
assessment method for monitoring the health of a large number of bridges using
the same instrumented vehicles. The method will have a significant economic
impact by providing an efficient and more cost effective method to improve the
management of the overall structural condition of bridges. The results of this
research will also lead to new signal-processing algorithms that will capture
signals collected from vehicles. In addition, knowledge gained during the
project will be useful for determining the applicability of this approach to
different types of structures. The experience and the insights provided by this
research project, which will directly involve two PhD graduate students and a
number of undergraduate students, will be transferred in courses and
demonstrations both at Carnegie Mellon University and the University of
Pittsburgh.