* 1130914
* Decomposition-Based Optimization:  A New Solver Paradigm
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Theodore Ralphs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 275,000.00

The research objectives of this award are (1) to develop advanced methodologies
based on decomposition for the solution of large-scale optimization problems,
(2) to integrate these methodologies with current state-of-the-art techniques,
and (3) to make these methodologies accessible to users through modeling
languages and extensions to the standard APIs (Application Program Interfaces)
provided by current state-of-the-art optimization software. Although
decomposition techniques have proven very effective in certain applications,
these methods have not been adopted in commercial solvers due to lack of a
mathematical theory integrating other advanced techniques; difficulties in
implementation; challenges associated with automatic detection of model
structure; and lack of support in modeling languages for expressing
decomposition strategies. This research aims to overcome these challenges and to
develop practical methodologies and implementations of advanced methods, along
with support for modeling by practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
this research will be in allowing practitioners to have access to powerful
methods of optimizing large-scale systems, whose ever-increasing complexity is
being driven in practice by the increased availability of data and storage.
Among other things, decomposition methods are the methods of choice for the
optimization of large-scale systems consisting of smaller subsystems linked by
relatively few system-level constraints. One typical example of such a system is
a logistics system consisting of geographically distributed warehouses, each
with an associated fleet of delivery vehicles. When the system-level constraints
are relaxed, the underlying optimization problem decomposes, leading to more
efficient solution methods. Decomposition may provide a practical approach to
parallelization and thus a means of capitalizing on the commoditization of
multi-core/multi-processor architectures. All methodologies will be implemented
in open source and distributed through the COIN-OR open source repository
(http://www.coin-or.org), ensuring wide dissemination.