* 1130796
* A Fundamental Framework for Health-Conscious Optimal Control in Battery Energy Systems, with Application to Lithium-ion Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Hosam Fathy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 355,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1130796&lt;br/&gt;Hosam Fathy&lt;br/&gt;Penn State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives: This proposal addresses the
fundamental problem of optimally controlling battery systems for performance,
efficiency, and health. The proposed research will use electrochemistry-based
models for optimal battery management, with application to health-conscious
battery charging, grid energy storage, and hybrid underwater vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit: The proposed research will add three original
contributions to the literature. First, it will furnish a novel framework for
combined order and index reduction in electrochemistry-based battery models,
thereby making these models more conducive to optimal control. Second, it will
use boundary control theory to optimize battery charging/discharging for long-
term health. Third, it will address the optimal power and thermal management of
a battery pack as a single integrated problem. Together, these contributions
have the transformative potential to bridge the current gap between the
electrochemistry and control technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The proposed research make a major contribution to battery energy storage and
power management. The research discoveries will furnish two new courses on
energy system modeling and optimal power management, and support two students in
a lab with a solid record of recruiting and training outstanding
underrepresented minority students. The PI will disseminate this research to the
electrochemistry and control communities ? as well as existing industrial
collaborators ? through an edited textbook and web-based seminar series.
Finally, the research will enable the PI to incorporate a stronger battery
energy storage components into existing toy kits for K-12 student education and
outreach.