* 1130266
* Collaborative Research: Staffing and Routing in Service Systems with Uncertain Arrival Rates: An Integrated Stochastic Programming and Asymptotic Analysis Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* James Luedtke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2016
* USD 206,119.00

The research objective of this award is to provide managers with sound,
practical tools to efficiently balance cost and quality when making staffing and
routing decisions in general service systems. Specifically, we consider service
systems having multiple customer and server types, and uncertainties in customer
arrival volume and server availability. A key complication is that these systems
possess uncertainties at multiple scales: operational uncertainty in the service
and arrival times, and higher-order uncertainty in the customer volumes and
server availability. We will study this problem using an approach that
integrates asymptotic analysis, which effectively addresses operational
uncertainties, and stochastic programming, which effectively addresses high-
order uncertainties. Specifically, we will explore the use of shadow policies
for real-time customer routing decisions and use asymptotic analysis to
demonstrate their quality for high-volume systems. The results of this analysis
will be integrated into a stochastic integer programming approach that
determines staffing levels and server schedules. Extensions of the methodology
to find good schedules for medium and small-scale service systems will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research will provide managers of complex
service systems with practical policies for real-time assignment of customers to
servers and methods for server scheduling that provide solutions that are robust
to uncertainties in customer volume and server availability. These methods are
directly applicable to call center systems and, by better matching servers to
requirements, have the potential to reduce costs while providing higher quality
service. If successful, the extensions of our methods to small and medium-scale
systems will also help managers of health-care systems plan schedules of
physicians, nurses, and other health-care providers in the face of a very
uncertain and heterogeneous patient population. The PI's will also collaborate
to include selective components of each other's discipline into the courses they
teach, thereby increasing the range of tools for dealing with uncertainty that
their students learn.