* 1130900
* Closed Loop Supply Chain Design for Uncertain Carbon Regulations and Random Product Flows
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Sarah Ryan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2016
* USD 250,001.00

The research objective of this award is to formulate and solve a tractable
closed-loop supply chain network design problem that includes: (a) facility
configuration that is robust to variations in the cost and constraint
implications of possible carbon emission regulations; (b) transportation
capacities of various modes that accommodate random variations in demands and
returns; and (c) a product return policy that balances the tradeoffs in
revenues, transportation costs, and emission-related costs. The problem's
difficulty arises from the discrete character of facility investment and return
policy choices, the nonlinearity introduced by seeking a robust design, and the
large number of scenarios required to accurately represent stochastic demand and
return quantities. By restricting how the transportation capacities depend on
the uncertain carbon policy parameters, an affinely adjustable robust
counterpart is obtained for the design problem with stochastic subproblems. The
research tasks are to approximate the discrete solution to this robust
counterpart and to efficiently reduce the number of stochastic scenarios to be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will help manufacturing firms to maintain global competitiveness by proactively
designing their closed loop supply chains in anticipation of possible market
mechanisms to control carbon emissions while mitigating the uncertainties
associated with transportation demands. The innovative combination of robust and
stochastic optimization will be widely applicable to capacity investment
problems under uncertainties that differ fundamentally in character, depending
on the existence of historical precedent and the repeatability of conditions.
Results and insights derived from this work will enhance the training of
graduate students in network and stochastic optimization as well as
undergraduate students in engineering economic analysis. A related complex, ill-
structured problem-solving experience will be developed for engineering economy
courses and, to ease its adoption in large-enrollment settings, will be
disseminated via open-source software tools.