* 1130368
* Computational and Experimental Multiscale Analysis of Heterogeneous Solids and Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Massimo Ruzzene, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this grant is to investigate the application of
multiscale analysis for wave propagation in solids with heterogeneities and
microstructured materials. A novel analysis technique to account for the
multiple scales that appear at the level of the geometric discretization of the
analysis domain is proposed. This method relies on the formulation of multi-node
elements, called multiscale elements, capable of explicitly modeling the actual
geometry of the material at sub-elemental length scales. Within each element,
geometric and material heterogeneities are incorporated through locally tailored
multiscale interpolation functions. These shape functions approximate the
unknown displacement and stress fields from a finite number of nodal values and
are obtained as local solutions of the differential operator governing the
problem at the small scales. The developed methodology will be applied to the
design of periodic and graded metamaterials for wave guiding, steering and
focusing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research findings will improve the
understanding of wave motion in damaged structures, and will enable the detailed
characterization and quantification of structural damage in critical structural
components. Advances from the research topics will be disseminated widely
through academic courses on wave mechanics and in undergraduate research
opportunities. Broadening of participation will be achieved by specifically
working with underrepresented students in conjunction with ongoing programs
available at Georgia Tech. In addition, educational laboratory activities and
classroom modules, developed through the GIFT program at Georgia Tech, will
expose high school and middle school underrepresented students to basic results
of the research and to underlying wave mechanics principles.