* 1130462
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A High-Resolution Record of Holocene Climate Change from Big Soda Lake, Nevada
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Roger Byrne, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Oxygen isotope records of climate change are used to quantify past climatic
conditions, to identify mechanisms of past climatic variability, to verify model
simulations of past climate. This research will develop a high-resolution
isotopic record of climate change in northwestern Nevada over the past 4000
years. Sediment cores recovered from Big Soda Lake near Fallon, Nevada are
seasonally laminated which make it possible to reconstruct a detailed high-
resolution record (i.e. sub-decadal) of Holocene climate change in the western
part of the Great Basin. The lake is primarily fed by groundwater; therefore,
changes in the fauna, mineralogy and geochemistry are directly related to
changes in climate and human activity. A key question is to what extent
prehistoric changes in groundwater levels compare to those recorded during
recent historical times. Sedimentary characteristics such as geochemistry, grain
size, magnetic susceptibility, and organic content will be measured to identify
regional changes in climate. Accurate chronological control will be ensured
through multiple methods including varve (sediment layer) counting, radiocarbon
dates on pollen concentrations, dated tephras, non-native pollen and lead-210
dating. This research will contribute to our current understanding of climate
change in through creation of continuous sediment core records that fill
important gaps from previous research.

This sub decadal-resolution study will resolve temporal gaps in our
understanding of the regional variation of past climate change, and resolve
chronological problems that have hindered previous lake studies in the region.
The results will provide insight into the variability of late Holocene climate
change in the western Great Basin. Understanding past climate change in this
drylands region with an expanding population, can help predict potential future
change where natural and human activities are sensitive to changes in the water
balance.

As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.