* 1130786
* Cascading interactions of herbivore loss and nutrient enrichment on coral reef macroalgae, corals, and microbial dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Rebecca Vega, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 850,106.00

Coral reefs in the Caribbean Sea are undergoing unprecedented declines in coral
cover due in large part to climate change, pollution, and reductions in fish
biodiversity and abundance. Macroalgae have become abundant on reefs, probably
due to decreases in herbivory (e.g., through overfishing) and increases in
anthropogenic inputs of nutrients. The spread of macroalgae has negative
feedbacks on reef recovery because algae are often superior competitors and
suppress growth of both adult and juvenile corals. A majority of reef studies to
date have focused on how stressors affect macroorganisms, while relatively few
have investigated how these stressors and the resultant algal-dominated states
affect microorganisms. Yet, coral reef-associated microbes play significant
roles in coral reef ecosystems through biogeochemical cycling and disease. Since
microbes are important mutualists of corals as well as potential pathogens, it
is important to understand the mechanisms that control their taxonomic and
functional diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
quantify how alterations of top-down (removal of herbivorous fish) and bottom-up
(inorganic nutrient addition) forces alter macrobial as well as microbial
dynamics on coral reefs in order to understand the mechanisms that reinforce
coral-depauperate reef systems. This work asks two main
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Q1. How do nutrient enrichment and herbivore
removal interact to affect benthic algal abundance, coral-algal interactions,
and coral survivorship and growth?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Q2. How do nutrient
enrichment and herbivore removal affect bacterial abundance, taxonomic
diversity, and functional diversity on and within
corals?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will directly and empirically
address many of the current hypotheses about how bottom-up and top-down forces
alter reef dynamics. The PIs will investigate: (1) the impact of multiple
stressors over several years; (2) impacts on multiple levels of biological
organization (from fishes to algae to microbes); and (3) the mechanisms
underlying changes in algal-coral microbe interactions. Significantly, the
approach will provide the statistical power necessary to distinguish between
seasonal- and stress-induced changes in macro- and microbial diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is a unique combination of experimental
ecology and microbiology that will improve our ability to evaluate global
threats to reefs. Training will include a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate
student, and two undergraduates in the fields of marine ecology, microbial
symbiosis, and molecular biology. The project will also provide research
opportunities for undergraduate minority students, since FIU is one of the
largest minority and urban-serving institutions in the US, with over 70% of its
students from under-represented groups in science (59% Hispanic, 13% Black, 4%
Asian; 56% female). The PIs are also committed to strong outreach programs
outside their university at both the local and national levels. For example,
they have established a monthly science caf√© ("Eat, Think, and Be Merry!") at an
independent Miami bookstore to provide a casual environment for the public to
come together with local scientists to learn about and discuss science and
conservation topics that impact Florida waters. They are also collaborating with
Symbio Studios to produce videos on coral reef ecosystems for their educational
series for Houghton Mifflin Harcourt's Science Fusion programs.