* 1130548
* Computational Methods for Optimized Reliability and Efficiency in Smart Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Brigham, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 191,000.00

The goal of the research is to develop new computational techniques for
nondestructive evaluation (NDE) of structural components that will provide fast,
reliable, and highly accurate quantitative evaluation of the current state of
structural properties. Algorithms will combine efficient computational models of
the structural response with optimization approaches to identify the structure's
state of degradation with a given set sensor measurements. To obtain high level
of efficiency and accuracy, novel model reduction techniques will be established
that are tailored for NDE applications. In addition, the algorithms will define
the optimal methods of exciting the structure and measuring the structural
response to provide a high-resolution local description of the damage. The
testing methods will be designed to maximize the sensitivity of the structural
properties to the test parameters and will be applicable to a host of NDE
applications from nuclear reactor to bridge structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will enable engineers to more
efficiently and accurately predict the current state of degradation and the
remaining life of a structure, leading to more timely response to hazardous
conditions and fewer false alarms and closures. The algorithms developed in the
project will be freely disseminated to the community for wide-spread use and
future developments. The research will provide advanced training to graduate and
undergraduate students and establish a summer research program for
undergraduates and pre-college students in collaboration with the office of
diversity to engage students from traditionally underrepresented groups in
engineering.