* 1130843
* A Multidisciplinary Investigation of Coastal System Response to Sea-Level Rise, Climate Dynamics, and Geomorphic Change
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Ryan Mulligan, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,922.00

Funds are provided to the PI who will use observations and analyses of coastal
stratigraphy and geomorphology, paleobathymetric models, geochemical proxies,
and a physical oceanographic model to understand Holocene responses of a coastal
system in North Carolina to changes in climate, geomorphology, and
hydrodynamics. The modern estuarine system has a microtidal range of
approximately 0.1 m, due in part to the existence of the Outer Banks barrier
islands. They hypothesize that barrier island segmentation during two intervals
of Holocene time resulted in an astronomical tidal component substantially in
excess of the modern system. To understand the response of the system to
geomorphic changes brought on by climate and sea-level conditions, they propose
to develop paleoenvironmental and paleobathymetric models of this system at
specific time slices, and model the tidal effects (amplitude, currents, sediment
transport, salinity). Geochemical proxies will be used to understand the
regional climate changes before, during, and following these two events. These
data will facilitate a better understanding of the past coastal system response
to climate conditions, and the potential for future changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This investigation will support two
masters students and one undergraduate student at ECU. Sea-level rise and its
effects are of high societal relevance all along the US East Coast.