* 1131157
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socialization and Creativity in the Advertising Industry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Erin Leahey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 7,002.00

SES - 1131157&lt;br/&gt;Erin Leahey (PI)&lt;br/&gt;Sharon Koppman (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation
Research: Socialization and Creativity in the Advertising
Industry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The industries that produce
intellectual property, also known as "creative industries," play a pivotal role
in the economies of advanced countries. Yet, we know little about what
influences people who work in the creative industries. This study examines
whether socialization patterns affect selection into creative positions and how
professionals in the field attain legitimacy. This project focuses on the case
of advertising professionals employed in the creative and accounts departments
of advertising agencies. Within this context, the project examines the link
between socialization patterns and creativity: whether early exposure to diverse
ideas and cultural forms increases the chance that an individual will seek out a
creative position. This project will also contribute to the theoretical debate
on culture and inequality by demonstrating how cultural signals are used to gain
legitimacy in the workplace. Data will be collected through a survey distributed
to a random sample of advertising professionals. In addition, the study involves
forty semi-structured interviews with professionals employed in elite
advertising agencies and four months of participant observation within an
agency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This project has
practical implications for employers as well as educators preparing students to
enter the creative industries. Labor markets in advanced industrialized
countries around the world are shifting towards occupations related to the
knowledge economy, including but not limited to the creative sector. According
to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the
European Commission and the United States Census, creative industries are the
fastest growing sector in many industrialized countries. By contributing to our
understanding of this large and growing economic sector, the project may inform
our ability to maximize global competitiveness. Findings from this study may
also inform training and education programs that focus on providing cultural
literacy with the goal to train the next generation of professionals in the
field.