* 1131006
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Entrepreneurship and Mobility in Immigrant Enclaves
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Sharon Yoon, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2012
* USD 8,977.00

SES - 1131006&lt;br/&gt;Gilbert Rozman (PI)&lt;br/&gt;Sharon Yoon (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation
Research: Entrepreneurship and Mobility in Immigrant
Enclaves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Ethnic enclaves can help
immigrants use ethnic solidarity to become upwardly mobile. Such upward mobility
trends are especially likely if an enclave is socioeconomically diverse, which
itself often results from successive immigration waves. However, enclaves can
also experience internal conflicts and factionalism, which can hinder working-
class co-ethnics from effectively mobilizing resources and becoming upwardly
mobile. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the Korean enclave in
Beijing as a case in point to examine the conditions under which co-ethnic
immigrants manage to mobilize resources and pursue upward mobility under adverse
conditions, i.e, where the enclave experiences strained solidarity. By strained
solidarity, we mean significant levels of distrust manifested at the community
level that impair smooth interactions among co-ethnics. The Korean enclave in
Beijing is split (both socially and institutionally) between fourth-generation
Korean Chinese rural migrants and recent South Korean immigrants. Nonetheless,
the enclave has evolved into a flourishing residential and commercial district
in which even lower-status Korean Chinese minorities have become increasingly
upwardly mobile. The PIs examine the degree to which these mobility trends are
related to various forms of cultural capital (linguistic, knowledge-based) and
hypothesize that relying on transnational resources plays an important role in
this context. Specifically, ties with both the recently arrived South Korean
entrepreneurial class and resources available via their country of origin, South
Korea. The study employs an original survey, interviews, and ethnographic field
work involving Koreans in Beijing to test theoretically grounded
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This study helps us
understand the changing nature of upward mobility in an increasingly inter-
connected world. It may advance our understanding of how historically
disadvantaged minority groups can employ bilingual and bicultural abilities and
other assets (innovations in communication and travel) to improve their mobility
chances in ways that would not have been possible even a few decades ago.
Findings from this study may be of interest to urban planners as well as policy
makers and economists. In addition, this case study contributes to the
sociological literature by examining whether classical notions of group
solidarity as a mechanism for upward mobility apply to contemporary
transnational enclaves.