* 1131392
* HI2: A New Measure of Hurricane Impact for Innovation in Enterprise Risk Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Daan Liang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2017
* USD 350,398.00

The objective of this research is to create a Hurricane Impact Index (HI2)
serving as basis and catalyst for innovation in enterprise risk management. As a
result of global climate change and rapid growth in coastal regions, businesses
and communities are facing unprecedented challenges in preparing for and
recovering from natural disasters. Traditional methods, processes, and
techniques in risk management used for mitigating severity and/or frequency of
adverse situations at individual enterprises have proven ineffective in
catastrophic events like hurricanes whose impacts are experienced on a much
larger scale and in manners that are often nonlinear. The proposed Hurricane
Impact Index is a paradigm shift aimed at continuously measuring realized effect
on business operations and economic performance through observation of physical
and economic conditions and advanced modeling of system interdependencies. It
would fundamentally transform the way hurricane risk is characterized, managed,
and mitigated with the aim to fill a critical knowledge gap in quantifying and
modeling hurricane-induced damages. The framework of this research can be
readily extended to other natural hazards such as earthquake and flooding.
Specific aims to be pursued include: 1) Comprehensive and continual assessment
of physical damages to built environment; and 2) Development and validation of
the Hurricane Impact Index. The success of this work will represent an important
step towards our long term goal of establishing alternative mechanisms of risk
transfer and risk hedging that are more efficient, transparent, and market-
driven.&lt;br/&gt;The creation of Hurricane Impact Index will give rise to more
powerful and cost-effective financial instruments complementing existing
weather-based derivatives and insurance policies. It can play a crucial role in
not only stimulating innovations in risk management but also supporting decision
making and policymaking on community sustainability and resiliency. Integrated
in the project is a plan for broad dissemination of findings through workshops
and technology transfer and commercialization in addition to standard academic
outlets. The project will support doctoral students in wind science and
engineering with sustained effort for recruiting students from underrepresented
groups. These activities collectively will provide valuable training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, nurture the next
generation of experts in multidisciplinary disaster-focused research, and
contribute to the knowledgebase of hazard mitigation.