* 1131643
* Robust State and Uncertainty Estimation for Unmanned Systems in the Presence of External Uncertainties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Eric Butcher, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 278,158.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a framework for estimation of
motion states and uncertain external inputs for feedback control of unmanned
vehicles operating in poorly known environments. This framework will
specifically address uncertainties due to uncertain external inputs, sensor
noise in motion sensors, and time delay in feedback control. A global treatment
of vehicle dynamics will make it possible to estimate and control the motion of
rapidly maneuvering vehicles in the presence of uncertainties. The estimation
schemes are deterministic, but approximate the underlying probability density
function describing the uncertainty in the dynamics of the vehicle. A robust
control scheme using the estimates of states and uncertain inputs in the
presence of bounded time-delay will be formulated to stabilize and control the
vehicle. A computational algorithm, based on a discrete-time interpretation of
mechanics, will be used to implement the estimation and control schemes in real-
time. Deliverables include software implementations of the components of this
framework, documentation of research results, and engineering student education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will directly impact applications of
unmanned systems in poorly known environments. Example applications include
space exploration, satellite geodesy, data gathering from tropical storms,
underwater pipeline leak detection, and search and rescue missions. Software
made possible through this research will offer improvements to the reliability
of unmanned systems used in such applications. In particular, results from this
research will (1) improve characterization of uncertain inputs affecting the
motion of unmanned vehicles, (2) enable the unmanned vehicle to learn and adapt
to the uncertainties in its environment, and (3) characterize and exploit time
delay in motion control. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will
benefit through classroom instruction and involvement in the research. An
educational website will be developed to disseminate research results to
students, experts, and the community at large.