* 1131698
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disengagement from Terrorism in Northern Ireland and the Basque Country
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* William Rogers Brubaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Terrorist groups are generally studied in isolation from the social movements in
which they are embedded. As a result, understanding the phenomenon of terrorism
and the process of its conclusion are limited. This comparative historical
investigation of the success of the Northern Irish peace process during the
1990s and the failure over the last decade to achieve peace in the Basque
Country of Spain provides an explanation of how terrorism ends based on the
contributions of social movement theory.

Theory suggests that centralized and hierarchical terrorist movements are better
able to negotiate disengagement from violence than are de-centered, loosely-
structured movements. These movement structures are largely a product of the
state's counterterrorist efforts. Targeted counterterrorist policy focused on
the dismantling of the military wing of the movement allows for the emergence
and consolidation of peace factions within terrorist movements. More broadly,
focused repression, targeting both violent and non-violent militants, actually
favors violence-advocating hardliners.

Combining both archival and interview-based research, this research reconstructs
the strategic discourse that occurred within the Irish and Basque movements in
order to demonstrate the specific constraints these movements faced in ending
violence. It also reconstructs the ways in which peace factions within the
movements overcame the constraints and worked to end terrorist conflicts.

This research has implications beyond providing an explanation for the Irish
success and Basque failure. First, by exploring the interactions between
counterterrorism and internal movement politics, the findings can contribute to
crafting policy which facilitates the emergence and development of peace
factions within terrorist movements. Second, this research provides policy-
makers and mediators with a better understanding of particular dilemmas and
obstacles that peace factions face within their movements in leaving violence
behind. Finally, recent developments in Basque politics make this project
especially timely. On September 5, 2010, ETA initiated yet another ceasefire. By
informing policy audiences in Spain of the ways in which previous attempts to
resolve the conflict failed, and by identifying applicable parallels from the
"successful" Irish case, this project can contribute to advancing strategies
which could facilitate the eventual resolution of violent conflict in the Basque
country.