* 1131644
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial and Temporal Configurations of Potential Distributions of Grassland Sparrows
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* A. Townsend Peterson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2013
* USD 11,749.00

One problem that has vexed biogeographers and others interested in the
distribution of different species is the difficulties that many species have in
adapting when their habitats are changed by human activity or other forces. A
related problem is the difficulty in monitoring the number and distribution of
these species. One such species is Henslow's sparrow (Ammodramus henslowii), a
grassland-nesting bird that is found in the central U.S. and nearby parts of
Canada. This doctoral dissertation research project will take a multifaceted
view of Henslow's sparrow distributional biology, focusing on improving
understanding about how populations respond to broad-scale habitat changes and
of the extent to which human activities affect the amount and distribution of
its breeding habitat, particularly in Midwestern grasslands. Henslow's sparrows
currently have a distribution that is patchy and local; although the limits of
the species' range are perhaps well-known, existing surveys are largely confined
to roads. Current information therefore may neither represent all available
habitat, such as grasslands in airfields, military bases, and reclaimed surface
mines, nor does it accurately estimate population trends. No detailed map of
suitable habitat for the full breeding distribution currently is available. The
doctoral student will use ecological niche models to produce a detailed
distributional understanding by identifying key environmental variables and
characterizing the amount of suitable breeding habitat and its spatiotemporal
dynamics within a patch-matrix framework while taking into account landscape
heterogeneity and habitat patch characteristics produced by year-to-year
disturbance dynamics. Once these models have been validated through independent
field surveys, year-to-year variation of the extent and arrangement of suitable
patches will be analyzed. This analysis will provide insight and explanation for
the broad-scale nomadic behavior documented in earlier studies of the breed.
These models also will be used to evaluate how well current survey techniques
function to sample Henslow's sparrow breeding habitat. The student will evaluate
these models by summarizing the amount of suitable grasslands in patches
immediately surrounding routes identified by the North American Breeding Bird
Survey and by comparing it to the broader distribution of this habitat (produced
by the niche models) and the proportion of habitat types within the landscape
matrix (using land-cover maps).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Henslow's sparrows have
very specific nesting habitat requirements that make them relatively good
indicators of healthy tallgrass prairie ecosystems. Like many other obligate
grassland species, they have suffered severe habitat loss as a result of
fragmentation and conversion of grasslands, a loss estimated to have exceeded 99
percent across North America. Unlike a few other species that adapted easily to
these changes, Henslow's sparrows have not responded well across their breeding
range, and they have exhibited significant population declines over the last
century. Recent studies have shown that this species does not return
consistently to patches of habitat from year to year, which makes management of
their habitat more difficult. This project will make significant contributions
to the assessment of Henslow's sparrow populations and trends. The project also
will provide a test of the capability of current survey techniques to
effectively survey rare species and spatially limited habitat types. The project
also will facilitate evaluation of recommendations for habitat management that
more effectively accommodate the nomadic behavior as well as the amount,
distribution, arrangement, or disturbance dynamics of this habitat at landscape
scales. The results of this project therefore will potentially affect how
species like Henslow's sparrows are managed and will prompt reevaluation of
population trend estimates or habitat availability for other, similar species.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.