* 1131620
* Collaborative Research: Controls on Hadal Megafaunal Community Structure: a Systematic Examination of Pressure, Food Supply, and Topography
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Timothy Shank, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,058,736.00

Intellectual Merit. Severe technical challenges associated with the extremes of
hydrostatic pressure have prevented major advances in hadal ecological studies,
and relegated hadal systems to among the most poorly investigated habitats on
Earth. The recent development of the fully functional Hybrid Remotely-Operated
Vehicle Nereus has now prompted scientists from around the world to join
together to identify the foremost standing questions in hadal science. Through
this project, Hadal Ecosystems Studies (HADES) program, PIs from 7 Institutions
from around the world will determine the composition and distribution of hadal
species, the role of hadal pressures (piezolyte concentrations, enzyme function
under pressure), food supply (distribution of POC with the abundance and biomass
of trench organisms, and metabolic rates/energetic demand), and depth/topography
(genetic divergence and spatial connectivity of populations) have on impacting
deep-ocean community structure. This project will examine these factors using
the world's first full-ocean depth hybrid remotely operated vehicle (HROV) in
conjunction with the only full-ocean depth imaging lander (Hadal-Lander). This
will pose a comparative framework for investigating hadal and abyssal community
structure as driven by pressure (and associated factors), food supply,
physiological adaptations, and topographic relationships. The investigators'
first order hypotheses to explain how faunal diversity and communities are
structured in trenches completely lack the data necessary to test them. Thus
this project will provide the first seafloor data and samples in one of the
world's best, yet little known trenches- the Kermadec Trench (SW Pacific Ocean).
The first international Trench Connection Symposium in 2010 concluded the need
to identify patterns of trench faunal composition and understand the first order
factors that play a role in structuring these ecosystems. Megafaunal community
structure and the relationship between POC and benthic bacterial biomass will be
examined as a function of depth and location by systematic high-definition
imaging and sediment/faunal sampling transects from abyssal to full trench
depths both along and perpendicular to the trench axis. Population genetic
approaches will provide levels of genetic divergence and evolutionarily
independent lineages to assess the role of depth and topography in trenches and
their adjacent abyssal plain in promoting the formation of species.
Physiological constraints will be investigated by examining in-situ respiration
of selected fauna and tissue concentrations of such protein stabilizers as
trimethylamine oxide (TMAO), and the structural adaptations of macromolecules.
These objectives represent an achievable and powerful combination of current
technological capability, scientific understanding and theory, and the expertise
of an international consortium of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The project will direct new avenues of research in the deep ocean. The
expedition and results will be disseminated broadly to the scientific community
and the public through both active metadata and data sharing mechanisms, award
winning sea-going web-based education curricula and data-posting web portals,
museum exhibits, and a major National Geographic television event featuring
trench and deep-sea science, including life forms at the deepest depths on earth
will engage the imagination of scientists and public alike. Outreach with
respect to global scientific literacy will focus on the fundamental planetary
processes associated with hadal faunal ecology and evolution at the world's
deepest trenches. A daily-updated web site from sea will provide real-time
public, museum, and aquaria access to the ongoing cruise activities and
discoveries. The integral involvement of postdocs, graduate and undergraduate
students will foster professional and educational advancement opportunities for
underrepresented groups. In addition, we will stimulate a broader collective of
interested biologists, chemists, geologists, and others to advance the
application of ecological and evolutionary theory to better understand the
biodiversity that inhabits hadal ecosystems. To this end, the investigators will
develop an international consortium for hadal science dedicated to training the
next generation of marine scientists and in conjunction with INDEEP,
international collaboration for deep-sea research. The use of the HROV Nereus
will advance this vehicle's capabilities for a broad range of disciplinary use,
drive advances in applying technologies for conducting rigorous hadal and
abyssal science, and further off-shoot technologies for use by the broader
scientific community. The results of this project will be the first of its kind
regarding the environmental variables that structure trench communities and lay
the essential foundation for future work on the dynamic processes that create
and maintain biodiversity in the deep ocean.