* 1131537
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Cost-Effective Energy Efficiency Management of Sustainable Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Lin Li, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 246,355.00

The research objective of this award is to establish a systems view of energy
efficiency in manufacturing systems, and to design a real-time control for a
cost-effective and energy-efficient sustainable manufacturing system.
Conventionally, improving productivity has been the primary research focus in
the literature on manufacturing systems, and little attention has been paid to
the systematic study of the complex issue of simultaneously reducing energy
consumption and minimizing production cost. This research utilizes the
opportunity offered by modern smart production equipment with multiple-energy
consumption states/modes (instead of just on and off) to reduce energy
consumption. The objective is to dynamically control each machine to achieve
system optimality and maintain production goal. A semi-Markov decision process
framework for the modeling and optimization of production processes is proposed
that minimizes the energy consumption and overall system cost. Approximation
methods will be developed to find near-optimal operational solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes the formulation and systematic study
of an extremely important problem that is faced by the U.S. industry today, and
the development of a framework for dynamically determining the production policy
that minimizes energy consumption and overall system cost. If successful, this
research will result in a deeper understanding of the optimal operational
structure of manufacturing system in the green world today, and eventually will
lead to economical and environmental impact. This project will closely integrate
with the training of graduate as well as undergraduate students, especially
female and underrepresented minority students. The ideas and results will be
broadly disseminated through classroom teachings, conference presentations, and
journal publications. The transformative impact shall come from our close
collaboration with industrial partners, student summer interns, and the
implementation of the research findings.