* 1131266
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Integrated Microstructure and Melt Pool Dimension Control for Electron Beam Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Nathan Klingbeil, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 242,830.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Collaborative research project is to provide fundamental and
experimentally-verified guidelines for integrated control of melt pool
dimensions and microstructure in electron beam additive manufacturing, a class
of emerging manufacturing processes which build geometric features by locally
melting metal and building it up layer-by-layer. The research approach involves
numerical modeling performed at the academic institutions in conjunction with
electron beam deposition experiments performed by the industrial and government
collaborators. Simulation results will be presented across a wide range of
electron beam powers, travel speeds, material feed rates, and deposit
geometries, and will guide the choice of critical experiments conducted by the
industrial and government collaborators. Models and experiments will include the
effects of local tailoring of temperatures in and around the melt pool by rapid
movement of the electron beam across the part surface.

If successful, the benefits of this research will include not only a fundamental
understanding of how electron beam process variables relate to final part
quality, but also a practical basis for simultaneous control of melt pool
geometry and microstructure. This will represent a significant contribution
toward qualification of electron beam manufacturing processes for aerospace and
other commercial applications. Research activities will be integrated with
ongoing NSF-supported educational research projects at both academic
institutions. Students performing research on this project will develop a
combined manufacturing, solid mechanics, heat transfer and materials background
that will make them highly valuable in industry and academics.