* 1131758
* MEMS-Switched Acoustic Delay-Lines Microsystems for Advanced Ultrasonic Imaging Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jun Zou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 366,998.00

The objective of this research is to achieve true time delays in the acoustic
signal channels of ultrasonic transceivers by using a new micro acoustic delay-
line system controlled by in-line micro-electromechanical-systems (MEMS)
acoustic switches. Multiple channels of time-delayed acoustic signals will be
transmitted or received without mixing with each other with a single-channel
transceiver module. Therefore, the massive transceiver electronics widely used
in today?s ultrasonic imaging systems could become unnecessary. The approach
includes (1) understanding the ultrasonic wave mode propagation, conversion and
attenuation in micro acoustic delay-line structures; (2) characterizing and
optimizing the operating speed and insertion loss of MEMS acoustic switches; (3)
establishing a predictive physics-based model and investigating control
algorithms to further improve the acoustic switching performance; and (4)
evaluating the ultrasonic beam-forming capability of the micro acoustic delay-
line system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research could enable new
ultrasonic imaging systems with enhanced performance and portability while
lowering power consumption and cost. Moreover, the new ultrasonic imaging
systems would be able to accommodate a variety of functional components to
enable advanced multimodal sensing and imaging modalities in a single compact
package. Application areas include ultrasonic imaging applications in medicine,
industry, civil engineering and military. The multidisciplinary nature of this
research is expected to provide unique learning and training opportunities.
Teachers and students from underrepresented school districts from grades 7-12
will be reached out to through the Enrichment Experiences in Engineering and the
Discover Engineering programs at the Texas A&amp;M University, and the Infinity
Project and the Kids Ahead program at the Southern Methodist University.
Research results will be incorporated into the principle investigators?
curriculum development at both the undergraduate and graduate levels and will be
disseminated through journal/conference publications and outreach activities to
the research community and general public.