* 1131816
* The Use of Nitrogen Isotopes of Amino Acids To Understand Marine Sedimentary 15N Records
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Matthew McCarthy, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2016
* USD 349,999.00

The bioavailability of nutrients plays a crucial role in oceanic biological
productivity, the carbon cycle, and climate change. The global ocean inventory
of nitrogen (N) is determined by the balance of N-fixation (sources) and
denitrification (sinks). In this three-year project, a researcher from the
University of California, Santa Cruz, will focus on developing compound-specific
N isotope (d15N) analysis of amino acids as a new tool for understanding N
source and transformation of organic matter in paleo-reservoirs. The offsets in
the isotopic ratios of individual amino acid groups may yield information about
trophic transfer, heterotrophic microbial reworking, and autotrophic versus
heterotrophic sources. By measuring and comparing the bulk and amino acid d15N
in size-fractioned samples from plankton tows, sediments traps, and multi-cores
in oxic and suboxic depositional environments, the researcher will: (1) Provide
a proxy of the d15N of average exported photoautotrophic organic matter; and (2)
Provide a new level of detail into sedimentary organic N degradation and
preservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project will
improve understanding of the fundamental underpinnings and behaviors of d15N
amino acid patterns and how they behave in contrasting sedimentary environments,
while also developing a potential paleoceanographic proxy. Funding will support
a graduate student and undergraduate research at the institution. The researcher
will also conduct community outreach in the form of a workshop/tutorial on the
proxy development.