* 1131022
* BIOME-A Bio-Robotic Infrastructure for Oceanic Microbial Ecology
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Lee Kerkhof, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2015
* USD 826,509.00

The PI's request funding to develop BIOME, a Bio-Robotic Infrastructure for
Oceanic Microbial Ecology. Coastal ecosystems are central to global
biogeochemical cycles despite their relatively small size; therefore, biological
oceanography has focused on understanding microbial bloom dynamics on
continental shelves. Unfortunately, our concepts of how a diverse bacterial
community transitions between seasons remain incomplete because of our inability
to sample on the appropriate time and spaces scales to resolve the processes
influencing the microbiota. In order to address this limitation, we are
proposing a build a biological sampler compatible with the Slocum Glider. What
is missing is a component capable of collecting and returning intact biomass to
the laboratory for molecular ecology studies to delineate the mechanisms driving
bacterial evolution in the sea. this project will provide a platform to define
the metabolic and genomic properties and mechanisms responsible for microbial
growth, adaptation, and survival in the oceanic environment. The BIOME research
will address fundamental questions in marine ecology and elucidate the
mechanisms supporting the diversity of microorganisms in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
broad impacts of this proposal are greater than average because the device being
designed has potential to be deployed widely if it is successful and would lead
to more accurate models of ocean microbial community structure and activity. The
PIs propose to develop a K-12 lesson plan about bacteria in the Mid-Atlantic
Bight with the help of an education outreach specialist associated with the Mid
Atlantic Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence, and have included this
aspect of the project in the budget. There is a plan for disseminating the
lessons to K-12 teachers through a variety of on-line and summer teacher
training programs, to the public through lectures at local library, and to kids
through the Rutgers 4-H after school programs. The PIs also intend (though don't
lay out any specific plan) to include underrepresented ethnic groups in summer
research through the RISE @ Rutgers program.