* 1131518
* Collaborative Research: Critical Hydraulic Conditions for Piping in Sandy Soils, Laboratory Measurement and Numerical Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Rice, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,000.00

The objective of this project is to provide fundamental understanding of the
piping phenomenon and practical solutions to the critical hydraulic conditions
for piping that account for: 1) soil properties (e.g., gradation, grain size,
and grain shape), 2) direction of flow, 3) stress condition, and 4) exit face
conditions. In current geotechnical engineering practice, these factors are
generally not considered and the critical hydraulic gradient is assumed to be
only a function of the soil buoyant unit weight. However, recent analyses,
laboratory experiments, and field observations indicate that piping can be
initiated at gradients much lower than the values predicted by the current
practice. Therefore, the current practice may be unconservative under certain
conditions. The project objectives will be achieved through: 1) experimental
measurements of critical hydraulic gradients of soil specimens with varied soil
properties, direction of flow, and exit face conditions, using laboratory
devices designed specifically for this project, 2) development of a numerical
model capable of capturing piping mechanisms in saturated granular soils by
coupling the discrete element method and the smoothed particle hydrodynamics
method, and 3) integration of the results from experimental testing and
validated numerical modeling into current engineering practice by providing an
empirical, but mechanism-based, relationship to account for the effects that the
factors discussed above have on the magnitude of critical hydraulic gradients.
This project will be accomplished through collaborative research between Utah
State University and The Pennsylvania State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this project have the potential to
transform the way that seepage-related erosion is analyzed in practice. The new
approach will not only be more accurate than existing analysis methods, but will
also have the flexibility to be applied to a vast array of seepage conditions
due to its mechanism-based origin. The societal benefits of this improved
analysis approach should not be underestimated. Dams and levee systems across
the U.S. are aging and, in many cases, in need of retrofitting or repair to
bring them up to current standards or meet changing load requirements. The
improved analysis approach is expected to vastly improve the accuracy of the
assessments of piping potential, increasing public safety and allowing for
better utilization of funds available to renovate this critical aspect of our
nation?s infrastructure. The project will also provide substantial educational
benefits, including training M.S. and Ph.D. students and providing research
opportunities for undergraduate students, particularly those from traditionally
under-represented groups at both Utah State University and The Pennsylvania
State University.