* 1131371
* Site survey and coring of potential IODP drill sites in the Western Pacific Warm Pool
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Gregory Mountain, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 04/30/2016
* USD 299,568.00

Intellectual Merit: The Indo-Pacific Warm Pool (IPWP) is the largest reservoir
of warm surface water on earth, the major source of heat for the global
atmosphere, and a location of deep atmospheric convection and heavy rainfall.
Small variations in the sea surface temperature (SST) of the Western Pacific
Warm Pool (WPWP), within the IPWP, influence the location and strength of
convection in the rising limb of the Hadley and Walker circulations, perturbing
planetary scale atmospheric circulation, atmospheric heating globally, and
tropical hydrology. Until a decade ago, a high-resolution paleo-perspective on
this critical area in paleoclimatic models was essentially non-existent due
either to the lack of high-resolution records from the WPWP or because of the
lack of records from key locations. The only available records came from low
sedimentation rate sites that resolved glacial-interglacial (G-I) variability at
best. However, recent work in the Indonesian Seaways and nearby seas has
demonstrated the possibility of obtaining records from key locations in the
WPWP, often with high resolution comparable to records from the high-latitude
oceans. Here, the PIs propose to survey several sites that are potential
candidates for obtaining long sediment records through the Integrated Ocean
Drilling Program (IODP). These sites are strategically selected in order to
resolve the effects of meridional (e.g., ITCZ displacement) vs. zonal (ENSO
related) and vertical (thermocline depth) on the tropical climate at millennial,
orbital and secular time scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Reconstructions of equatorial climate have been among the highlights of
paleoceanographic research of the last decade, by any measure. The records to be
collected from this area have the potential to offer new insights into
mechanisms of climate change and to help in testing climate models that are used
for the IPCC predictions. Secondly, the project would enhance infrastructure for
research by providing (to approved NSF data repositories immediately after the
cruise) the seismic data necessary for IODP proposals that are based on
collaborations among many proponents from different countries. Finally, through
direct shipboard instruction and hands-on work, the cruise will provide training
for the next generation of scientists in the intricacies of coring and multi-
channel seismic data acquisition at sea, both of which are critical for
furthering paleoceanographic research.