* 1131506
* Software-Defined MIMO Radar Fusion for Structural Health Monitoring Sensor Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Changzhi Li, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 377,819.00

The research objective of this award is to resolve significant integration and
deployment problems currently limiting structural health monitoring utilizing an
innovative multiple-input multiple-output radar-based approach. A software-
defined wireless radar sensor network will be devised to monitor structural
vibration and deflection with unprecedented accuracy. Passive distributed
sensing for low-power data aggregation will also be achieved taking advantage of
the multi-input multi-output network. The impacts will be embodied as new
capabilities of radar sensor networks for robust structural health monitoring.
The approach will be founded on a hybrid fusion of radar solutions, enabled by
novel hardware and data processing algorithms. Software configurability will be
a driving force in this effort to revolutionize the capability of radar systems
while maintaining a compact size. The hardware, software and signal processing
innovations will be incorporated to achieve an integrated sensor network system
that will be validated in both the laboratory and in a full-scale field
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this research
will include novel methods for structural health monitoring, a critical concern
for the management of aging infrastructure in the United States, as well as the
advancement of approaches to monitoring rotating and reciprocating machinery in
transportation and manufacturing industries. This research bridges the fields of
civil engineering, microwave engineering, embedded systems, and radar signal
processing. Through student involvement and outreach, the multidisciplinary
nature of this project will enable unique educational opportunities that are
often missing in traditional engineering curriculums. In addition, the
utilization of an international test-bed for the proposed full-scale field
experiment promises to cultivate important collaborations that are critical to
the advancement of knowledge on a global scale.