* 1131788
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Role of Picocyanobacteria in the Marine Silicate Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Jeffrey Krause, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2013
* USD 256,128.00

INTELECTUAL MERIT: The investigators will follow-up on their discovery of
significant accumulation of silicon by marine picocyanobacteria of the genus
Synechococcus to assess the contribution of these organisms to the cycling of
biogenic silica in the ocean. Oceanographers have long assumed that diatoms are
the dominant marine organisms controlling the cycling of silica in the ocean.
Recently, however, single-cell analyses of picocyanobacterial cells from field
samples surprisingly revealed the presence of substantial amounts of silicon
within Synechococcus. The contribution of Synechococcus to biogenic silica often
rivaled that of living diatoms in the two systems examined. Moreover, size
fractionation of biogenic silica indicates that up to 25% of biogenic silica can
exist in the picoplanktonic size fraction. Given that picocyanobacteria dominate
phytoplankton biomass and primary production over much of the world?s ocean,
these findings raise significant questions about the factors controlling the
marine silica cycle globally, as well as the proper interpretation of biogenic
silica measurements, Si: N ratios in particulate matter, and ratios of silicate
and nitrate depletion. It also suggests that picocyanobacterial populations may
be subject to previously unknown constraints on their
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have both laboratory and
field components. Because cellular Si varies substantially among the field-
collected samples and laboratory strains so far analyzed, the laboratory
component will document variability in Si uptake and cellular Si concentrations,
while determining what role physiological and phylogenetic factors play in this
variability. The investigators will use strains of Synechococcus for which there
are already genome sequences. Laboratory experiments will 1) use 32Si
radiotracer uptake experiments to assess the degree of variability in Si content
and Si uptake kinetics among strains of Synechococcus acclimated to different
levels of silicate, 2) characterize the intracellular distribution and chemistry
of silicon within cells using fractionation techniques, density centrifugation,
electron microscopy and x-ray absorption spectroscopy, and 3) use bioinformatic
analyses of published genomes to determine whether uptake of Si can be predicted
based on phylogenetic relationships, to identify candidate genes involved in
cyanobacterial Si metabolism, and to develop probes for community structure that
can be related to cellular Si content. Field work at the Bermuda Atlantic Time
Series (BATS) site will assess the contribution of Synechococcus and diatoms to
total biogenic silica in surface waters at times of the year when the former are
typically dominant. Field measurements will include size fractionation of
biogenic silica biomass and Si uptake, and synchrotron-based x-ray fluorescence
microscopy, and the phylogenetic composition of the Synechococcus
assemblage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This project has the potential
to drive a major paradigm shift in our understanding of the marine silicon
cycle. In addition, one PhD student will be trained at Stony Brook. Each PI will
provide research experience to a number of undergraduates working on original
research projects for credit, as a part of an REU program or as the basis for
undergraduate theses. Stony Brook research programs for undergraduates are
supported with summer research money from the Undergraduate Research and
Creative Activities (URECA) program, and draw on its very diverse student body.
The investigators will also engage promising high school level students through
several residential programs that the PIs have been a part of in the past. These
include the BLOOM program at Bigelow and the Simons Summer Research Fellowship
Program at Stony Brook. The PI has continuing relationship with a regional high
school (Brentwood) with a high proportion of underrepresented minorities. PI
Twining is involved in the Caf√© Scientifique program at Bigelow. Baines will
engage in similar outreach through the Center for Science and Mathematics
Education (CESAME) sponsored Open Science Nights. Finally, PI Baines will
cooperate with CESAMEs teacher education programs, with the aim of incorporating
biological oceanography into K-12 curricula. PIs Krause and Brzezinski will
incorporate aspects of phytoplankton ecology into UCSB's Oceans to Classroom
Program that brings marine research at UCSB to life for over 18,000 K-12
students each year.