* 1131568
* Addressing Geographical Disparities in Transplant Organ Accessibility Across United States
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* John Friedewald, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 319,800.00

The objective of this research is to develop advanced mathematical models with
sufficient granularity to guide the United Network of Organ Sharing decision
makers in crafting an implementable policy towards reducing the geographic
disparity of Kidney allocation over time. Nearly 700,000 patients currently
receive kidney replacement therapy either in the form of hemodialysis or kidney
transplantation, consuming $24 billion (6.4 percent) in Medicare expenditures
annually. Kidney transplantation, where a patient receives a healthy kidney from
either a deceased or living donor, has a significantly better five-year patient
survival of 81.2 percent, an improved quality of life, and leads to significant
cost-savings. However, kidney transplantation is marred by the shortage of
available kidney organs. The US Department of Health and Human Services in their
"Final Rule" states, "Organs and tissues ought to be distributed on the basis of
objective priority criteria, and not on the basis of accidents of geography."
The current national kidney allocation system is plagued by geographic
disparities in the waiting time associated with kidney transplantation. The
median waiting time during 2000-2009 varies from 0.93 years to 4.14 years
depending on a patient's local area of listing. The model will incorporate
simulation based input and output in an optimization framework that consistently
considers multiple equity objectives within a planning-type framework. Such
modeling is necessary to incorporate detailed patient population
characteristics, transplant center behavior, the quality of available organs,
acceptability of the model generated solution by key stakeholders, and the ease
of implementing the suggested policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solution
techniques and algorithms developed for this research would be potentially
applicable to other distribution problems where equity needs to be achieved. The
project will involve and train graduate students and research outcomes will be
used to inform the transplant community through presentations at national
conferences.