* 1131614
* U.S.-Australia IRES Collaboration: Behavioral ecology research training in Australia's tropical savannah
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Jordan Karubian, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) award is made to
Professor Jordan Karubian in the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
at Tulane University in New Orleans, Louisiana. The 21 participating U.S.
graduate and undergraduate students will collaborate for two months over a
period of three years with researchers in the School for Environmental Research
at Charles Darwin University in Australia. Their foreign collaborators at the
Institute are Professor Michael Lawes and Professor Donald Franklin. The
students will study avian behavioral ecology and fire ecology research in the
world?s largest remaining tropical savannah habitat. The research will develop
an understanding of the relationship between the environment, demography, and
the mating system of the red-backed fairy-wren. The students will exploit the
considerable flexibility these wrens exhibit in social organization, expression
of sexual signals, and mating behavior in an area in which ecological conditions
vary in a patchwork manner. By characterizing the degree to which the wrens use
flexible behavioral and physiological strategies to negotiate the ecological and
social environment that they experience, and comparing this reproductive
flexibility with other tropical and temperate species, it is likely that this
research will further our understanding of avian mating systems and how they
respond to anthropogenic activities. The program will provide technical training
in cutting edge behavioral ecology methods and will build the capacity of these
students to work with foreign collaborators in the future. The researchers also
plan to include Australian Aboriginal groups in their field research projects.

A major emphasis of the project is to engage U.S. students in meaningful
projects with international students and faculty. Students will work closely
with researchers with different scientific backgrounds and will learn field and
laboratory techniques that will enhance their research skills. Altogether, these
experiences will increase the networking and international competitiveness of
the student participants. The research program will have broad impacts on
biological education and research.