* 1131153
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Agrobiodiversity, Food Security, and Food Culture in Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Michael Dove, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the role of crop
diversity in Andean food security, using Bolivian food culture as a lens to
analyze the linkages between native crops, household food consumption practices,
and the broader social context. Bolivia presents a paradox common in crop
centers of origin, because the country is rich in agrobiodiversity, but it
exhibits the highest levels of malnutrition in South America. Genetically
diverse crop varieties have evolved in conjunction with varied biophysical
environments and farmers' cultural practices, but such varieties tend to be
maintained in marginal agricultural areas, which are frequently sites of high
food insecurity. While the existing literature offers detailed examinations of
the role of environmental factors and agricultural practices in the evolution
and maintenance of crop diversity, the relationship between these forces and the
broader social processes driving small-scale farmers' social and economic
marginalization has largely remained unanalyzed. In order to fill this gap in
the literature, three empirical questions will be explored in this project: (1)
What relationships exist between household culinary practices and the genetic
and morphological patterning of native and traditional Andean crops? (2) How do
practices, values, and selection pressures on crop diversity change as food
products and people move across space? (3) How does agrobiodiversity contribute
to the food security of vulnerable rural and urban populations? Data responding
to these questions will be gathered through a detailed case-study of the
Cochabamba region of Bolivia, relying on a combination of interviews,
participant observation, and survey techniques. These data will further underpin
theoretical inquiries along two lines. First, they will provide insights into
the leveraging of native and traditional foods in narratives of indigeneity,
modernity, and difference-making in the present-day Bolivian public sphere.
Second, they will contribute to ongoing debates surrounding the ways in which
the material nature of goods and the social meanings surrounding them contribute
to competing conceptions of value. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
generate basic theoretical and applied knowledge about the relationships linking
agrobiodiversity to food security and food culture. Although the existence of
these relationships is widely accepted, the mechanisms underpinning them have
not been explored extensively. By examining agrobiodiversity and food
consumption as elements of a continuous food system, this project will shed new
light on the role of crop genetic resources in a wider social context. In the
realms of policy and application, this research has direct relevance to the
design of programs to alleviate hunger and food insecurity in Bolivia and other
comparable locales. Through collaborative relationships with applied development
organizations in the country, the project will generate knowledge leading to new
opportunities for reinforcing locally sustainable food systems. Furthermore,
this project will help to develop methodological principles for the study of
agrobiodiversity and food security suitable for other world regions. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.