* 1131298
* Design and Control Principles for Mobile Health Care Operations Management -- The Case of Asthma Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Paul Detjen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 329,997.00

In 2005, 6.5 million children in the United States suffered from asthma, a
chronic respiratory disease characterized by periods of difficulty in breathing.
Childhood asthma places severe burden on communities through emergency room
visits and hospitalization due to lack of access to routine and continuous
health care. Non-profit organizations, such as the Mobile C.A.R.E. Foundation
(MCF), provide mobile care for childhood asthma through periodic visits to
schools in metropolitan areas across the United States. Mobile care entails a
complex array of operational decisions, including patient scheduling and
capacity allocation, which are critical to ensuring that community health
objectives are met effectively. This research investigates the link between
operational decisions in a mobile environment and their impact on the community
health outcomes. Three critical aspects of the research setting, chronic care,
mobile delivery and non-profit environment, necessitate the creation of a new
family of operations research models for planning, scheduling and resource
allocation in health care operations compared to those developed for
conventional settings such as primary care clinics and hospital outpatient
departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have significant impact at
many levels. Operations research techniques can greatly improve the ability of
MCF to provide essential health services to children from underserved
communities in the Chicago region in a sustainable manner. Such operational
improvement is especially critical during an economic downturn. The insights
will be used to create a set of operational best practices to be disseminated to
other organizations that operate mobile clinics for chronic conditions beyond
asthma. The new operations models will contribute to the growing field of health
care operations, and stimulate research in settings as varied as mobile health
care for diabetes and for homeless and elderly, and mobile HIV clinics in
Africa. The research will actively engage graduate and undergraduate students in
analytical research and field work.