* 1131848
* NCRN-MN: Cornell Census-NSF Research Node: Integrated Research Support, Training and Data Documentation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Ping Li, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 3,560,887.00

The era of public-use micro-datasets as a cornerstone of empirical research in
the social sciences is coming to an end. While it still is feasible to create
such data without breaching confidentiality, scholars are pursuing research
programs that mandate inherently identifiable data, such as geospatial
relations, exact genome data, networks of all sorts, and linked administrative
records. These researchers acquire authorized restricted access to the
confidential identifiable data and perform their analyses in secure
environments. The researcher is allowed to publish results that have been
filtered through a statistical disclosure limitation protocol. Scientific
scrutiny is hampered because the researcher cannot effectively implement a data-
management plan that permits sharing these restricted-access data with other
scholars. The data-custody problem is impeding the "acquire, archive, and
curate" model that dominated social science data preservation in the era of
public-use micro-data. This project will bridge the transition to restricted-
access data and offer the scholar, the scientific community, and the custodial
agency a feasible path to long-term data preservation. The Comprehensive Census
Bureau Metadata Repository (CCBMR) will be a Data Documentation Initiative-based
curation system designed and implemented in a manner that permits
synchronization between the public and confidential versions of the repository.
The scholarly community will use the CCBMR as it would use a conventional
metadata repository, deprived only of the values of certain confidential
information, but not their metadata. The authorized user, working on the secure
Census Bureau network, will use the CCBMR with full information in authorized
domains. There is no duplication of effort, and the project will implement fully
automatic disclosure avoidance review of the metadata where feasible. The
preservation function operates indefinitely on the original scientific inputs as
long as the researchers cooperate and the agency continues to fund the
preservation component of the CCBMR. Doctoral students will be taught how to
develop research programs using restricted-access Census Bureau data and the
repository tools developed in this project in combination with previously
developed tools. The same tools will be used to develop computational statistics
algorithms based on boosting to improve the integration, editing, and imputation
models that assemble the micro-data used for the Census Bureau's longitudinally
linked employer-employee database.

Because the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act
of 2002 formalized the obligation of every statistical agency in the United
States to take long-term custody of the confidential micro-data used for its
work, all federal statistical agencies face the same problem as the Census
Bureau. The CCBMR, the education based on this repository, and the collaborative
computational statistics model all can be generalized to meet the restricted-
access research requirements of other statistical agencies. These tools allow
statistical agencies to harness the efforts of researchers who want to
understand the structure and complexity of the confidential data they intend to
analyze in order to propose and implement reproducible scientific results.
Future generations of scientists will be able to build on those efforts because
the long-term data preservation in the CCBMR will operate on the original
scientific inputs, not inputs that have been subjected to statistical disclosure
limitation prior to entering the repository. This curation will result in a
viable system for enforcing data management plans on projects, ensuring that
results can be tested and replicated by future scientists. This activity is
supported by the NSF-Census Research Network funding opportunity.