* 1131387
* Trace-metal isotopes in Atlantic seawater and particles from Geotraces transects A03 and A10
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Seth John, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2014
* USD 453,513.00

Trace metals significantly affect marine biogeochemistry and can be important
tools of discovery, leading to information on nutrient supply and
demineralization, ocean circulation, and earth?s climate history. Due to their
importance, the international GEOTRACES effort was designed to measure the
distribution of metals in the oceans. However, metal concentration distributions
are only a part of the larger picture. To provide a more complete dataset,
researchers from the University of South Carolina propose to measure trace metal
isotopes (Fe, Cd, Cu, and Zn) and plan to apply these data to distinguish
between the latest competing hypotheses of factors influencing metal
biogeochemcial cycling. Many processes can fractionate the isotopes of elements
and therefore differences in the isotope signal can be instructive of
biogeochemical cycling of these elements. The goal of the project is to address
the origin and amount of biologically available iron, its modification during
internal cycling, its transfer between pools, and the factors that influence its
bioavailability. In addition, Zn and Cd isotope analyses will yield information
on modern and ancient oceans, which could help predict how oceans change in
future climates. the isotopes of cu will also be examined. Results will inform
the ocean science community, and elucidate how trace-metals and other nutrients
affect production and are impacted by climate change. The research will support
a young scientist and a post-doc and will also contribute to the education and
training of undergraduate and graduate students as well. The award is to a
first-time NSF applicant and new faculty member.