* 1131842
* Interfacing Live Cells with Artificial Membranes: Synchronization in a Coupled Nonlinear System
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Dolores Bozovic, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this award is to explore synchronization of motion
among hair cells of the inner ear, and its role in the overall sensitivity of
mechanical detection. The PI will create a hybrid system, in which a biological
preparation containing live and functional cells is interfaced with artificial
polymer membranes. This will enable direct measurements of the onset and
dynamics of synchronization between oscillatory cells. Polymer membranes of
different material properties will be used to allow variation in the strength of
inter-cell connections, and their sizes will be varied so as to couple different
numbers of elements. Electronic circuits will also be introduced that mimic the
role of neural control of hair cells. Voltage signals will be applied across the
sensory epithelium in conjunction with the mechanical sensitivity measurements,
and a feedback circuit will maximize the responsiveness of the preparation. The
hybrid preparation will provide a system in which coupling and adaptive behavior
can be independently varied, and hence the role of these two important elements
can be quantitatively assessed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale sensitivity of
detection by the auditory system has still not been fully explained, and these
experiments are designed to identify the missing components in our understanding
of its underlying mechanisms. The project constitutes the first step towards the
construction of a bio-mimetic device that can replicate the behavior of the
cochlea, with the long-term goal of creating an implantable artificial
mechanical sensor. The educational efforts of the PI aim to train graduate and
undergraduate students in techniques at the interface of physics, engineering,
and biology, via new courses introduced into the curriculum, undergraduate
research programs, and an inter-departmental discussion forum.