* 1131172
* Markov Decision Process Models for Optimizing Vaccine Administration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Bruce Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 336,957.00

The research objective of this award is to formulate and analyze Markov decision
process models to enable vaccine clinicians to optimally balance the tradeoffs
inherent to vaccine administration, especially in remote locations, e.g., rural
areas and developing countries. The main tradeoff is one between vaccine
"wastage" and missed opportunities for vaccine administration. Wastage is
especially acute for vaccines that are packaged in large, multi-dose vials which
once opened, must be used within a matter of hours; hence clinicians face
difficult tradeoffs between opening a vial to satisfy a potentially small
immediate demand, versus retaining the vial to satisfy a potentially large
future demand. Furthermore, because the power supply in remote areas of
developing countries is often unreliable, the development of -passive cold
boxes- that maintain temperature over several weeks - provided they are not
opened excessively often is being considered; clinicians deciding when to
retrieve vials from these cold boxes will face difficult tradeoffs between
retrieving vials for potential immediate use, versus not having vaccines
available in the face of future demand. Moreover, the design specifications for
these cold boxes are open questions that depend heavily on how their use will
impact wastage and coverage in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated
outcomes of this research include: (i) optimal vaccine administration policies
(e.g., vial opening decisions and cold box retrieval decisions) for different
situations (e.g., vaccine type(s), vial size(s), demand profile(s)) as a
function of many variables (e.g., time of day, vial inventory, history of cold
box openings); (ii) dissemination of operational guidelines that can be easily
implemented by clinicians in the field; and (iii) insights into various cold box
designs in with respect to vaccine coverage and wastage. The results of the
research will be disseminated within the US and internationally through the WHO
website and potentially enable millions of additional vaccines to be
administered annually throughout the world.