* 1131579
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Integrated Microstructure and Melt Pool Dimension Control for Electron Beam Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Bryant Walker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2015
* USD 359,532.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) collaborative research project is to provide guidelines for integrated
control of melt pool dimensions and microstructure in electron beam additive
manufacturing, a class of emerging manufacturing processes which build geometric
features by locally melting metal and building it up layer-by-layer. The
approach will be to model electron beam deposition by finite elements, guided by
an approximate analytical model that assumes the process is dominated by thermal
conduction. This allows rapid understanding of trends in results as a function
of process variable changes (from use of the approximate analytical model),
identifying key cases to model more accurately via finite elements. Simulation
results will be presented across a wide range (up to a factor of 5) of electron
beam powers, travel speeds and material feed rates and will guide the choice of
critical experiments conducted by the industrial and government collaborators.
Models and experiments will include the effects of local tailoring of
temperatures in and around the melt pool by rapid movement of the electron beam
across the part surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the primary
benefit of this research will be its development of a practical basis for
simultaneous control of melt pool geometry and microstructure for these
manufacturing processes. Because melt pool geometry can be monitored and
controlled as a part is built, indirect control of microstructure through the
control of melt pool geometry can substantially decrease the number of trials
needed to achieve a desired microstructure. This will represent a significant
contribution toward the qualification and widespread use of electron beam
manufacturing processes for aerospace and other commercial applications.
Research activities will be integrated with ongoing educational research
projects at both academic institutions.