* 1131596
* High Performance Cement Composites with Nanocrystalline and Nanofribrillated Cellulose
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* W. Jason Weiss, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

The overall goal of this project is to develop a fundamental understanding of
the behavior of Cellulose Nanocrystal (CNC) and Nanofibrilated Cellulose (NFC)
with the goal of using this information to develop a new generation of CNC/NFC-
based cementitious materials that show high strength and toughness. CNCs/NFCs
are an alternative to other types of nanoreinforcements that have high aspect
ratio, elastic modulus and strength, low density, reactive surfaces that enable
easy functionalization and are readily water dispersible without the use of
surfactant or modification. In addition, the sources that CNCs/NFCs are
extracted from are themselves sustainable, biodegradable, carbon neutral, and
have low environmental, health and safety risks. This research offers a
different perspective to material design and characterization by studying the
structure-function relationship through an integrated approach that combines
processing, structural and chemical characterization, state-of-the-art
microscopy and bottom-up multiscale modeling to unravel the physical mechanisms
that underpin CNCs/NFCs nanomechanics, and relate this to the macroscopic
properties of CNC/NFC-reinforced cementitious materials through extensive
experimental tests at different length scales. There is a quest to develop a new
generation of high-performance multifunctional, renewable and sustainable
infrastructure materials that radically break traditional engineering paradigms.
The development of innovative, green CNC/CNF reinforced cement composites can
drive the performance and use of these materials offering an alternative for
other environmentally harmful nanoparticles. The use of higher performance
materials is one way to ?do more with less?. Furthermore, these materials can
help lowering the carbon footprint by reducing the amount of materials needed in
the built infrastructure. The graduate students involved in this project will be
trained in a truly interdisciplinary setting. Information learned in this
research program will be directly brought into the classroom at graduate and
undergraduate levels, and disseminated at international conferences and in
journal publications.