* 1131393
* Collaborative Research: Biophysical alteration of wetland geomorphology in response to rising sea level
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Amala Mahadevan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2015
* USD 341,280.00

Collaborative Research: Biophysical alteration of wetland geomorphology in
response to rising sea level

Our objective is to examine the evolution of networks of tidal creeks in salt
marshes as they respond to rising sea level. We have documented rapidly growing
creeks, incising into the marsh at 1-2 m per year, in coastal marshes throughout
the South Atlantic Bight and in similar environments worldwide. Understanding
the mechanisms driving the evolution of these drainage networks is crucial for
predicting marsh responses to sea level rise under different conditions. The
study will examine the physics of tidal flows and sediment erosion, while also
considering the significant impact of marsh plants and animals (e.g. crabs) on
these processes. Using a combination of field measurements, mesocosm
experiments, and numerical modeling, we will 1) evaluate the physical mechanisms
underlying sediment erosion in creeks, including variation in flow speed and
processes changing the strength of the marsh soils, 2) test the hypotheses that
crabs facilitate growth of creeks by loosening sediment through burrowing and
removing stabilizing vegetation; and that hydrological conditions at creek heads
are preferred by crabs, and 3) develop a numerical model of creek evolution to
test the importance of different parameters such as vegetation type, faunal
density, tidal range and sediment supply on the morphological evolution of
creeks. The model will help us to integrate our observations and generalize our
findings over a range of conditions. Salt marshes provide valuable ecosystem
services to humanity, but these productive habitats are threatened globally by
accelerating sea-level rise. Understanding the impact of sea-level rise on the
physical structure of a marsh is crucial to predicting both the response of
marsh ecosystems and the larger-scale morphological response of the coastline.
The impact of increasing water levels on marshes depends on complex feedbacks
between physical and biological processes. Initial studies of this issue focused
on interactions between water depth and marsh elevation, which affect sediment
deposition and plant growth. Recently, increasing attention is being directed
towards the manner in which creek networks evolve as they respond to the larger
volume of water they must convey during each tidal cycle at higher sea levels.
The evolution of creek networks is a critical component of marsh response to
sea-level rise, because creek morphology affects the amount of water and
sediment delivered to the marsh surface, and the drainage of the marsh, and
thus, the length of time the marsh is waterlogged. In turn, the flooding and
drainage of the marsh influences the health of plants and animals in this
ecologically vital environment. The ability of creek networks to respond to
increasing sea levels depends, in part, on how easy it is to erode the marsh
surface, which depends on both sediment type, and on stabilization or loosening
associated with flora and fauna. Uncovering the linkages between geology and
biology will have bearing on the fields of geology, ecology and climatology, as
well as those interested in coastal protection and salt marsh evolution. The
project will develop a new modeling tool to examine response of marshes to sea-
level rise, which will be broadly applicable to many salt marshes in the U.S.
and globally.