* 1131083
* Collaborative Research: In Situ Measurement of Rates of Chemoautotrophic Carbon Production at Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Jeremy Rich, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 154,649.00

The PI's request funding to develop a Vent-Time Series Submersible Incubation
Device (Vent-TSSID), a robotic micro-laboratory for routine application by the
oceanographic community for measuring rates of relevant metabolic processes at
hydrothermal vents at both in situ pressures and temperatures. Knowledge of the
in situ metabolism of microorganisms carrying out CO2-fixation at deep-sea
hydrothermal vents is very limited. Particularly lacking are studies measuring
rates of autotrophic carbon fixation in situ, which is a measurement ultimately
needed to constrain production in these ecosystems. Although recent data
suggests that nitrate reduction either to N2 (denitrification) or to NH4 +
(dissimilatory reduction of nitrate to ammonium, DNRA) might be responsible for
a significant fraction of chemoautotrophic production, NO3 --reduction rates
have never been measured in situ at hydrothermal vents.

Broader Impacts:

The Vent-TSSID developed from this proposed work will be made available to the
research community for use at other deep sea vents. This grant would fund 2
graduate students, one at WHOI and the other at Brown University. The PIs also
have involved undergraduates in their research programs and plan to continue to
do so. Dr. Sievert currently participates in the WHOI Science and Technology
Education Partnership, and Dr. Rich has been an active participant in the Brown
Environmental Fellows program.