* 1131074
* IDR/Collaborative Research:  Characterizing Uncertainty in the Motion of Volcanic Plumes Advected by Wind Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Marcus Bursik, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 537,704.00

This grant provides support to develop a methodology for the quantitative
assessment of confidence in predictions of the motion of ash clouds caused by
volcanic eruptions. By combining statistical modeling, stochastic analysis, and
the tools of computational science together with a widely-used volcanic particle
dispersion code, this grant will provide tools to assess real time predictions
of ash cloud motion that accounts for varying wind conditions and a range of
model variables. More specifically, the PUFF computer code will be used as the
ash cloud simulation tool. PUFF, which propagates an airborne ash plume, will be
integrated with a volcanic eruption model called BENT. BENT outputs ash
distribution as a function of time and height. This integration substitutes for
the unknown PUFF input parameters several BENT inputs that are better (but not
entirely) constrained by physics. This integrated model will be used to develop
a framework for analyzing the effects of uncertain parameters and of differing
windfield models, on the output distribution for the cloud location. Polynomical
chaos quadrature and stochastic integration techniques will be used to provide a
quantitative measure of the reliability (i.e. error) of those predictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the effects of uncertainty in dispersion
model predictions are important to assess and mitigate potential hazards
associated with volcanic ash clouds. There are economic and sociologic impacts
both near the volcano and far downwind from the eruption. For example, the
airline industry decides flight schedules, routes, and fuel consumption
estimates, based in part on dispersion model forecasts. The results of this
research will provide decision makers and civil protection authorities with a
framework for evaluating hazard risk. Importantly, this methodological
development is independent of the specific PUFF code, so the framework for
prediction and reliability analysis can be directly applied to other ash cloud
codes, and more generally to other hazard models -- such as radiological and
chemical plume dispersion, and gas release from truck or rail accidents.