* 1131390
* The Surveying Coastal Ocean Autonomous Profiler (SCOAP): Development and Demonstration
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2014
* David Ullman, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2014
* USD 679,531.00

The PI requests funding to develop an autonomous surface craft (ASC) SCOAP as a
sampling platform for material transport rates and pathways. In this project a
mobile platform for interdisciplinary sampling (the Surveying Coastal Ocean
Autonomous Profiler, SCOAP) will be developed by redesigning and enhancing an
available ASC. The enhancements include maximizing its seaworthiness,
lengthening the duration of unattended deployments, and making it capable of
safe marine operations in waterways with heavy vessel traffic, fixed and mobile
fishing activity, and vandalism risks. SCOAP has potential to substantially
advance the ability of coastal oceanographers to measure and investigate
material transport processes. It can host suitable sensors to detect any
parameter, and simultaneously measures quantities from multiple disciplines, so
will help oceanographers from different areas of expertise integrate their
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts would be a new autonomous multi-sensor vehicle that can provide long-
term measurements in the coastal ocean. This effort has the potential to develop
a significant new tool for studying a variety of coastal processes. The project
includes graduate and undergraduate students for the engineering development and
field work.