* 1131271
* Digital Fabrication of High-Temperature Metals Using Selective Inhibition of Sintering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Behrokh Khoshnevis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2016
* USD 449,999.00

The research objective of this award is to establish a microscopic mechanical
inhibition theory underlying the metal powder sintering process and to develop
the Selective Inhibition Sintering process for fabrication of parts in metals
that have high sintering temperature. In the Selective Inhibition Sintering
process, an inhibitor agent is used in shaping the part geometry. To understand
the scientific principles underlying such a process, systematic study of the
inhibition phenomenon will be performed for metals with various sintering
temperatures. The relation between inhibition capability and the printed
inhibitors including their chemical components, printing parameters and
sintering path will be established. Statistically designed experiments will be
performed to understand the relations between process parameters and fabrication
performances such as fabrication time, part accuracy, resolution, and material
properties. A demonstration system will be built for the identification of the
key factors for process control and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will provide a novel additive manufacturing process
that can present an order of magnitude reduction in machine cost and an order of
magnitude improvement in building speed as compared with other metal-based
additive manufacturing processes. Practical uses of such a metallic part
fabrication technique will benefit a wide variety of industries including
aerospace, defence, automotive, and medical, especially for fabrication of hard-
to-machine materials such as stainless steel and titanium. The funded activity
will provide educational opportunities for graduate students and for high school
students from underprivileged areas around the University of Southern California
and Saddleback College. Undergraduate students from Saddleback College will also
be intensely involved in experimentation and demonstrations at RapidTech, which
is a National Center for Rapid Technologies.