* 1131616
* Habitat fragmentation as a process: how habitat context influences the effects of eelgrass loss on epifaunal community structure
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kevin Hovel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 188,199.00

In this research project, the investigator will carry out a set of field
experiments to determine whether the effects of experimentally fragmenting
seagrass habitat on epifaunal community structure are mediated by environmental
factors that typically co-vary in marine habitats: structural complexity and
predation risk.

Intellectual merit. Studies in terrestrial and marine systems collectively show
that the effects of patchiness depend largely on landscape context, i.e., the
characteristics and settings of individual landscapes. Progress in exploring
what aspects of landscape context modify effects of habitat fragmentation on
ecological processes has been slow. The experiments developed for this research
directly address primary questions about the role of habitat structure in
moderating ecological processes in a critical nursery habitat, and take initial
steps forward to explore three important concepts: (i) how communities respond
to the process of habitat fragmentation, rather than simply how communities
differ between continuous and patchy areas; (ii) the relative influences of the
two major components of habitat fragmentation (habitat loss and increasing
patchiness) on biodiversity; and (iii) how co-varying factors in naturally
occurring habitats alter faunal responses to large-scale alteration of habitat.

Broader impacts. Seagrasses provide critical ecosystem services including the
formation of critical refuge and foraging areas for the postlarvae, juveniles,
and adults of many species of fishes and invertebrates that feed on diverse
assemblages of invertebrate epifauna and infauna. However, disturbances that
fragments seagrass habitat are increasingly common and approximately 30% of the
world's seagrass habitat has been lost. Disturbances to seagrass habitat may
alter feedbacks between plants and invertebrate grazers that influence ecosystem
function and may increase susceptibility to species invasions. In addition to
addressing these applied issues, this research includes participation of under-
represented groups in the biological sciences. Student assistants for the
project are selected from the SDSU Bridges to the Baccalaureate Program. The
investigator has developed outreach activities for K - 12 students through San
Diego's Ocean Discovery Institute.