* 1131791
* Collaborative Research: Deterministic and Statistics Theory of Wind Driven Sea of Finite Depth.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2011,11/30/2015
* Alexander Korotkevich, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 11/30/2015
* USD 199,335.00

Development of self-consistent statistical description of ocean waves in the
coastal area is an important problem in physical oceanography. On deep water the
main nonlinear effect is the four-wave resonant interaction described by
Hasselmann kinetic equation for spectrum of wave action. Three-wave interaction
becomes also important at finite depth, and comes to dominate in shallow water.
Three-wave interactions of gravity waves are non-resonant; they become almost
resonant on very shallow water only. This fact makes the development of
consistent, well-justified analytical statistical theory of gravity waves at
finite depth a difficult problem. It is unlikely to be solved by any heuristic
modification of the Hasselmann equation that is written for time evolution of
the pair correlation function. For the proper description, one has to derive a
coupled system of equations for time evolution of pair and triple correlation
functions. This project will derive, justify, and study these equations through
the following steps: (1) derive the coupled system of equations for pair and
triple correlation functions and make sure that this system preserves energy and
on deep water goes to the classical Hasselmann equation; (2) generalize the
obtained equation for the case of varying bottom topography and presence of
current; (3) develop the numerical code for solution of equation for
correlations, including into equations the input from wind and the dissipation
of this input due to white-capping; (4) perform a massive numerical simulation
of primordial dynamic equations in full 3-dimension geometry and use the
obtained data for justification of statistical equations; and (5) on the base of
deterministic numerical experiments find the function of dissipation due to
white-capping on shallow water.

Intellectual Merit The development of an analytical model for statistical
description of waves in shallow water will be a breakthrough in the theory of
nonlinear waves, which would have practical consequences such as for coastal
wave forecasting. The numerical codes for solution of the coupled equation for
pair and triple correlations will be an advancement in computational geophysics.
The verification of approximate analytical theory by a more exact and detailed
numerical simulation could be a model applied to other topics in the future.

Broader Impacts The method of using the coupled system of equations for
correlation functions of different orders for description of wave turbulence is
not limited to gravity waves on shallow water. Similar methods can be applied to
the theory of long internal gravity waves in ocean and atmosphere, to the theory
of Rossby waves in atmosphere of rotating planets. Numerical experiments can
improve our understanding of breaking internal waves as well. Some of the
results will likely be applicable to different branches of nonlinear wave
dynamics such as magnetohydrodynamics, plasma physics, and nonlinear optics.