* 1131238
* The role of estuaries in modulating the export of particle-bound biogenic materials by small mountainous rivers to Cascadia Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Miguel Goni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2015
* USD 701,617.00

When subject to seasonal floods, small mountain river (SRM) systems can be
responsible for freshwater discharge volumes comparable to that of large
continental rivers and recently have been recognized as an important "line-
source" of land-derived material to the ocean. Unfortunately, accurate
quantification of their contribution to the marine environment has not been
possible because we lack quantitative knowledge of the alterations these
materials undergo during estuarine transport. Researchers from Oregon State
University propose to determine how the composition, magnitude, and timing of
sediment, particulate organic matter, and trace metal fluxes are modified by
estuarine processes during flood events in Alsea Bay, a typical SRM. To
accomplish their goals, the researchers plan to carry out event-response
sampling (variable combinations of freshwater discharge, tides, and winds),
geochemical analyses (grain size, mineral surface area, organic carbon and
nitrogen content, stable carbon and nitrogen isotopic signatures, terrigenous
and marine biomarker compositions, total metal contents, and fraction of
reactive Fe), in-situ monitoring (water level, currents, salinity and turbidity
at the fluvial/estuary and estuary/ocean interfaces), and physical transport
modeling. The sampling scheme and the geochemical data will be used to monitor
changes in the concentration and compositions of particle-bound organic matter
and trace metals during the periods following different flood events. To
calculate the net flux of sediment, organic matter, and metals, as well as
determine the modulation by physical forcings such as river discharge, tidal
amplitude, coastal setup and local winds, the research will rely on the combined
in-situ measurements and the geochemical data. Lastly, a three-dimensional
circulation and sediment transport model will be developed for Alsea Bay and
adjacent coastal waters to predict estuarine circulation, particle export, and
within-estuary trapping. The model will be validated by results obtained in the
field and then used to quantify patterns of temporary estuarine storage and
export to the coastal ocean under a range of scenarios not covered by their
observations. As regards the outreach efforts, the proponents will work with the
Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence Pacific Partnership and
community colleges in Oregon to carry out instructional workshops and develop
curricular materials for their classes, as well as work with the Port of Alsea
and the city of Waldport to create materials from the project for their website
and visitor's center. Lastly, they plan to continue their collaboration with the
Oregon State University Hatfield Center and the Oregon Coast Aquarium in Newport
via presentations about the study's outcome. One graduate and one undergraduate
student will be supported and trained as part of this project. It is anticipated
that the students will be recruited via the Oregon State University Native
Americans in Science, Engineering, and Natural Resources program. The proponents
also plan to attract out-of-state students to the College of Ocean and
Atmospheric Sciences Research Experience for Undergraduates program and have
them work on the project in the summer months. In addition to funds allocated in
the budget for the undergraduate student and the out-of-state student, the
budget includes funds for the Saturday Academy's Apprenticeship in Science and
Engineering to fund one high school student for an 8 weeks summer internship to
work on geochemical or hydrodynamic data analysis collected as part of the
study.