* 1131582
* Fundamental Physical Mechanisms Leading to Initiation of Fault Rupture, With Application to Induced Seismicity at the Geysers Geothermal Field
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Steven Glaser, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 393,706.00

This research project is a suite of laboratory experiments examining the dynamic
evolution of motion of a contact junction on a fault surface which results in
gross rupture - using what is called nano-seismology. In order to understand the
mechanisms leading to fluid-injection induced seismicity (IS), the mechanisms
leading to rupture initiation must be defined. This project's novel sensors will
allow measurement, at a scale approaching shear of nanojunctions, of evolving
frictional behavior. Waveform inversion and forward synthetics will model
measured behaviors, tying together the multiple scales across which there are
self-similar frictional mechanisms, leading up to actual "slip." The first stage
of the experimental campaign is the investigation of the effects of
thermoelastic strain and cementation on fault strength; the second stage will
investigate the effects of contact melting on rupture initiation mechanisms. The
third set of experiments will take place in a steam driven true-triaxial
geothermal reservoir simulator. This set of tests will investigate the effects
of thermal contraction, and injected water flashing to steam, as proximate
causes of fault weakening. Both through-going and growing hydraulic fractures
will be modeled.

Enhanced geothermal systems (EGS) are potentially a major contributor to the
nation's supply of clean, sustainable energy. An EGS is an engineered subsurface
heat exchanger designed to either improve a conventional hydrothermal reservoir,
or to create a circulation system where hot reservoir rocks have low
permeability. This is most often done by injection of pressurized fluids. This
injection has been shown to induce seismicity, so understanding the mechanisms
of why induced seismicity occurs is fundamental for utilizing this resource.
Understanding the mechanisms of induced seismicity is also necessary for the
exploitation of the country's rich deposits of shale gas, and for carbon
sequestration. The Geysers hydrothermal field, which is the largest such
electricity producer in the world, will serve as the field test bed; laboratory
results being compared to actual seismic behavior from the Geysers through
partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.