* 1131695
* Direct-Write Nanomanufacturing of High Density and High Aspect Ratio Metal Electrode Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Min-Feng Yu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

The project is aimed to develop and apply a nozzle array for the scale-up
fabrication of high density and high aspect ratio metal electrode arrays. The
development is based on a meniscus-confined electrodeposition principle that we
have recently introduced and applied in ?direct writing? a variety of 3-D metal
micro and nanostructures in an ambient environment, including high aspect ratio
out-of-plane metal wires, submicron electrical interconnects, and curved and
coiled micro/nanostructures. By scaling up the manufacturing process, the
proposed development is positioned to provide a leap-forward advance in
capabilities for manufacturing 3-D microscale and nanoscale metal structures
with unprecedented dimensional and shape controls, all in an ambient environment
and in a direct-write means. The developed processes will be highly attractive
to microelectronics industry and device packaging industry where this technology
offers a brand new way of fabricating 3-D high density electrical interconnects
with microscale and even nanoscale feature sizes while significantly simplifies
the fabrication process, greatly expands the design flexibility, considerably
reduces the size and ultimately provides great cost savings. The methods and
technologies developed in this project are also appealing subjects for the
education of students and the public, and will be broadly integrated into
various educational programs to effectively train the next generation work force
and educate the public the benefit of scientific advancement.