* 1131627
* Defect Free and Robust Microstructuring Using Femtosecond Axicon-lens-focused Beam (FAB) with Application Focus in Thin Film Solar Cell Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Shuting Lei, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 293,442.00

The objective of this research project is to study the physical interactions
between a femtosecond near-nondiffracting laser beam and advanced materials such
as solar thin films and reveal the ablation mechanisms in microstructuring of
such materials. Research approaches will include both experimental investigation
and numerical modeling. A comprehensive experimental study will be conducted to
assess the effects of laser beam shaping and operating parameters on process
robustness, efficiency and cut quality. A laser ablation model will be developed
to elucidate the basic ablation mechanisms and to optimize process conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this work will generate new
fundamental knowledge in the area of femtosecond laser interaction with advanced
materials. The new knowledge will serve as the scientific foundation based on
which new femtosecond laser micromachining processes can be developed. The
proposed microstructuring process has applications in numerous areas including
scribing of solar cells, micromachining of microelectromechanical systems and
light-emitting diodes, microdrilling in automotive and aerospace industry,
surface texturing for tribological components, etc. In the solar industry, for
example, a significant increase in conversion efficiency for thin film solar
panels will be achieved using the proposed scribing process. Together with the
potential of significantly reducing cost through roll-to-roll mass production
this project will contribute to the nation?s clean energy future free of air
pollution, hazardous waste, and global warming. Besides impacts on manufacturing
industry, fascinating education materials and activities will be developed to
train a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students and to educate K-12
students and the general public.