* 1131884
* NSF Workshop Proposal: Towards a Unifying Theory of Critical Zone Structure, Function and Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Jon Chorover, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2012
* USD 83,334.00

This "workshop" proposal requests funding for the "All Hands" National Critical
Zone Observatory Program meeting to be held at Biosphere 2 near Tucson, Arizona,
May 9-12, 2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing discussions between Critical Zone
Observatory (CZO) Principal Investigators has identified the need to incorporate
a larger cross section of CZO personnel in the annual meeting in order to (i)
expose CZO students, postdoctoral scientists, and co-investigators to the
activities of other CZOs in the network, (ii) to enhance cross-CZO information
exchange and collaboration, and (iii) enable collaborative engagement of CZOs in
the task of the development of requisite theory and measurement of critical zone
structure, function and evolution. The proposed workshop is intended to meet
these objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is intended to broaden
community involvement in CZO research and engage young investigators in
furthering the development of the cross-CZO science agenda. The workshop will
contain a series of six lectures presented by invited (non-CZO-funded) speakers
that are conducting research on critical zone processes, in addition to oral and
poster presentations by CZO personnel, particularly students and postdoctoral
scientists. It will also involve a significant amount of dedicated time for
discussions on research disciplinary integration, and a one-day workshop to
develop a set of questions, hypotheses, and research approaches/methods for
possible network pursuit by the CZO teams that will: (i) make synergistic use of
existing commonalities across the CZO data sets, and/or (ii) give rise to novel
X-CZO collaborations.