* 1131134
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced imaging flow cytometry for plankton studies via acoustic focusing and emulsion microfluidics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Steven Graves, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2016
* USD 246,846.00

The PI's request funding to improve automated in situ monitoring of the marine
microbial community. Microbes account for most of the primary productivity and
biomass in the ocean, and the structure of the microbial community determines in
large part that of higher trophic levels. A fundamental understanding of the
factors that regulate community structure requires detailed and sustained
observations of the plankton, which motivated the PIs to develop in situ flow
cytometric and imaging-in-flow techniques that measure individual-cell light
scattering and fluorescence properties, and utilize automated image analysis to
determine taxonomic affiliation of the larger cells. While the instrument
designs have proven and effective, two enhancements will enable new research
applications. The first challenge to be addressed is that large cells are often
under-sampled by current instruments. Acoustic focusing will increase sampling
rate by > 10-fold and thus provide a far better look at these cells,
facilitating studies of in situ growth rates of different phytoplankton species,
and potentially making possible species-level studies of microbial predator
activity. The second challenge to be addressed is the need for physical capture
of cells for in depth analysis. Emulsion microfluidics techniques will
facilitate image-based cell sorting of field samples by allowing the required
image analyses to be carried out in a delayed laboratory procedure. After
returning the stored cells to the laboratory, analysis of the image
corresponding to each stored cell will be carried out, and the stored cells
sorted as desired by a novel microfluidic device.

Broader Impacts:

This instrument if successful will be capable of statistically quantitative
sampling of pico, nano and microplankton with underwater deployment times as
long as half a year. The samples archived in the instrument will permit
unprecedented insights into the dynamics of the planktonic ecosystem. If made
available commercially (which is in the works) instruments of this type could be
key elements for biological sampling on moored ocean observing systems. The
proposal has a significant training aspect with the inclusion of two graduate
students as well as the collaboration with the Zephyr foundation on the
development of a phytoplankton 'unit' in their educational program aimed to high
school students. The signs of global change are clear, but the ramifications of
these changes are not well constrained because of our limited knowledge of
ecosystem responses. The proposed improvements to the IFCB will provide a means
to directly observe responses of the primary producers in the natural
environment as conditions change. There is no doubt that this knowledge will
improve our modeling capability and provide guidance for societies actions.