* 1131422
* Collaborative Research:  A Framework for Modeling and Measuring Collaborative Creativity in Early Stage Engineering Design Teams
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Yan Jin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 217,408.00

The objective of this research award is to model collaborative creativity in
engineering design teams in a way that considers both an individual's internal
creative processes and the external creative processes that occur through team
interactions. Creativity in the generation of new concepts is a key driver of
innovation in engineering design, but a continuing challenge has been to
postulate strategies that consistently encourage high quality concept generation
in design teams. Much research on creativity has focused on theories for
internal cognition in individuals, while engineering and organizational behavior
research has centered on more general creativity-focused activities at the team
level. A comprehensive set of experiments and metrics will be formulated to
assess the role of each of these aspects of individual and collaborative
creativity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will help advance
the fundamental understanding of the nature of creativity in engineering design
teams and further the basic knowledge of innovation in design. This work will
have impact across many industries, from product development to automotive to
services. The metrics and approaches that arise from this research will serve as
a foundation from which to develop strategies for design teams and organizations
to become more creative as well as innovative. This research will involve the
active participation of undergraduates, women, and underrepresented minorities
at MIT, USC, and Wellesley College. Research will also involve urban high school
students to encourage the pursuit of careers in engineering through exposure to
design activities.