* 1131587
* Single-Step Manufacture of Affinity Nanodiscs for Drug Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Tai-Hsi Fan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 397,249.00

This project is aimed to develop a novel method that enables the mass production
of lipid-based affinity nanodiscs in a simple but very effective manner.
Manufacturing of affinity nanocarriers for targeted drug delivery has attracted
significant attention in the field of nanotechnology. One of the most widely
studied nanocarriers is antibody-functionalized liposomes. However, the
synthesis of drug-loaded affinity liposomes usually requires time-consuming and
multiple-step process, resulting in costly mass production. Moreover, the
aqueous core within liposomes is not favorable for encapsulating hydrophobic
drugs. In this project, nucleic acid aptamers and hydrophobic drugs will be
incorporated to the self-assembled lipid-based nanodiscs in aqueous solutions.
It is expected that such vehicles have the capability of targeting specific
cells and carrying a large amount of hydrophobic molecules. Preliminary studies
have shown that stable nanodiscs are attainable and the aptamers are functional
after chemical conjugation. Based on the compelling results, this project
includes (1) synthesizing and characterizing the novel affinity nanodiscs, (2)
modeling the growth kinetics and dynamic interactions of the nanodiscs, and (3)
understanding the biological functions of the affinity nanodiscs. The
anticipated outcomes of this interdisciplinary study are to provide insights
into the kinetics and thermodynamics of molecular self-assembly and to develop a
transformative method for preparing affinity nanocarriers for hydrophobic drugs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to several scientific and economic
impacts. First, the one-step manufacturing of the novel nanodiscs will greatly
reduce the cost of mass production, making the relevant targeted chemotherapy
more affordable to the general public. Second, since more than 40 percent of the
new anti-cancer drugs are hydrophobic, this delivery platform will pave a new
way of delivering hydrophobic drugs especially for cancer chemotherapy. Third,
the data to be generated will further enrich the knowledge of nanotechnology,
molecular recognition, and colloidal science. The broader educational impacts of
this project will also be evident in our strong commitment to education and
human resource development. First, this project will provide students with a
unique interdisciplinary environment to learn nanotechnology, drug delivery,
colloidal science, biomolecular engineering, kinetic analysis, and mathematical
modeling. All participating students will have modularized scientific questions
to study and will discuss their research findings in joint group meetings. The
students will be able to not only acquire hands-on research skills, but also
learn analytical, communication, collaboration, and innovation skills. In
addition, the PIs will incorporate the results from this research into their
teaching courses ("structural characterization of soft materials" and "drug
delivery"). Second, the PIs will continuously participate in the outreach
programs established at UConn. These outreach efforts will raise K-12 students'
interests in science and engineering and facilitate the transfer of the novel
bench work to biopharmaceutical industries. Third, the research findings will be
widely disseminated through publications in peer-refereed journals and
presentations at professional conferences.