* 1131897
* NCRN-MN: Triangle Census Research Network
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Jerome Reiter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,087,370.00

A primary mission of many federal statistical agencies is to disseminate data to
the public for secondary analysis. However, dissemination is increasingly
challenging due to risks of unintended confidentiality breaches, nonresponse and
faulty data, and the costs of mounting surveys that collect many detailed
attributes. The Triangle Census Research Network (TCRN) will develop broadly
applicable methodologies that will transform and improve data dissemination
practice in the federal statistical system. In particular, the TCRN will advance
methodologies and tools for disseminating public use data with high quality and
acceptable risks of confidentiality breaches by developing theory and
methodology for releasing multiply imputed, synthetic datasets based on
flexible, nonparametric Bayesian models built specifically for high-dimensional
data with longitudinal and multi-level aspects. TCRN will develop approaches for
including survey weights in redacted data that can improve statistical
estimation without leading to confidentiality disclosures. The project also will
develop the framework for computer systems that provide secondary analysts with
feedback on the quality of inferences from redacted data, and it will develop
theory and methodology for creating synthetic contingency tables based on
fusions of linear programming and Bayesian modeling. The TCRN will improve
methodology and practice for handling missing and faulty data by developing
frameworks for simultaneous imputation of missing data and editing of faulty
data by integrating paradigms from statistics and operations research. The
project also will develop nonparametric Bayesian methodology for multiple
imputation of missing data in high dimensions with longitudinal and multi-level
aspects. Finally, to enhance agencies' abilities to integrate information from
multiple sources, the TCRN will develop methods that agencies and secondary
analysts can use to properly account for uncertainty in inferences in imperfect
record linkage settings, as well as to pass on that uncertainty in public use
data products via multiply imputed datasets. TCRN also will develop statistical
approaches to combining information from multiple data sources that do not
depend on record linkage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodological developments
of the TCRN will transform the way statistical agencies handle data
dissemination with regard to statistical disclosure limitation, missing data,
and integrating information. These developments will offer federal agencies
options for releasing data products with increased utility, leading to advances
in science and improved policy making. The TCRN will apply the methodologies to
major Census Bureau data products, thereby improving the hundreds of secondary
analyses of these datasets. The interdisciplinary team of the TCRN will use
these data products to answer questions in aging, economics, and social welfare
that have important implications for policy making. As an integral part of the
research, the TCRN will involve and offer educational opportunities to
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and statisticians at federal agencies,
thus developing and training future leaders in data dissemination research and
practice. This activity is supported by the NSF-Census Research Network funding
opportunity.