* 1131053
* Ranking Large Information Sets
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Predrag Jelenkovic, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 12/31/2014
* USD 330,000.00

The objective of this research project is to develop statistical tools and
construct efficient simulation methods for validation and testing. Rapidly
growing webs of interconnected, dynamic and complex information sets, e.g., the
World Wide Web (WWW), scientific data, social networks, news, national security
data, etc., are reaching unprecedented scales. Hence, effective methods for
ordering/ranking these data sets are of utmost importance for making the best
use of this wealth of information. Given that the scale and complexity of these
information sets will continue to increase in the future, a new probabilistic
approach for understanding their average behavior is needed in the same way that
statistical mechanics was needed for understanding large sets of molecules. To
this end, statistical tools will be developed for the analysis of a variety of
dynamic, distributed, and possibly nonlinear information ranking algorithms. The
novel statistical methodology to be developed will provide a framework for
designing ranking algorithms with a pre-specified behavior. As a complement to
the analytical work, efficient simulation methods will be constructed for the
validation of modeling assumptions and for testing the second-order properties
of ranking algorithms and information webs.

If successful, the results of this research will provide a new framework for the
analysis and design of customized ranking algorithms with a predetermined
typical behavior, which will result in algorithms better tailored to the diverse
requirements of specific application areas. Given that the work will pursue
analytically tractable approximation methods, it is expected that it will
provide a considerable amount of new insights and design rules of thumb for
ranking algorithms. Furthermore, the developed mathematical techniques will
significantly enrich the existing literature on weighted stochastic recursions,
heavy-tailed large deviations, weighted branching processes, and efficient
simulation methods. This work is also expected to have a substantial broader
impact, since the preceding mathematical disciplines are heavily used in a wide
variety of application areas that include the analysis of algorithms, biology,
and statistical mechanics.