* 1131359
* Risk Assessment of Bridges under Multihazard Effect of Earthquake and Flood-Induced Scour
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Peggy Johnson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 256,000.00

The occurrence of earthquakes in the presence of flood-induced scour is a
critical multi-hazard scenario for bridges located in seismically-active flood-
prone regions. The objective of this research is to study the impact of this
multi-hazard scenario on the design of bridges. An analytical multi-hazard
framework will be formulated to assess the reliability of representative bridges
located in three seismically-active, flood-prone regions of US and to quantify
risk associated with these bridges under the combined effect of earthquake and
scour. Regional flood hazard curves will be developed and multi-hazard scenario
for bridges will be characterized by combining these hazard curves with regional
seismic hazards. Bridge scour calculated from developed flood hazard curves will
be incorporated in finite element analyses. Reliability analysis will be
performed to assess the variability of bridge performance due to uncertainties
involved in various analysis modules. Results will be presented in forms of (i)
fragility surfaces and curves and (ii) risk curves for different multi-hazard
scenarios. The multi-hazard analysis framework will be used to investigate the
effectiveness of several seismic retrofit techniques for bridges under
earthquakes in the presence of flood-induced scour. &lt;br/&gt;On completion of
this research, the profession will have access to a comprehensive knowledge-base
on bridge performance under multi-hazard effect of seismic and flood-induced
scour. Results can be utilized further for loss estimation of bridges located in
the study regions and for performance evaluation of highway transportation
networks under future events. This research is designed to educate graduate and
undergraduate students on multiple phases of multi-hazard risk assessment.
Several online modules will be developed which will enable educators, state DOTs
and practicing engineers to utilize the research outcome for their respective
purposes.