* 1131128
* Environmental Sensitivity of Diamond-Like Carbon (DLC) Friction and Wear
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2015
* USD 325,000.00

The research objective of this award is to understand and control the surface
properties of diamond-like carbon (DLC) which is a technically important
material. Various types of DLC are used to control friction and wear in a wide
range of engineering applications due to their superior mechanical and
tribological properties. The recent discovery of near-frictionless properties of
hydrogenated DLC films can lead to innovations to reduce frictional energy loss
and increase the service life of mechanical systems. However, the near-
frictionless behavior is observed only in vacuum or extremely dry conditions
after an initial induction period during which the friction is initially high
and the DLC film surface wears. In atmospheric conditions, near-frictionless DLC
films lose their superlubricity and are subject to wear. This research is based
on a hypothesis that the DLC surface is highly reactive and can be oxidized in
ambient air. Through a series of control experiments and using innovative
experimental designs, this research will determine the thickness and composition
of the oxidized surface layer in various environments and find vapor additives
that can ensure ultra-low friction and wear-free operation of DLC in ambient air
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new hypothesis and experimental findings of
this research will have great impacts on not only DLC tribochemistry but also
energy-saving technology. This work will change the common view that the DLC
surface is inert. The DLC surface is reactive especially in oxygen and humid
environments. The deeper understanding of the DLC surface chemistry will
eventually help to develop coating technologies for energy conservation through
reduction of parasitic frictional dissipation and material loss. Undergraduate
students will be involved to analyze how much energy is lost in daily activities
around us as well as in industrial places. Graduate students involved in this
project will be trained with multidisciplinary skills - chemical engineering,
molecular spectroscopy, tribology, and coatings. The spectral data and findings
of this research will be incorporated into a graduate-level characterization.
The research opportunity will be offered to underrepresented groups.