* 1131342
* Toward an Environmental Sustainability of the Crosslinked Plastics via Ultrasonic Extrusion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Avraam Isayev, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 337,814.00

This grant will enable the exploration of a new science-based technology for a
novel continuous process enabling the reprocessing of crosslinked polyethylene,
a material used extensively today in products such as plastic bags, hot and cold
water pipes, wire and cable insulation, storage tanks and many injection molded
parts. Most crosslinked materials cannot be reprocessed because the network
molecular structure that gives them such attractive properties is very difficult
to decrosslink without destroying the polymer. In fact, today most of these
discarded products are simply burned for their limited caloric value. These
novel ultrasonically aided extrusion processes have the potential to produce
material of sufficient quality and integrity to enable it to be reprocessed into
new products. The research team will study the ultrasonic extrusion and
fabrication, as well as the structure and properties of the decrosslinked
polyethylene materials and will establish the process models and identify the
mechanisms allowing for the prediction of the optimal conditions of ultrasonic
processing and scale up of the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will lead to the manufacture of new materials and
products from waste crosslinked polyethylenes for use in many of the same
applications. The societal impact would be a significant solid waste reduction
in landfills. The theoretical modeling and computer simulations of the
ultrasonic treatment of these crosslinked polyethylenes will contribute to the
optimization of the process and design of new ultrasonic extruders. The
technology could also be applicable to a broader class of crosslinked polymers
beyond polyethylene.