* 1131290
* Solution-Based Fabrication of Epitaxial Metal-Oxide Nanocomposite Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Hongmei Luo, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2015
* USD 307,983.00

This award provides funding for the synthesis and study of oxide nanocomposite
materials in order to control and manipulate the physical properties of oxides.
A variety of techniques are available to prepare bi-layer or multi-layer
laminate nanocomposites. However, the technique to prepare self-assembled
nanocomposites is solely by pulsed laser deposition. This project aims to
develop a new technique to self-assembled nanocomposites and broaden the
composite systems with varied compositions and microstructures. The main
objectives of this project are: 1) to use a novel chemical solution approach,
the polymer-assisted deposition to synthesize the bi-layer and self-assembled
nanocomposites of the same two-phase materials; 2) to analyze the morphology and
microstructure; and 3) to evaluate the physical properties. The polymer-assisted
deposition has all the benefits of a chemical-solution approach: low cost, easy
set-up, and large area coatings. However, it is unique since the solutions are
very stable for years, where polymers in the solutions actually bind with metal
ions, which prevents the metals from undergoing hydrolysis. Therefore, it
provides extremely straightforward to synthesize the composites and precise
control of the stoichiometry. In addition, the microstructure of the self-
assembled nanocomposites prepared by the polymer-assisted deposition is
different from the films prepared by pulsed-laser deposition, which will allow
us to compare and understand how the microstructure and morphology affect the
functionality of oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project will
directly contribute to important advances in the knowledge of 1) the principles
of predicting two-phase nanocomposite systems; 2) functionality as determined by
morphology and microstructure of the oxide nanocomposites; and 3) the necessary
conditions for achieving enhanced functionality or multifunctionality. This
project holds great promise for enhancing various fundamental and applied
studies of oxide nanocomposites. Furthermore, the understanding of oxide systems
can have great technological impact on nitrides and carbides and their
composites as well. The technical aspects of the project will be integrated with
an educational mission in form of course development, teaching laboratories, and
special seminars. The graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
through a multidisciplinary environment and the students will get an opportunity
for training and working at national laboratories.