* 1131192
* Workshop: Clean Energy Education Workshop, Urbana, IL, September 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Debasish Dutta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

(1131192)Dutta- The extraordinary problems posed by fossil fuel use call for our
nation and the world to make a transition to clean energy. This is a major and
long-term commitment. "Clean energy" encompasses a broad suite of technological
approaches in combination with relentless progress towards greater efficiency in
our entire system of energy use, from the sources to the social and economic end
products. However, the transition to clean energy is not an issue that can
simply be addressed by technological advances. Since conventional fuels will
remain accessible, the transition to clean energy will only take place if
consumers demand clean energy and the business, policy and regulatory
environments facilitate the adoption of new approaches over the business-as-
usual strategy of combustion. Such a change can only be driven by an energy
literate citizenry that understands adopting clean energy is a cornerstone of
building a secure future for our nation. Clean energy education is therefore an
enabling component of this generational effort, one that will require the
highest levels of American expertise and innovation. The University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign will host a workshop that is intended to catalyze the
formation of clean energy education programs nationwide. This workshop will
bring together government leaders, industry representatives, academic experts,
teachers and workforce trainers to chart the way forward to a national program
in clean energy education. The workshop will provide a forum for federal agency
and industry thought leaders to share their vision for a clean energy economy
with academic institutions, outlining challenges, knowledge gaps, and
educational needs. This knowledge is fundamental to the development of a
national framework for clean energy education, whose goal is to enhance our
human capital, a key to innovation and global competitiveness. This workshop
will address energy education opportunities across a broad spectrum that
includes K-12 schools, community colleges, universities and continuing education
in the workplace. It will also foster institutional partnerships necessary to
develop and sustain clean energy education programs, creating a pathway towards
the goal of nationwide energy literacy. The workshop program, presentations and
related educational resources will be placed on the Internet for the public at
large. In addition, a final report will be issued that contains recommendations
concerning four target areas for energy education: K-12 schools; college and
graduate programs; schools of business and government; workforce and continuing
education. The report will identify the greatest opportunities for, and the
obstacles that might hinder the creation of, programs to reach each of these
important audiences. The workshop report will inform policymakers and provide
guidance for the development of a national program to prepare an energy literate
citizenry.

This award is co-funded by the CBET Environmental Sustainability program in ENG
and the Division of Graduate Education in EHR.