* 1131770
* Interactions of bacteria, viruses and bloom-forming diatom genus Pseudo-nitzschia
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Sunny Jiang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project seeks to elucidate the interactions between
viruses, bacteria and toxic bloom-forming marine diatom genus Pseudo-nitzschia
in the coastal marine environment. The cosmopolitan Pseudo-nitzschia sp.
(Bacillariophyceae) causes harmful algal blooms in various parts of the world.
Recent genome sequences of two marine diatoms revealed that bacterial genes
contribute up to 5% of their genome make-up, highlighting the close association
of marine diatoms with bacteria in evolutionary history. So far, few have looked
at the interactions of diatoms with their epibiotic bacteria and none have
studied the interactions of virus, bacteria and phytoplankton using direct
experimental approach. This project investigates the physiological, biochemical,
genetic and ecological interactions of algae-microbe associations in order to
decipher the influences of microbes on algal bloom dynamics and toxigenesis. By
incorporating methods in phylogeny, physiology, biochemistry, comparative
genomics and metagenomics, the research seeks answers to the following
questions: 1) What are the epiphytic bacteria associating with different species
of Pseudo-nitzschia and how do they change at different stages of the bloom? 2)
How do these bacteria affect the physiology of the Pseudo- nitzschia hosts and
how does the algal host regulate these microbial interactions? 3) Can viruses
promote a bloom by selectively lysing algicidal bacteria, while creating
opportunities for growth- promoting bacteria or vice versa? This project is
guided by the preliminary research on microbe- algae interaction, where
significantly different epibiotic bacterial communities were found to associate
with two Pseudo-nitzschia species. Bacterial associates of one Pseudo-nitzschia
sp. stimulated the growth of the algal-host but acted as a pathogen on another
Pseudo-nitzschia sp. This project will expand the work on epibiotic bacterial
community diversity and dynamics by sampling additional species of Pseudo-
nitzschia and investigating the changes in epibiotic and planktonic bacterial
community structure following the initiation, peak and decline phases of Pseudo-
nitzschia blooms in coastal oceans. Algal host responses to epibionts
association will be investigated using physiological experiments of binary and
multi-culture experimental approaches. The chemical communication between algal
host and epibiont bacteria will be addressed by looking at the algal exudate
excretions and bacterial enzyme secretions using established LC-MS and enzyme
assays. To illustrate the influences of viruses on bacterial-algal interaction,
bacteriophages specific to epibiotic bacteria will be isolated and included in
the physiological experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project integrates education in environmental science and engineering with in-
depth investigation of microbial interactions during algal bloom. The
integration will be achieved through training of a minority postdoctoral fellow,
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in environmental
science, early exposure of undergraduate students to environmental research, and
outreach to society. The recruitment and training of minority participants in
the research will be conducted in collaboration with Minority Science Program
(MSP) and the California Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP) program.
Jointly with Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP), undergraduate
students will be recruited to participate in this project at the early stage of
their study in UCI. Outreach to society and 7th-12th grades students will be
accomplished in collaboration with the Newport Back Bay Science Center managed
by the California Department of Fish and Game.