* 1131416
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Integrating Space and Place into Children's Perceptions of Environmental Health Hazards.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Marta Jankowska, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2013
* USD 11,585.00

The overall objective of this doctoral dissertation research project is to
develop a geographical overview of how children perceive environmental health
hazards, comparing beliefs and realities of environment-disease pathways with
spatial and contextual methods. Spatial processes uncovered by health geography
and environmental health recurrently corroborate the importance of geography for
understanding disease transmission. Studies have examined how place is a driving
force of disease with a focus on differing levels of exposure, from household to
neighborhood to broader regional contexts. However, the literature has yet to
sufficiently incorporate notions of space, such as topology and networks, into
understanding how geography shapes health. In this project, qualitative methods
will feature key informant interviews, focus groups, and interviews with
children. Quantitative and spatial data will be collected in Accra, Ghana using
surveys, hazard mapping, photographic exercises, and neighborhood walks with GPS
tagging (locating specific objects in a neighborhood). Analysis will revolve
around interview coding, data exploration, mapping, variance tests, and logistic
regression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, this analysis of health perceptions
of children in a developing world city will fill a gap in the literature on
children's health perception, and provide a novel research domain for spatial
cognition. This research will advance the health geography and environmental
health literature by developing and applying a spatial cognition framework of
environmental health hazard knowledge that includes diverse spatial components.
Perceptions of environmental health hazards will be used to explore both spatial
and contextual aspects of infectious disease transmission among the growing
population of children in Accra, Ghana. Within the broader framework of health
geography and environmental health, the proposed spatial analytical and
qualitative integration will develop a multi-pronged systems approach for
studying environment and disease. The research has broad applications in public
health interventions and education by narrowing the gap between children's
spatial perceptions of health and health education methods, and therefore will
be shared with the Health Ministry, NGOs with interest in children's health, and
the Population Council in Accra. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;