* 1131548
* Collaborative research: Constraining the global ocean nitrogen cycle with multiple tracers in a biogeochemical inverse model
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Curtis Deutsch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2014
* USD 380,755.00

Nitrogen (N) biogeochemical cycling in the marine environment is subject to
complex biological and environmental feedbacks with unknown climate
sensitivities. Past studies have attempted to characterize the marine N
inventory using biogeochemical tracers, such as nutrient stoichiometry, nitrogen
isotopes and N2 gas, but these studies have been a snapshot, focusing on a
single process in a specific region of the ocean at a time. Such studies were
forced to ignore other important and related controlling mechanisms. To resolve
the magnitude and type of environmental controls on the processes that influence
the N inventory, processes need to be considered simultaneously. Researchers
from the University of California at Los Angeles propose to model the spatial
distributions and rates of the primary N budget fluxes. In order to derive a
global marine N budget, researchers propose to use an inverse model framework
that is consistent with all available tracer data. The global ocean circulation
model will contain biogeochemical cycles of tracers and will be constrained to
optimize the fit to physical tracers (T, S, 14-C-age, CFCs). To examine how
environmental variables affect the magnitude of each flux, they will be
regressed against the modeling results, providing insight into the effects of
anticipated climate change on the N budget. Furthermore, analysis of the inverse
solution's error structure will allow researchers to examine the validity of
tracer-related assumptions. This work could set up a statistically rigorous
framework that will enable researchers to assimilate rapidly developing data
streams and will highlight areas in the oceans where data is lacking, allowing
resources to be used strategically. The project will provide education and
training for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a post-doc, and
will provide important information and insights into the biogeochemical cycling
of N necessary to understand the impact of changing climate on ocean processes.