* 1131972
* Conference: Meiosis Gordon Research Conference and Research Seminar to be held June 3-8, 2012 at Colby-Sawyer College, New London, NY
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Nancy Hollingsworth, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2013
* USD 11,995.00

Intellectual Merit: The meeting of the 2012 Meiosis Gordon Research Conference
will be held June 3-8, 2012 at Colby-Sawyer College, New London, NY. Meiosis is
specialized cell division that halves the number of chromosomes in cells to
create gametes used for sexual reproduction. Meiosis underlies the genetic
diversity within and among species, and meiotic mutations have a major impact on
organismal fitness. A major strength of the field is that, in addition to the
wide variety of approaches that are being taken to understand this critical cell
division process, a large number of different model organisms are studied,
including yeast, nematodes, plants, fruit flies and mammals. This meeting
provides an opportunity for people studying the same process in different
organisms to compare notes, and the synergism that has resulted from these
interactions has greatly helped speed the advance of our understanding of
meiosis. The 2012 Meiosis GRC will bring together over 150 researchers who study
the cell and molecular biology, genetics, genomics, biochemistry and
evolutionary biology of meiosis. All areas of meiosis will be represented at the
meeting. The objectives of the meeting are as follows: 1) To provide a forum for
scientific interaction in this interdisciplinary field, 2) To present the newest
results in the field, 3) To introduce young researchers to the field, 4) To
promote interdisciplinary discussion that will foster new approaches, concepts
and ideas. The meeting will consist of nine plenary sessions. There will be a
poster session and posters will be presented by graduate students, postdocs, and
PIs. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Meiosis GRC is one of two regularly
scheduled conferences. The Meiosis GRC has typically had the highest fraction of
female participants among the Gordon Conferences. The conference organizers
strive to ensure that qualified minorities can attend. This is facilitated
through the Carl Storm Fellowships to self-identified members of
underrepresented groups.