* 1131112
* A Combined Quantum Mechanical and Experimental Study of Interfacial Biomaterial Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Vikas Tomar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,519.00

The research objective of this award is to use quantum mechanical simulations in
combination with Raman spectroscopy to explore and understand how inorganic-
organic interfaces contribute to biomaterial deformation mechanics. Despite
significant advancements in biomaterial characterization and biomimetic material
development, ways to modify interfacial interactions that could lead to changes
in biomaterial deformation mechanisms remain unexplored. This award focuses on
using quantum mechanical simulations to understand how idealized organic-
inorganic interfaces (e.g. tropocollagen-hydroxyapatite) influence biomaterial
deformation mechanism. The simulation results will be correlated to the peak
shifts in the Raman spectra of deformed and undeformed biomaterial samples.
Based on the findings quantum mechanical simulations will be used to examine and
predict possible changes in the organic as well as the inorganic constituents
that can lead to desired changes in interfacial deformation mechanisms for
significant improvements in biomaterial strength.&lt;br/&gt; The award results
will establish a transformative framework whereas different types of biomimetic
morphologies can be analyzed for their effect on mechanical strength and
fracture toughness without continuum phenomenological assumptions. The
successful completion of research will establish new inorganic-organic
interfacial deformation mechanisms that could act as a seed for accelerated
development of new structural biomimetic materials. Therefore, the success of
this research will pave a new framework that could significantly benefit the
biomechanics and life sciences community. Education and outreach activities in
this award will focus on integrating award research work with K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate educational enhancements. The results of the
research will be incorporated in the graduate and undergraduate solid mechanics
courses that the principal investigator has been teaching. Rising junior and
senior high school women and students from underrepresented communities will be
provided opportunities to explore technology, math, and science concepts using
hands-on learning during summer time University campus visits