* 1131976
* RAPID: Evaluation of Multidecadal Variability in Surface Solar Radiation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Joel Norris, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2014
* USD 29,999.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to determine
whether the current generation of 20th century climate simulations can reproduce
the observed record of surface insolation, particularly the periods of solar
"dimming" and "brightening". While past radiative forcing by greenhouse gases is
reasonably well known, the record of aerosol forcing - the presumed agent of
dimming and brightening - is not. The project is motivated by the fact that the
earlier generation of models used for the Fourth Assessment report (AR4) did not
successfully reproduce the observed dimming and brightening over Europe and East
Asia, two regions where earlier research shows that insolation trends were
driven by aerosols rather than changes in clouds. Given that the observed trends
were driven by aerosols, the lack of agreement with models suggests that the
aerosol histories used in the AR4 simuations were not accurate, hence research
in the present project tests for improvements in aerosol-driven insolation
variability between models used for AR4 and AR5. The work relies on a novel
method for the removal of cloud cover effects in the computation of insolation
trends, which is useful since the models do not have the same cloud and weather
history as the observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
project lies in its support of the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide
information on climate change and its consequences to decision makers worldwide.
This project seeks in particular to identify and reduce uncertainty in aerosol
radiative forcing, which will contribute to reducing uncertainty regarding the
sensitivity of earth's climate to greenhouse gas increases.