* 1131252
* Advancing Self-Assembly Processing through Architecturally- and Compositionally-Complex Block Copolymer Surfactant Mixtures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* S Michael Kilbey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this research is to elucidate the interconnected links between
the design of architecturally-complex block copolymers, their integration into
nanoscale structures, their dynamics in solution and kinetics of self-assembly
at solid-fluid interfaces. In so doing, this research will advance self-assembly
processing as a means of nano-manufacturing. A distinctive and novel aspect of
the work involves the use of kinetic modeling to quantify the relative
importance of thermodynamically-controlled and mass transport-governed
relaxation processes that operate during self-assembly at solid-fluid
interfaces. Experimental studies will focus on the effect of variations in
composition and architecture, which will be introduced by systematically mixing
diverse sets of well-defined copolymers based on polystyrene/polyisoprene and
polystyrene/poly(2-vinylpyridine) block copolymers, which display surfactant-
like behaviors and self-organize in selective solvents. The shape, size, and
kinetics of assembly of the mixed copolymer aggregates will be fully
characterized. Understanding how variations in the composition and architecture
of the constituent building blocks will pave the way for using mixtures of
simpler building blocks to create complex, higher-order structures, and also
help to identify new and useful pathways for tailoring thin film formation by
self-assembly.

The spontaneous generation of nanostructures from simpler polymeric building
blocks is fundamental to a wide variety of technologies finding application in
society, including drug encapsulation and delivery, environmental remediation by
solubilization and mobilization of contaminants, and formation of patterned
surfaces for microelectronics and bit-patterned media. This research promises to
provide new insights into how to design and process copolymer-based materials to
attain assemblies of different shape, size, and properties, thereby spurring
additional technological advances. In addition, knowledge of the kinetics of
assembly in solution and at interfaces will enhance the development of self-
assembly as form of nano-manufacturing, which offers intriguing possibilities
for creating new products, structures and devices via an efficient and scalable
method. Finally, this research program will foster the development of young
scientists, engineers and teachers, and the greater scientific community will be
engaged through a symposium conducted at a national meeting.