* 1131665
* A Recurrent Nested Bayesian Non-parametric Model for Real Time Monitoring of Pattern Dependent Surface Topography in Chemical Mechanical Planarization (CMP) Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Ranga Komanduri, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 12/31/2013
* USD 366,999.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a new approach to effectively
capture the underlying nonlinear and nonstationary evolution of the multi-
dimensional process states in Chemical Mechanical Planarization (CMP) process,
to enable early defect detection of pattern dependent surface topography in CMP,
i.e., dishing/erosion. The proposed research will: (1) establish the fundamental
relationships that connect process abnormalities in CMP with extracted features
from online sensor signals, i.e., a mapping between the sensor features with the
evolving dishing and erosion, thus, to enable early detection of surface
topography related defects; and (2) create a new online predictive model with a
novel recurrent nested Dirichlet process (RNDP) model which has a non-parametric
property and data-driven nature, and can accurately capture CMP process
nonlinearity/nonstationarity and avoid the possible model over- and under-
fitting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will result in a
technological breakthrough that can fully utilize/integrate the CMP process data
and thus enable early defect detection/alleviation for wafer yield improvement.
It is anticipated that this proposal would generate significant contributions
toward promoting the technological advances in process monitoring and control
for semiconductor industry, leading to a better product (IC) quality and higher
process productivity for the CMP process. The new curricula, REU, combined with
undergraduate and graduate student mentoring programs, will attract potential
students, especially from underrepresented groups, to engineering related
research and education by exposing students to both fundamental research and
industry practices. Dissemination of research outcomes includes professional
presentations and publications, website development, media outreach and student
publications, as well as collaboration with industry partners.