* 1131948
* US-German Collaboration: How dynamic is encoding? State-dependent feature-selectivity in thalamo-cortical circuits of the rat whisker system
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2015
* Garrett Stanley, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 11/30/2015
* USD 425,000.00

This project entails an effort aimed at understanding how we sense
tactile/touch, and how this is influenced by the state of the brain. The brain
goes through many different changes in state, from asleep to awake but non-
alert, to alert and attentive, but how the outside world is sensed in these
different situations is unknown. This project utilizes a powerful experimental
model, the rodent whisker system, which shares many of the same features as the
human fingertip, and combines this with measurement of the electrical signals of
the neurons in the associated parts of the brain. The project is a special
collaborative project between the laboratory of Dr. Garrett Stanley at Georgia
Tech in the USA and the laboratory of Dr. Cornelius Schwarz at the University of
Tuebingen in Germany, in an effort to foster interactions between scientists in
the two countries in the area of Computational Neuroscience. Success in this
project will have important implications for the development of prosthetic
devices for delivering sensation to individuals who have lost sensory function
due to disease or trauma. Further, through the Georgia Tech GIFT program, the
Stanley and Schwarz laboratories will partner with the CEISMC (Center for
Education Integrating Science, Mathematics, and Computing) program to work with
a science teacher and a small group of students at a local Georgia high school
serving the underrepresented population.

This project is jointly funded by Collaborative Research in Computational
Neuroscience and the Office of International Science and Engineering. A
companion project is being funded by the German Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF).