* 1131455
* Collaborative Research: Developing New Instrumentation to Accurately Measure Heat and Mass Flux of Hydrothermal Fluids
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Timothy Crone, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2015
* USD 394,634.00

The PI's request funding to develop a pair of camera systems that are
specifically designed to use OPV (VentCam) and DFV (Diffuse Effluent Measurement
System (DEMS)) to measure the velocities of focused and diffuse hydrothermal
flows in these environments. The VentCam system will use OPV to perform time-
series velocity measurements on black smoker fluids using a high-speed, high
resolution camera with automatic panning that maintains the flow in the field-
of-view during sulfide chimney growth. The DEMS will measure diffuse fluid
velocities using a camera attached at a fixed distance from a background
specially designed for DFV calculations. Simultaneous temperature measurements
by thermocouples placed in high-temperature vent orifices as well as low-
temperature loggers coupled to the DEMS will help constrain the partitioning of
diffuse and focused heat fluxes and the amount of crustal cooling attributable
to axial venting. Measuring the rates at which hydrothermal fluids exit the
crust, and how those rates change over time, is critical for understanding these
systems and the complex linkages between their component parts. Such
measurements can provide information about the structure of permeability in the
subseafloor, the geometry of hydrothermal circulation patterns, fluxes of heat
and chemicals exchanged with the overlying ocean, and the potential productivity
of subseafloor ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge gained using these tools will improve our
understanding of hydrothermal fluid fluxes and their contribution to a variety
of chemical, biological and physical processes. The project will support two
early career scientists who were responsible for developing the optical methods
to be used by these imaging systems. The Mentoring plan for the post-doc is well
described and likely to result in successful development of the researcher
during the projects lifetime. When developed and tested, the instruments have
potential for longer-term time series if connected to regional seafloor cabled
observatories like the Regional Serial Nodes observatory under development on
the Juan de Fuca Ridge.