* 1131361
* Studies of Friction and Adhesion in Nanoscale Asperity-Asperity Contacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* James Batteas, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 309,517.00

Advanced technologies such as microelectromechancial systems (MEMS) devices,
suffer considerably from friction and adhesion due to the large surface to
volume ratios of their components, limiting their practical applications. The
goal of this grant is to develop molecular based approaches for lubrication
schemes to address these challenges and advance the fundamental understanding of
lubrication in MEMS. Mixed monolayer films proffer the potential of providing
modest friction modification, with integrated molecules that can also function
as mobile lubricant phases under contact. In this grant we will explore how
mixed monolayer systems can be exploited to solve key issues in the lubrication
of MEMS devices through the precise control of surface interactions by
systematically tuning surface chemical composition. These fundamental
experimental studies are paired with molecular dynamics simulations of the
contacts, as well as large scale tribometry measurements to allow us to explore
these phenomena over a range of length scales (nm ? Ã¬m) and timescales (ps ? s).
New techniques for exploring the asperity-asperity contacts that dominate
microdevices, using tip enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS), will also be
developed, where friction/adhesion and the corresponding local chemical changes
at interfaces will be probed concomitantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If these
studies are successful, the development of mixed monolayer schemes for MEMS
devices may enable active device technologies to reach production status. The
students working on this project (both graduate and undergraduate) will receive
multidisciplinary training in materials science, engineering, and surface
chemistry and physics, developing proficiency in multiple arenas, preparing them
for the advanced technology workforce. Aspects of the work will also be
incorporated as demonstrations for elementary school students in our Science and
Engineering Open House. Collaborative interactions with the University of
Florida and Sandia National Labs will also allow students to conduct research in
both fundamental and applied settings, as well as both government and academic
labs.