* 1131500
* NCRN-MN: Linking Surveys to the World: Administrative Data, the Web, and Beyond
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Charles Brown, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,134,059.00

This project will undertake research that responds to the specific analytic and
operational requirements of the Census Bureau and other federal statistical
agencies to improve their estimates while reducing costs and respondent burden.
The project will use administrative data, and more generally, data generated by
households and businesses in the course of their normal activities to produce
economic and demographic measurements that currently rely on surveys. The
project will develop and evaluate methodologies that use the vast constellation
of data generated by ordinary activity in a modern society and that protect the
privacy of individuals and businesses. The project will examine administrative
records created by businesses, individuals, and governments, streams of data
from social media sites on the World Wide Web, and detailed geospatial data. The
project will analyze these multiple source of data and relate them to data
collected on surveys. It aims to improve survey measurements of economic and
demographic data and potentially supplement or replace surveys with statistics
based on administrative, Web-based, and geospatial data. Applications of these
approaches include the following: using linked survey-administrative data to
assess attrition, selective non-response, and measurement error in surveys;
using Web-based social media to measure job loss, job creation, small business
creation, and informal economic activity; using administrative geo-spatial data
to enhance small-area estimates; and training in the use and creation of linked
survey-administrative datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Federal statistical
agencies have pressing needs to innovate in light of the rapidly changing
structure of the economy and the interaction of these changes with the
fundamental ways in which households and businesses produce and use information.
This project will combine expertise in social science, survey research, and
information science to address the scientific and practical problems that the
statistical system must confront. The project will advance the science of
measurement and serve to renew the statistical system both by bringing frontier
methodology to measurement problems faced by the statistical agencies and by
nurturing a new generation of scholars, both within the statistical agencies and
academia, who will collaboratively address these issues. This activity is
supported by the NSF-Census Research Network funding opportunity.