* 1131861
* Partial Support Of the Condensed Matter and Materials Research Committee
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 65,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides partial
support for the National Research Council's (NRC) Condensed Matter and Materials
Research Committee (CMMRC). The CMMRC is a multidisciplinary group with
membership drawn from universities, industry, and government laboratories. The
areas of expertise represented on the committee are intended to cover the full
breadth of the condensed matter and materials research fields. Nominees for
committee membership have been and will continue to be selected on the basis of
demonstrated intellectual leadership in these areas and thoughtful consideration
of cross-cutting issues. The operating guidelines of CMMRC include the following
objectives: (1) to respond to requests for technical information and assistance;
(2) to initiate and oversee the conduct and publication of studies in these
fields and their strong multidisciplinary connections to other fields of science
and technology; (3) to act as an educational resource for the condensed matter
and materials research communities; and (4) to provide a forum for discussion
among condensed matter and materials scientists and Washington D.C.
policymakers. To carry out those objectives, CMMRC meets on a semiannual basis
and between those meetings, conducts its business through telephone
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of CMMRC will generate broader
impacts in two ways. First, these activities engage a group of leading
scientists from across the subfields of condensed matter and materials science
in joint deliberations and provide a learning environment for that body
regarding the public-policy process for science and the position of those fields
in the broader context of the physical sciences. Second, CMMRC activities lead
to an improved understanding of condensed matter and materials science by the
broader scientific and policy-making communities. By holding multi-disciplinary
workshops and town hall meetings, and initiating studies, CMMRC will continue to
educate researchers, policy makers, and the general public about advances in
condensed matter and materials science that have impact in other fields of
science and technology.