* 1131093
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Double Standards and Team Selection
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Murray Webster, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 9,220.00

SES - 1131093 Murray Webster (PI) Sharon Doerer (co-PI) University of North
Carolina, Charlotte

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Double Standards and Team Selection

Abstract This project examines how people make hiring recommendations.
Specifically, this dissertation examines attitudes held by those making hiring
recommendations, and how team recommendations evolve as a result of an
interaction between the attitudes of evaluators and the qualifications of
candidates.

The project employs an experimental design and is grounded in social
psychological theory. The first phase of the study measures some attitudes that
other research has suggested may affect hiring recommendations. One hundred and
fifty participants will complete this attitude assessment. In the second phase,
these participants will then participate in a random assignment to one of three
experimental groups. In the control condition, the participants will make
recommendations of candidates based on the candidate information only. In the
other two conditions, the PIs examine the effectiveness of two factors, formal
standards for hiring and accountability, on hiring recommendations. In these
conditions, the participants are given the same candidate information, but they
will also be given either formal standards for evaluating the candidates or the
participants will be told that they will be asked to explain their selection
recommendations. Participants then review candidate qualifications and recommend
candidates for a work-team. Thus, measures of the effect of the two
interventions on participant recommendations are compared to recommendations
given by participants who are only provided candidate information. The PIs also
test for effects of participant attitudes on subsequent candidate
recommendations.

Broader Impacts Findings from this research may inform our understanding of the
social psychological factors that shape hiring decisions and are of interest to
employers as well as job applicants. Thus, results from this research may have
practical implications for a variety of organizations. In turn, findings may
shape the development and effectiveness of interventions designed to optimize
hiring decisions crucial to achieving organizational goals.

In addition, the project builds on similar research conducted in other
countries, which will enable us to assess the degree to which factors affecting
hiring decisions are context- or culturally specific. In the process of
conducting this research, the PIs will also advance the discipline by providing
training in research methods to at least one other sociology student.