* 1131621
* Turbulent Exchanges, Energetics and Transports in Buoyant Gravity Currents
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Jonathan Nash, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2015
* USD 391,443.00

Intellectual Merit: The front that bounds a tidal river plume represents a
region of intense exchange between terrestrial- and oceanic-source waters. It
propagates as a gravity current, with a turbulent rotor that both dissipates and
radiates internal wave energy as it advects and diffuses freshwater into the
coastal waters. White and Helfrich (2008) have outlined a framework in which the
dissipative or radiative character of a steady front can be assessed from its
density and velocity alone, contrasting the hypothesis that frontal deceleration
was necessary for wave release (Nash and Moum, 2005). It is the objective of
this project to detail the relationship between waves and turbulence using data
from the Columbia River plume system, to test some of White and Helfrich?s
(2008) ideas in the field, to connect these with laboratory and numerical
experiments, and to extrapolate these to a plume-wide system,. The study focuses
on 4 aspects of the plume system in which high-resolution turbulence and
internal wave data have been collected but not fully analyzed: (1) Energetics
and structure of the gravity current head: are details of the density/velocity
structure behind the front sufficient to assess whether a front dissipates
energy via turbulence or via radiated waves? And can the combination of
dissipation, wave trapping and wave release account for the front?s observed
evolution (growth and decay)? (2) How do these work to set mass transport and
circulation patterns within the head? How/where are energy and mass transported
during wave release? (3) Can mixing within the stratified shear flow behind the
front be predicted a priori, and how important is it compared to that at the
front, from a perspective of both energetics and cross- isopycnal transport? (4)
Can (1-3) be related to the external parameters, such as river flow, tides,
coastal currents? In addition to testing lab/numerics-inspired theoretical ideas
about gravity current propagation, a complimentary goal is to assess which of
the front or the trailing shear flow is responsible for the majority of the
plume mixing. This is fundamental, as it dictates whether surface coastal waters
or deeper fluid is entrained into the plume, which have important biogeochemical
consequences. In addition, if energy is lost from the front via waves, that
energy is not available for local mixing but may instead produce turbulence in
regions remote from the plume itself.

Broader Impacts: In addition to the analyses of Columbia River plume data
outlined above, a second objective is to link recent fieldwork on plumes of
different scale to each other, and to laboratory and numerical studies that are
simultaneously being conducted. To do this, a 4-day workshop will be held with a
focus on providing a flexible and adaptive forum for discussing recent results,
exchanging analysis techniques, and collectively synthesizing studies and future
directions. Given that there has been a significant recent interest in this area
(with numerous current and recently-completed experiments), such a meeting is
timely. This grant will support a PhD candidate at OSU, and provide
opportunities for student exchanges among synergistic field/lab/numerical
projects. Results will be broadly disseminated in scientific journals and made
accessible to the public through the web and other media (newspaper articles,
etc.) Finally, knowledge of the location and intensity of plume fronts and of
large-amplitude waves is of significant interest to the marine community: (1)
for navigation, these are a hazard due to velocity convergence and wave
steepening, especially over the bar, (2) for fisherman, they represent active
feeding grounds, (3) for pollution response, the front represents both a
material boundary for surface contaminants, but also a conduit for exchange into
deeper/coastal waters. It is hoped that these results will ultimately improve
the skill of operational river-plume models.