* 1131850
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Contributions of the Thalamus and Basal Ganglia to Neocortical Beta Oscillation: A Novel Computational Hypothesis
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Christopher Moore, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 10/31/2014
* USD 830,000.00

For over 80 years, researchers have observed rhythmic electrical activity in the
neocortex, the outer shell of neurons covering the mammalian brain. Despite the
prevalence of these oscillations, their meaning for computation--if and how they
help us move, perceive and/or think--is a topic of intense debate. Beta
oscillations, rhythmic activity at 15&#8208;29 Hz, are prominent in neocortex.
Overexpression of beta is a hallmark of Parkinson's disease, and treatments that
relieve its motor symptoms also diminish beta. Similarly, beta oscillations
predict failure by human subjects to perceive sensory stimuli. These findings
directly implicate beta as important for information processing and healthy
brain function. Understanding the detailed origins of beta is crucial to knowing
its role and to potentially guiding targeted therapies.

The present study will test a recently developed hypothesis that explains the
natural expression patterns of beta in the human brain. This hypothesis emerged
from a detailed biophysically accurate and multi&#8208;area computational neural
model. To test this hypothesis, the proposed research will use detailed
simulations of multiple brain areas to guide experimental recordings and brain
stimulation. These data will in turn be used to advance and constrain the model.
As part of this research, the model will be elaborated to include interconnected
elements from the basal ganglia, thalamus and neocortex.

These same areas will be targets for neural recording, to understand how their
activity correlates with neocortical beta in anesthetized and behaving
preparations processing sensory information. Causal testing of model predictions
will be achieved by leveraging recent innovations in optogenetics, the
application of light pulses to turn neurons on and off with millisecond
precision and cell-type specificity. Optogenetics will test in a real brain the
sufficiency and necessity of the activity patterns that are predicted by the
model to lead to expression of this brain rhythm.