* 1131073
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Democracy and Adaptation Effects of India's Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGA)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Harry Fischer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,950.00

Countries around the world are gearing up to respond to anticipated climate
change by developing plans for adaptation. In order to be effective, these
efforts must facilitate participation of local beneficiaries in project planning
as well as provide equitable distribution of benefits from public investments.
Past experience with development initiatives has shown that effective
participation is uncommon, however, and outcomes are often highly inequitable.
Little is actually known about factors that enable communities to channel
development projects towards addressing climate-related vulnerabilities. This
doctoral dissertation research project will investigate factors that (1)
encourage participation of marginal social groups in development project
selection, (2) enable such groups to receive equitable benefits from project
outcomes, and (3) enable citizens to design development initiatives for reducing
vulnerability to climate impacts. A recent policy in India, the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), provides an excellent opportunity to explore
these themes. NREGA is expected to provide a social safety net through provision
of minimum-wage employment generated through state-funded rural development
activities. Projects are ostensibly selected at the local level through
democratic deliberation. The doctoral student will draw upon a diverse array of
scholarship examining local democracy, rural development, common-pool resource
management, and climate change adaptation to study participation, equity, and
climate vulnerability reduction outcomes in NREGA project selection and
implementation. Working in the northern Indian state of Himachal Pradesh, he
will employ a two-tiered analytical approach. He will use qualitative approaches
to identify the processes that generate positive outcomes in a small number of
case studies, and he will derive testable operational hypotheses for
quantitative analysis. In the second phase, he will test the hypothesized
relationships among specific factors and a suite of outcome indicators across a
larger universe of cases through quantitative modeling. The student hypothesizes
that more equitable and democratic project implementation is the outcome of the
dynamic interactions of multiple actors traversing the state-society divide. He
also will assess whether access to critical adaptation knowledge and capacity to
influence development decisions are likely to be bolstered by homogeneity of
endowments and interests, a vibrant civil society, human capital, access to mass
media, and a local history of coping with climatic stresses.

The expected flow of resources from the global community towards climate-
adaptation assistance has great potential to ameliorate the current living
conditions of the world's poor while increasing their ability to withstand
future challenges. The findings from this project will enhance basic knowledge
regarding how the structure of adaptation policies can influence their
effectiveness, and they will enable decision makers to make more informed
choices about allocating scarce resources towards appropriate interventions. The
project also will produce a large database that combines project-level outcomes
with data dealing with sociopolitical, economic, institutional, and
environmental variables. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.