* 1131408
* Structure and Micro-Fracture Testing of Single Grain Boundaries in Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Martin Harmer, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the sub-nanometer
structural and chemical characteristics of transparent magnesium aluminate
spinel grain boundaries that are responsible for intergranular fracture when LiF
is used as a sintering aid. It has long been known that partially-disordered
intergranular films (IGFs) at the 1-2 nm scale can have a profound effect on the
behavior of ceramic materials, and it is now becoming evident that newly-
revealed thinner layers (complexions) can have similar effects on macroscopic
behavior. Although conventional High-Resolution TEM studies have not identified
residual LiF in fully-processed liquid phase sintered spinel, light elements
like Li and F are not detectable by this technique in the quantities typical of
many boundary complexions so there is high likelihood that sub-nanometer layers
of boundary LiF are, indeed, behind the poor boundary strength. The proposed
program will test this proposition in a highly coordinated set of experiments
correlating the mechanical properties of doped grain boundaries with their
associated grain boundary chemistry and structure. This will be accomplished
through the marriage of cutting-edge aberration-corrected Scanning Transmission
Electron Microscopy (ac STEM) and newly-developed microscale fracture testing
techniques that are suitable for evaluating the local fracture properties of
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this program will inform the
development of transparent, fracture-resistant spinel materials for spacecraft
windows, sensor domes, armor, and protective goggles and face shields. Although
the study of interface complexions is in its early days, the long-term impact of
the proposed work is through the contribution of a key element (the link between
boundary fracture behavior and complexion) to a developing scientific framework
for documenting, understanding and exploiting complexions in ceramic materials.
There is great potential to achieve unique combinations of properties in many
ceramic (and even metallic) systems by tailoring grain boundary structure and
chemistry according to the complexion framework. The development of micro-scale
fracture techniques that can be performed using commercially-available
instruments will present, for the first time, the opportunity for a large number
of people and industries to be directly involved in carrying out quantitative
fracture measurements with very small volumes of material. Impact on human
development will be primarily through the education and training of the graduate
students and undergraduates who will be involved with the project, who will have
access to the latest microscopy and microtesting technologies. Impact on the
local community will be achieved through continuing participation in outreach
activities including ?NanoDays? at the Da Vinci Discovery Center of Science and
Technology in Allentown, PA.