* 1131446
* Geodynamic modeling of plume capture and release by a migrating mid-ocean ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Paul Hall, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2015
* USD 261,402.00

It has long been hoped that persistent sources of volcanism such as Hawaii and
Yellowstone might for a fixed frame of reference, so that the tails of volcanic
centers and seamounts they produce might record the motions of tectonic plates
that pave the Earth?s surface. However, there is considerable evidence to the
contrary. In particular, the Hawaiian hot spot appears to have moved very
rapidly southward between 81 and 47 million years ago ? and remained more-or-
less fixed latitude thereafter. The perplexing question is why? The answer may
have much to say about flow in the Earth?s interior as it related to the motions
of its surface plates. One possibility is the plume of material that feeds the
volcanism was captured for a time by the East Pacific Rise, a mid-ocean ridge
where new seafloor is created. This project will use a combination numerical
models and laboratory models to investigate this possibility. In addition to the
likely contribution of this work to understanding important large-scale flow
processes in the Earth, the comparatively strong broader impacts of this project
include support for a junior researcher and a graduate student, laboratory
experiments that provide an excellent opportunity reveal the underlying physics
and are ideal for the proposed undergraduate involvement, and videos from the
models that will be shared on line; the SERC site is a good place for making
these materials available to the broader community.