* 1131161
* Collaborative Research:  Resilient and Sustainable Engineered Fiber-Reinforced Earthen Masonry for High Wind Regions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Fabio Matta, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 111,000.00

This collaborative research aims at experimentally and theoretically quantifying
the structural resilience of a new fiber reinforced earthen masonry system for
dwellings in high wind regions. This goal will be achieved by engineering and
prototyping stabilized earth blocks and mortar, both enhanced with addition of
natural fibers, and verifying the structural response of full-scale walls
through physical testing. Engineering of the mortar and blocks will be based on
two criteria: optimization of the amount of stabilizer and fibers, and
compatibility of block and mortar where the target strengths are defined to
force failure in the mortar joints. Engineering of the wall system will be based
on the formulation and verification of interaction laws between applicable in-
plane and out-of-plane forces. The interaction laws will be based on
constitutive models obtained from the characterization of materials and scaled
subassemblies. The collaboration involves faculty at the University of South
Carolina, the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the University of Florida, with
one PhD student at each institution. The engineering and characterization of the
blocks and mortar will be lead by the University of Florida and the University
of Nebraska-Lincoln, respectively. The engineering of the walls, including
analysis and experimental verification, will be lead by the University of South
Carolina, Columbia. The outcome will be a prototype block and mortar
combination. The verification of the selected system will be based on proof-
tests of full-scale wall specimens under in-plane, out-of-plane, and pendulum
impact load simulating the impact energy of representative flying debris, which
typically cause human deaths and injuries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will advance knowledge and technology by engineering both the mortar
and blocks to enhance damage tolerance, and through the verification of
structural system and predictive analytical models based on full-scale
experiments. The final outcome of the project will be a novel, affordable,
energy efficient and locally appropriate system for rural dwellings that is
designed to withstand high wind loads, such as those experienced in the
Midwestern and the Southeastern US. The outcomes of this project will be
transferred to a broad audience of Indian reservations in Nebraska and to high-
school students and teachers through a summer workshop program. New educational
material will be incorporated in courses offered to engineering undergraduate
and graduate students at the participating universities.