* 1131282
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Environmental Initiatives and the Impacts on Carbon Stocks and Biodiversity in a National Park in Central Africa.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jacqueline Vadjunec, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This study is grounded in land change science research, which combines the
social and the physical aspects of environmental change, in an effort to better
understand the complex coupled human-environment relationship. As a result of
increasing global environmental impacts (e.g. climate change and the loss of
biodiversity) from humans transforming the environment (e.g. through
deforestation and degradation), solutions have been proposed to slow down the
rate at which the environment is being altered, while at the same time seeking
win-win solutions for sustainable development. Payments for Environmental
Services (PES) and Reducing Emissions from Degradation and Deforestation (REDD)
were proposed by the international community as a means of achieving this double
goal of protecting the environment, while, at the same time, improving the
livelihoods of the traditional people that often depend heavily on the
environment for much of their livelihood. This project will be based in the
Korup National Park (KNP) in Cameroon, and seeks to answer the following
questions; (1) what factors lead to deforestation and degradation (environmental
change) in the KNP? (2) How do these changes affect the environment, in terms of
carbon stocks and biodiversity, and how have they been influenced by household
decisions? (3) Lastly, how will household incomes and the environment in the
park be influenced under different policy scenarios? The methodology will
involve the use of mixed methods of data collection, and analysis.
Questionnaires will be used to generate data on the socio-economic and
demographic conditions of households while in-depth interviews with key
informants will be used to generate data on land use trajectories, and household
methods of adapting to the changing physical and socio-economic environment.
Other techniques such as field based forest inventory, measures of carbon
stocks, regression analysis, and other methods will be used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study provides the opportunity to examine the
potential implications of PES/REDD policies on local households and communities,
which is critical to our understanding of the important role households and
local communities will have to play in global climate change mitigation
strategies. The project will be conducted in association with The University of
Buea, The Smithsonian Center for Tropical Forest Science (CTFS), and other local
environmental NGOs interested in better understanding carbon stock dynamics and
the prospects of implementing PES schemes. Furthermore, this project will allow
the CoPI to gain valuable field research experience, while also completing his
dissertation requirement. After the completion of the PhD, the CoPI will train
students in field-based research methods in land change science. Results from
this study will contribute to the increasing global talks regarding the
importance of people, parks, and sustainable development in the tropics. The
results will be shared with local affiliates, and also published in scientific
papers as a contribution to the global debate on PES/REDD. User-friendly results
will be disseminated to local communities, and copies of digitized maps will be
given to chiefs and locals administrators of the park. The project also will
provide support to enable a graduate student to establish an independent
research career.