* 1131566
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Irish Neutrality in World War II
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Jeffrey Olick, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 6,060.00

SES - 1131566&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey Olick (PI)&lt;br/&gt;Tara Tober (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation
Research: Irish Neutrality in World War
II&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;On September 2nd, 1939, independent
Ireland officially declared its neutrality during the Second World War. This
period is known as "the Emergency." How and why has public memory and
commemoration of this period changed over time? This dissertation traces the
causes and consequences of social, political, and cultural shifts in how the
Emergency has been officially and publicly remembered in Ireland since 1945.
Ireland's neutrality during the deadliest and most widespread war in history,
during which it abandoned allies and neighbors and failed to defend democracy
against fascism, created difficulties in a post-World War II European context.
As such, the Emergency presents a unique case to examine how nations construct
and reconstruct particular unpleasant or embarrassing aspects of their past.
This project involves analysis of archival data (political speeches, government
documents), survey data (Irish opinion polls), and interview data (interviews of
Irish soldiers who fought in WWII despite neutrality).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research may
be of interest to a broad set of stakeholders, including policy makers, and the
general public. Many states and nations periodically face a situation in which
part of their past requires interpretation, and re-interpretation. Public memory
and efforts to memorialize the past plays an important role in enabling
countries to promote national cultures, legitimate the state, and address both
positive and negative events of the past. Findings from this research may
improve our understanding of how shifts in public memory and commemoration
contribute to political stability over time, and to the development of more
democratic societies.