* 1131404
* GOALI: Study of Advance Rate of Hard Rock Tunnel Boring Machines (TBMs) and the Impacts of Ground Conditions and Machine Specifications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jamal Rostami, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project is to develop a model for estimation of Tunnel Boring Machine
(TBM) utilization and advance rate based on the machine specifications and
ground conditions. Accurate estimation of the penetration, utilization, and
daily advance rate of hard rock TBM has been a challenge due to the complexity
of the machine rock interaction and the influence of operational and management
issues on machine production. Having a reasonably accurate estimate is crucial
in justification of the project, as well as planning and cost estimation. The
errors in the estimates have caused many technical and legal problems and have
engaged much of resources in construction claims. A quick review of the
literature shows that much of research has focused on the estimation of rate of
penetration (ROP) of certain machine types in a given geology. Yet, the
estimation of machine utilization and analysis of downtime has not been treated
in a systematic way, although downtime is the largest proportion of time spent
in any tunneling operation involving TBMs. The limited amount of research in
this area is outdated and does not reflect the advances in machine manufacturing
techniques. The controlling parameters for TBM utilization and advance rate
include the geological setting, machine type and specifications, operational
parameters, the machine backup system and auxiliary equipment, and finally site
management. This study will look at the case histories of recent TBM application
to evaluate the impact of various geological parameters on machine performance.
An existing TBM field performance database will be updated with additional data
for statistical analysis and seeking new relationships between controlling
parameters. The study will also develop activity based models of the tunneling
operation and will establish correlation between time required to perform each
activity and ground conditions to allow for more accurate estimate of machine
utilization and advance rate. Also, the feasibility of using artificial
intelligence methods for estimation of the machine performance will be evaluated
based on the available data to complement the proposed models. This project will
be performed with the participation and contributions by the Robbins Company,
the largest manufacturer of tunnel boring machines in the US (and one of the
largest in the world), and Frontier Kemper, a leading tunneling contractor in
North America. Both companies will assist the research project by providing
field data and expertise to expand the database of TBM field performance and
realistic activity time models. The proposed work will improve the accuracy of
the existing performance prediction models and offer means to achieve more
efficient operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a more reliable estimation of
TBM advance rate, more accurate cost estimation for hard rock tunneling can be
achieved and many of unnecessary construction claims can be avoided. This study
can also lead to an objective evaluation of machine backup system and impact of
various components on machine utilization, which can lead to a systematic
evaluation of ground conditions for selection of proper machine and backup
system to avoid long delays in tunneling operation. Overall, the result of this
study leads to more efficient and cost effective tunneling with reduced delays,
improved safety, and prospects for better risk management for tunnel
construction using TBM. The main beneficiary of the study will be the general
public through the cost savings on the construction of critically needed civil
infrastructure upgrades such as water, sewer, rail, subway, and road tunnels.