* 1131441
* CRCNS Data Sharing: An open data repository for cognitive neuroscience: The OpenfMRI Project
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Russell Poldrack, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 07/31/2015
* USD 743,856.00

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has become the most common tool for
cognitive neuroscience, because it provides a safe, non-invasive, and powerful
means to image human brain function. Based on recent rates of publication, there
are currently more than 2000 fMRI studies being performed every year worldwide.
The aggregation of data across multiple studies can provide the ability to
answer questions that cannot be answered based on a single study. For example,
using datasets from multiple domains one can start to investigate to what degree
a region is selectively engaged in relation to a particular mental process, as
opposed to being generally engaged across a broad range of tasks and processes.
In addition, it provides the ability to integrate across specific tasks to
obtain stronger empirical generalizations about mind-brain relationships, and to
better understand the nature of individual variability across different
measures. Recent work in neuroimaging analysis has focused on the application of
methods such as machine learning techniques to understand the coding of
information at the macroscopic level, and network analysis techniques to
understand the interactions inherent in large-scale neural systems. The
availability of a large testbed of high-quality fMRI data from published studies
would also provide an important resource for the development of these and other
new analytic techniques for fMRI data. However, sharing of raw fMRI data is
challenging due to the large size of the datasets and the complexity of the
associated metadata, and there is currently no infrastructure for the open
sharing of new fMRI datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, OpenfMRI, will
provide a new infrastructure for the broad dissemination of raw data within
cognitive neuroscience, addressing a critical need by providing an open data
sharing resource for neuroimaging. The initial project is already online at
http://www.openfmri.org with a limited number of datasets. The full project will
greatly expand this repository by providing access to a large number of fMRI
datasets from several prominent neuroimaging labs, spanning across a broad range
of cognitive domains. Utilizing the substantial computational resources of the
Texas Advanced Computing Center, the project will also perform standard fMRI
analyses on all data in the repository using a common analysis pipeline, thus
providing directly comparable analysis results for all of the studies in the
database. The OpenfMRI project will support the development of infrastructural
elements to make sharing of data by additional investigators more
straightforward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The repository of data that will be
created by the OpenfMRI project will also serve as an important resource for
teaching by providing students with the ability to replicate the analyses from
published studies using the same data. By providing any researcher in the world
with the ability to acquire large fMRI datasets, it will also provide all
researchers with the ability to work with the same state-of-the-art datasets,
regardless of institution. By creating the infrastructure for open sharing of
research data, the project will also enhance the impact of other NSF-funded
neuroimaging research projects by providing an infrastructure that can be used
to make their data available. The planned work has the potential to benefit
society by improving education, health, and human productivity through an
increased understanding of mental function and its relationship to brain
function.