* 1131170
* Synergistically Propelled Ichthyoid (SPI): Dynamics Investigation for Improved Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Ranjan Mukherjee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 274,994.00

This research will investigate fundamental problems in fluid-structure
interactions motivated by the development of an efficient and maneuverable
submersible. This submersible employs a fish-like flexible tail driven by a
conveyed fluid jet; the combination of the jet's thrust and that of the
oscillating tail synergistically propels and maneuvers the submersible. Two
disconnected bodies of fluid-structure interaction literature will be merged in
this research - the study of oscillatory fish-like propulsion and the study of
fluttering fluid-conveying pipes. The fluid-conveying pipe literature will be
extended toward conditions that exist in fish-like swimming: external flow,
spatially-variable tail planforms, large deformations, and fast accelerations
and large rotations. Furthermore, acceleration and rotation of the submersible
will be accomplished by varying the conveyed fluid velocity; an area, which
requires additional theoretical development. Euler-Bernoulli beam theory and the
theory of elastica will be used to model spatially-varying beams conveying fluid
with time-dependent velocity. These theoretical investigations will be
complemented by numerical simulations and a hardware platform for experimental
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fish-like submersible uses a novel
mechanism for propulsion which requires investigation of a flexible tail
subjected to significant accelerations and fluid forces. The submersible has
many potential applications; since the surrounding water is pulled into the hull
during normal operation, it is an ideal candidate for environmental monitoring,
chemical sensing and water cleanup operations. The methods developed in this
research will also apply to other emergent problems in fluid structure
interactions, such as vibration control of large wind turbine blades and better
design of ornithopters through improved understanding of bat and insect flight.
In humans, deflection of a flexible member in the airway causes snoring and
sleep apnea - better understanding of fluid loading on flexible structures could
lead to improved therapy and surgical treatments.