* 1131467
* GOALI: Accelerating Digital Design Through Web-Accessible Anthropometric Data and Digital Human Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Ulrich Raschke, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2014
* USD 351,277.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) project is to quantify and predict the spatial requirements of
humans of different populations and to understand how such requirements impact
decision making for design engineering purposes. Current tools for the design of
artifacts, tasks, and environments are hindered by the availability of detailed
data on the body dimensions (anthropometry) for most user populations. To
address this, research activities will be conducted in three primary areas: 1)
estimating body size and shape for target user populations; 2) identifying
relevant tasks, postures, and measures; and 3) creating a robust, scalable, and
accurate human figure model that can embody the results, which will then be used
for artifact design. The work will address the specific challenges posed by the
secular trends observed in the U.S. population: the increased prevalence of
obesity, the aging population, and changing
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this effort
will provide, for the first time, freely available detailed estimates of the
body size and shape of the U.S. civilian population and select global
populations. These digital human models (and instructions on their use) will be
made available online in an open-source format allowing their use in most
commercial CAD packages. In addition to benefiting ergonomists and designers in
a wide range of industries, over 1 million university students per year will
have exposure to the work through the industry partner's existing university
program (those using different CAD systems will have access through the open-
source models). This will improve design education and facilitate accurate
configuration of manufacturing facilities and product design - improving safety,
performance, and customer satisfaction.