* 1131052
* Broadband Vibrational Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Robert McMeeking, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 09/30/2015
* USD 322,468.00

Energy harvesters are a promising technology for capturing useful energy from
the environment or a device's operation. This research will develop and
implement a novel energy harvester design for capturing vibrational energy in
environments with a broad ambient vibration frequency spectrum. The design uses
flexible ceramic piezoelectric elements that produce electricity when
mechanically strained, which are in a buckled state at equilibrium. Preliminary
experimental results show that a harvester with this design can output
appreciable power over a broad range of forcing frequencies, unlike harvesters
of vibrational energy based on linear mechanical principles which only give
appreciable response if the dominant ambient vibration frequency is close to the
resonance frequency of the harvester. The proposed work includes the
experimental characterization of this device for periodic and stochastic
forcing, plus the development of low- and high-dimensional models that will be
analyzed theoretically and computationally. Particular attention will be paid to
parameter and forcing regimes for which there is chaotic response, since the
preliminary experimental results suggest that this is where the energy
harvesting could be maximized. The dependence of the response on parameters will
be determined, and multiparameter optimization will be used to identify
parameter values for the device for which the energy harvesting is
optimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibrational energy harvesters have potential
application in a variety of environments which produce considerable vibrational
energy, such as automobiles, trains, aircraft, watercraft, machinery, and
buildings. Energy harvesters could power auxiliary functions for such systems,
for example the wireless transmission of data for system monitoring.
Furthermore, many mechanical and electronic systems such as autonomous vehicles
and sensor networks require bulky batteries and/or power supplies for their
operation. If energy harvesters could be used to provide complete or
supplementary power for such systems, they could function with reduced cost and
inconvenience of replacing their batteries. This work will also develop a
rigorous modeling framework for piezoelectric vibrational energy harvesters
which will be beneficial for other researchers working in this and other areas
for which both piezoelectric and mechanical effects are important.