* 1131802
* IDR:  Phononic Surfaces for Flow Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mahmoud Hussein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 517,534.00

This Interdisciplinary Research project presents a new concept for surfaces
interacting with fluids - flexible surfaces that can be designed to
hydroelastically or aeroelastically interact with boundary-layer flow in a
favorable manner leading to reduction of drag forces. The basic idea, which is
inspired by condensed matter physics, is to have a periodic lattice structure at
the inner core of the surface, hence the phrase phononic surface. The surface
will be primarily designed to delay laminar-to-turbulence transition and
separation, and also to cause drag reduction for fully developed turbulent flow.
Other functions that can be simultaneously realized are reduction of overall
vibrations and structural noise emission. The research plan involves
investigation of an efficient, systematic and integrated methodology for
modeling, analysis and design of the proposed phononic surfaces. For the
periodic lattice unit cell band structure calculation, a novel and efficient
computational scheme based on modal analysis will be utilized. Specialized
genetic algorithm operators will be created for the unit cell optimization.
Direct numerical simulation of the flow and the elastic wave motion in the
surface will be carried out. The unit-cell design will be performed
independently of the full coupled solid-fluid simulations thus providing crucial
computational savings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of the
research, at the cross-roads of dynamical systems, condensed matter physics and
fluid dynamics will enrich the various aspects of the planned research.
Elucidating the nature of the interaction between the dispersive periodic waves
in and beneath the solid surface and the nonlinear and unstable fluid waves will
constitute a new discovery involving fundamental physical phenomena. The
subsequent utilization of this knowledge promises to open a new direction in
flow control. For streamlined ships and aircrafts, or vehicles in general, the
proposed drag-reduction concept will bring about substantial improvements in
fuel efficiency and hence economic and environmental benefits. Gains to the
performance of turbines of different sorts could also be realized.