* 1131551
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Employment Context Shapes Time and Stress Factors
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Benjamin Snyder, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 8,399.00

SES - 1131551&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey Olick (PI)&lt;br/&gt;Benjamin Snyder (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation
Research: How Employment Context Shapes Time and Stress
Factors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Numerous studies have shown that
time pressure is widespread among workers in today's economy. Demands on our
time often exceed our ability to meet them and can become a source of stress
that crosses racial, gender, and class boundaries. Moreover, in the American
context, stress related to time pressure is considered as contributing to a
public health crisis. Two puzzles emerge from existing research: First,
objective measures of time use are poor predictors of how people experience time
pressure subjectively. In other words, people who work long hours do not
necessarily report feeling rushed, overwhelmed, burned out, or pressed for time.
Yet, some groups with relatively low work hours and high leisure time do report
feeling a great deal of time-related stress. Second, the number of people
reporting time pressure has risen over the last few decades, although
longitudinal statistics show no clear trend regarding a decrease in leisure time
compared to the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses this puzzle by
analyzing the link between employment context and the subjective experience of
time pressure. The central research question is: How do different occupational
contexts shape the way people experience time, leading some to experience time
as a source of stress? The data collection includes observations of and
interviews with executive professionals, truck drivers and unemployed persons.
The project evaluates (1) how time pressure is produced in different employment
contexts, (2) how the flexibility of one's schedule and the perceived value of
one's time shape the flow of work, and (3) how individuals make meaning of a
time-pressured life within different cultural
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses pressing public concern about the pace of life in modern societies
like the United States. As Americans are increasingly squeezed between complex
and often competing demands of work and life, the need to better understand how
individuals cope with the new forms of stress created by these fast and fluid
social conditions becomes paramount. Project findings will help researchers,
policy makers, and employers better understand how different ways of organizing
the work experience produce different forms of time-related stress.