* 1131571
* Electrochemical Underpotential Co-deposition of Binary and Ternary Alloys: Towards a Novel Manufacturing Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Giovanni Zangari, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2016
* USD 286,000.00

This grant provides funding to explore the advantages and investigate the
fundamental limitations of a novel electrochemical process for alloy film
formation, with the objective to assess its viability as a practical
manufacturing technology. This process exploits the energy released upon alloy
formation to predict the conditions under which a film with a predetermined
composition and structure is obtained. Theoretically, this process provides
complete control over material formation, but in manufacturing environments the
predictive capabilities of this method are limited by the need to achieve
sufficiently fast production rates. Experiments with a set of binary alloys will
therefore quantify how and to what extent practical production rates will affect
the theoretical predictions, ideally providing correction terms that will enable
one to maintain process control under practical manufacturing conditions. Fast
production rates also hinder the direct synthesis of complex crystal structures
of technological interest; formation of such structures will be therefore
investigated by tailoring the synthesis conditions, to inhibit the formation of
alternative structures. Finally, this process will be extended to alloy
materials composed of three elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will strongly impact current practices in manufacturing
processes utilizing alloy films, in particular microfabrication processes, by
providing a robust and precise method for the synthesis of new materials, using
procedures characterized by low cost and low energetic impact. In particular,
new processes for the formation of platinum- and palladium-based alloys will be
made available, which may provide enhanced performance in magnetic or energy
conversion devices. Other potential benefits include a simplification of current
manufacturing processes and the development of new device concepts that may
exploit materials made available through this research.