* 1131516
* Enhancing the Fidelity of Early Paleogene Planktic Foraminiferal Oxygen Isotope and Mg/Ca Records with the Use of In Situ Analytical Techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Valley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2014
* USD 215,457.00

Funds are provided for the continued development and testing of a new technique
for acquiring reliable delta 18O data from slightly to moderately altered
planktic shells preserved in deep-sea sediments. This technique uses a secondary
ion mass spectrometer (SIMS) for in situ delta 18O analysis of domains within
individual planktic shells recovered from Early Paleogene deep-sea records.
Initial results confirm the veracity of this approach suggesting that it will be
transformative for quantifying and circumventing the effects of diagenesis on
18O obtained from planktic shells. Paired delta 18O values with Mg/Ca ratios in
the same planktic shell will be used to reconstruct Early Paleogene variation in
SSTs and seawater delta 18O at tropical (Site 865) and subpolar (Site 690)
latitudes. The basal areas of pustular outgrowths (muricae) on their chamber
walls represent domains of enhanced biocalcification that contain no mural
pores, making them less susceptible to diagenesis and ideal targets for SIMS.
Objectives of this proposal are threefold: (1) Reassess tropical open-ocean SSTs
during the Early Paleogene. (2) Quantify the effects of diagenesis on
paleoceanographic proxies. (3) Compare low- and high-latitude records with
emphasis on transient hyperthermal climate states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The method, when widely applicable, could transform the study of
paleoclimates based of planktic foraminiferal delta 18O. The study of Early
Paleogene greenhouse climate could be an analog for future climate change driven
by fossil fuel emissions.