* 1131471
* Collaborative Research: Serpentinization of oceanic crust: Integrated modeling of deformation, fracture, fluid flow, and heat transfer
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Robert Lowell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 189,772.00

As the crust on and under the seafloor reacts with seawater, many of the
minerals get altered from those without structural H2O to those with it. The
most common of the latter minerals involved in seafloor alteration is
serpentine. When this mineral forms, there is a large increase in the volume of
the rock (up to a 40%). Due to the complex interplay of a variety of parameters
such as temperature and temperature gradients, composition, water-rock ratio,
mineral reaction, confining pressure, faulting, etc. our understanding of the
impact of serpentinization on crack propagation in ocean crust, faulting, and
other types of deformation both small and large, is limited. This research
addresses this issue through an integrated approach that involves developing and
applying theories for crack initiation and propagation in seafloor rocks and
using the results to understand the formation of tectonic and structural
features we see on and below the seafloor, features that tend to be associated
with hydrothermal vent systems and seafloor faulting and deformation. Research
will be carried out using mathematical models that have been revised to
incorporate additional essential parameters and more precise equations to
simulate crack initiation and propagation. Models will be modified to allow
calculation of stresses and strains to determine the importance of large scale
faulting and fracturing on internal and external serpentinized bodies. Results
of the modeling will be checked against observational data from the Atlantis
Massif, part of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge system and the Hyuganada Forearc region
southwest of Japan. Broader impacts of the project include building
infrastructure for science by producing models and modeling codes that have the
potential to crossover into the fields of ore deposit and energy research. It
also helps improve our ability to tap the potential of using mafic and
ultramafic rocks on and below the seafloor as possible carbon sequestration
sites for atmospheric carbon. Training of students, of which one is from a
gender under-represented in the sciences, in computational geoscience is also
involved, as is integration of research results into classroom training for
undergraduate students.