* 1131203
* High Speed Friction Stir Spot Welding:  A New Approach to Spot Joining of Ultra High Strength Steel
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Miles, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2015
* USD 265,000.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypothesis that joint bond
area in friction stir spot welding of ultra-high strength steel is determined
largely by interface pressure, interface temperature, and weld time. Welding
speeds in the range of 5,000 to 10,000 revolutions per minute will be
considered, and the welding process will be constrained to a maximum vertical
welding load of eight kilonewtons, with a goal of achieving a desired level of
joint strength. A novel approach to modeling friction stir spot welding will be
used within a Lagrangian finite element framework, where the joint interface
will be represented virtually and where a proposed relationship between joint
contact pressures, temperatures, and weld time will be used to estimate bond
area. Archard's law will be used within the model to estimate tool wear. An
experimental program will measure joint strength and tool wear over time, while
microstructural evaluation of the joints will provide insight into the effect of
tool wear on bonding mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
project will enable the use of friction stir spot welding for joining ultra-high
strength steel sheet in many industrial settings. The modeling approach will
provide increased understanding of the role of tool design and process
conditions on joint strength and tool life. Finding a solution to spot joining
of ultra-high strength steels is important because these alloys have the
potential to make car frames lighter and stiffer, improving vehicle fuel economy
and reducing carbon emissions. The widespread use of ultra-high strength steel
is currently limited by brittle weld microstructures produced by traditional
resistance spot welding.