* 1131321
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How U.S. and E.U. Science Is Producing Both Meat and Animal Welfare
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jacque (Jody) Emel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 11,975.00

Since about the mid-1990s, animal welfare has been an increasing focus of farm
animal science research in the US and the European Union, due in large part to
public concern expressed over the treatment of farm animals. The US and EU
governments are supporting multi-million dollar/euro programs that will play
major roles in establishing national and international welfare standards. A
complicating factor within farm animal science in both locations is the current
lack of precise definition or measurement standards for welfare. This project
will examine three programs (two under the US Department of Agriculture and one
European Union-sponsored) that are all engaged, at varying levels, with a more
recent research paradigm that attempts to measure animals' subjective (i.e.,
having awareness of their experiences) welfare, and will use a combination of
qualitative methods that include textual analysis of program documents and
published scientific research, and triangulation of data from interviews of key
research personnel and observation at research sites. Three objectives guide
this project's design: 1) to compare the major characteristics of the US and EU
research programs; 2) to examine in depth the manner in which knowledge of farm
animals and their welfare is actively produced through the scientific
spaces/settings, practices, and discourse of the programs and their published
research; 3) to assess the implications for both the industry and for animal
welfare of the varying research approaches identified within the US and EU
programs. The project will develop data on the physical spaces/settings of the
research and the experimental procedures, examining the data for relationships
between particular spaces and practices and particular constructions of the
animals' (subjective) welfare. With regard to discourse, the project will use
narrative analysis broadly following a grounded theory approach to identify and
understand epistemological and ontological approaches to farm animal welfare
science, researcher conceptions of farm animals' capacities for awareness of
experience and the resulting definitions of good/poor welfare, and the
discursive representation of welfare concepts within and outside the scientific
community. It is expected that the study will point to the types of changes
(e.g., to farming spaces, practices, etc.) the scientific research results
indicate, how the results respond to societal concerns about farm animal
welfare, and how the US/EU research programs interact with and influence one
another.

In comparing the US and EU research programs, this project will provide
information about the ways in which welfare standards are determined in both
locales. This information will be useful for policymakers and animal advocates
in evaluating both these standards and the use and influence of public and
private financial resources in responding to societal concerns about animal
welfare. This project will also contribute to the understanding of the
environments in which farm animal science takes place, the manner in which it is
conducted, and the ways in which it is represented in scientific publications
and beyond, thereby enhancing a critical understanding of the function of
science in both animal agriculture and human-animal relations in Western
society, and reflecting on the mutual influence between science and public
opinion/policy. The outcome of the US and EU research has significant
implications for many stakeholders ranging from institutions and corporations to
the humans and animals whose lives are affected by their actions. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.