* 1131535
* Dynamic Choice Models for Challenging Societies with an Application to Car Ownership Decisions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Cinzia Cirillo, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 280,000.00

This objective of this research is to develop a dynamic econometric model that
accounts for the evolving characteristics of the products offered by the
automobile industry and consumers? expectations of future vehicle quality. The
timing of consumers? purchases is formalized as an optimal stopping problem
where the agent (consumer) must decide on the optimal time of purchase. The
modeling framework is further enriched by explicitly considering the consumer?s
choice from a set of different types of vehicles whose quality changes
stochastically over time. The consideration of heterogeneity in parameters and
the possibility of repeated purchases are part of the proposed dynamic model.
The project also intends to solve the difficulties encountered when dealing with
the estimation of complex econometric models. In particular, concepts derived
from stocastic programming and advanced optimization techniques based on trust
regions will be adopted to formalize and solve this dynamic
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will contribute to
the major challenges facing society when attempting to meet its increasing
mobility needs while striving to minimize energy consumption and reduce
environmental and economic impacts. More energy efficient and environmentally
friendly highway transportation technologies are under development and could be
available on the market in the near future; they could ensure the freedom of
mobility and energy security, while lowering costs and reducing the impact on
the environment. Estimation techniques for analyzing the impact of technological
improvements and rapid changes in energy costs are necessary to understand the
mobility of tomorrow and adapt the products of our car industry.Students will be
actively involved in collaboration with four international centers recognized
for their excellence in education and research. The creation of an integrative,
inter-disciplinary curriculum at the University of Maryland is expected to raise
the awareness and the interests of both undergraduate and graduate students in
transportation and related disciplines.