* 1131459
* Collaborative Research:  From Warnings to Evacuation in Hurricanes: a Holistic Investigation using an Interdisciplinary Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Hugh Gladwin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 12/31/2015
* USD 99,718.00

Hurricane evacuation is a complex process driven by human decision-making under
uncertainty and governed by social, technical, spatial, and temporal
constraints. This project takes a holistic approach to modeling the process by
integrating behavioral modeling of household decision making with methodologies
based on emerging concepts in network science, stochastic modeling and agent
based simulation. Data will be collected through scientific telephone surveys
developed using qualitative methods and integrated into a temporal GIS framework
including 2010 Census demographic data, spatial risk zones, and transportation
route information. Communication and assimilation of evacuation warnings will be
modeled using emerging complex network approaches including social contagion on
random networks. The resulting impact of warning propagation on risk perception
will be an input to household agent-based evacuation decision models that will
incorporate social and temporal constraints. Evacuation trips thus generated
(including timing, potential routes/destinations) will then be analyzed and
evaluated using stochastic optimization models incorporating nontraditional
objectives such as evacuation to safety and determine optimal routes, departure
time, and safe destinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this project
is that it will integrate social science and engineering to model a process in
which social and technical aspects cannot each be studied in isolation. This
interconnection is faced by forecasters and emergency managers as much as by
researchers in multiple disciplines. As such it should open new paths in cross-
disciplinary research and teaching applied to problems that are both complex and
of consequence to society.