* 1131039
* Investigating a Framework for STEM-Reading to Support Secondary School Students with Reading Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Philip Sadler, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 286,000.00

This award is led and managed by Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical
Observatory with significant contributions from colleagues at Harvard University
and the University of Massachusetts at Boston, as well as participation from
Landmark School. The purpose of the project is to investigate how effective the
use of a technological intervention that limits attention and controls text
reading rate, labeled "Span Limiting Tactile Reinforcement (SLTR)," is for
improving the science reading comprehension and fluency of high school students
with dyslexia. A comparison of using SLTR with iPod technology to using
traditional paper reading is being conducted. The design of the primary
investigation involves assigning 150 high school students with dyslexia to four
randomly assigned sub-groups to control for presentation order (iPod vs. paper)
and for text (two different similar material sets).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
from the primary research combined with additional data collection protocols is
being used to address two additional exploratory research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. Does the effectiveness of SLTR depend on the type of
STEM content?&lt;br/&gt;2. To what extent does the utility of SLTR differ among
subtypes of dyslexia?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation of this project is
being conducted by an external and independent evaluator, funded under a
different award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A replication manual for this award is
available on the award website and results from the studies are provided on the
website and in peer-reviewed publication.