* 1131295
* A High Resolution Distributed Moisture Sensing System for Direct Measurement of Earthquake Induced Void Redistribution
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Xiong Yu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 247,818.00

The research objective of this award is to understand and quantify earthquake-
induced void redistribution in soils, a major liquefaction triggering mechanism
in stratified ground. The venue is an advanced guided electromagnetic wave
sensor that monitors the void redistribution in the real time. The sensing
capability will be achieved by measuring the water content distribution in
saturated sand with high spatial and temporal resolution. The research
activities, under a strong interdisciplinary perspective, involve understanding
the interactions of electromagnetic wave with particulate materials (that is,
soils), integration of state-of-the-art electronics, design and screening of
functional coating materials. Sensor performance will be evaluated in simulated
earthquake bestbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to a sensing
system that can quantify the extent of void redistribution, a primary soil
liquefaction triggering mechanism during earthquakes. This will significantly
expand our current knowledge on liquefaction in layered ground and help improve
the infrastructure resiliency to earthquakes. This interdisciplinary research
will advance sensor design, fabrication and system integration; direct and
inversion scattering analyses of electromagnetic wave in dispersive materials
(such as soils); and instrumentation that can be used in a variety of
fundamental and applied research on ground liquefaction. The project will give
graduate and undergraduate students the opportunity to pursue interdisciplinary
education in soil liquifaction. Outreach to K-12 students will be conducted
through various partnership programs between Case Western Reserve University and
local school districts.