* 1131734
* Collaborative Research:  Biological controls on reactive oxygen species in the oligotrophic ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Bettina Voelker, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,573.00

It has been assumed that photo-oxidation of chromophoric dissolved organic
matter is the primary source of superoxide (O2-) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2);
however, there are indications that biological sources may play a significant,
if not dominant, role in the production of these reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Because the presence of these ROS in the open ocean can affect the redox cycling
of iron, copper, and manganese which thereby influencing their bioavailability
and H2O2 has been shown to inhibit the growth of Prochlorococcus ecotypes in the
mixed layer, it is important to understand the biological controls on O2- and
H2O2. For this reason, scientists at the Colorado School of Mines and Harvard
University will test the following hypotheses: (1) dark biological production is
an important contribution of H2O2 and O2- to oligotrophic surface waters; (2)
spatial and temporal variations in biological production and decomposition rates
contribute to the observed variability in H2O2 concentrations; (3) biological
production of H2O2 in oligotrophic waters proceeds via formation of O2-, and the
yield of H2O2 from O2- is variable depending on the major sink reactions (e.g.
with metals) of O2-; and (4) activities of NADH (nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide) oxidase enzymes from a phylogenetically and ecologically diverse
group of bacteria, including cyanobacteria and heterotrophs, are significant
sources of ROS to marine waters. To test the first three hypotheses, a series of
field observations in oligotrophic waters of the subtropical North Pacific will
be carried out to establish biological production rates of H2O2 and O2- and
assess their relationship to photochemical production and H2O2 concentrations in
the euphotic zone. In addition, laboratory studies will also be conducted to
examine the stoichiometric yield of H2O2 from O2- in the presence of different
O2- sinks. For hypothesis 4, the diversity of microorganisms involved in ROS
production will be identified, as well as the proteins involved which will
enable the interpretation of community-level transcriptomic data for regions
illustrating variable contributions of biological activity to ROS production.

As regards broader impacts, the lead proponent plans to present a lecture at the
Colorado Science Conference for Professional Development on the importance of
biogeochemical cycles. If successfully received, she proposes to develop this
material into a one day workshop and offer it via the Colorado School of Mines
Teacher Enhancement Program. One postdoc and one graduate student from the
Colorado School of Mines and one postdoc, one graduate student, and one
undergraduate student from Harvard University would be supported and trained as
part of this project.