* 1131281
* IRES: Enhancing Global Competence and Research Skills in Climate Change and Urban Ecosystems Through Collaborative Research in China
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Zhu Ning, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Claire Hemingway
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The research topic of this IRES program addresses the possibility of designing
the urban ecosystem to deal with the negative effects of climate change. The
proposed program will send students from Southern University and Louisiana State
University to China to conduct collaborative research with the Chinese Academy
of Sciences (CAS) Institute of Applied Ecology and Southern China Botanical
Garden, and the Beijing Forestry Institute, The research will be directed at
four general topics: Modeling the impact of global warming and urbanization on
natural resources; Combined effects of elevated levels of carbon dioxide and
ozone on urban forests; Carbon storage and sequestration by urban forests; and
Response of soil carbon dynamics to long-term nitrogen deposition in a tropical
forest at the urban-rural interface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year four
undergraduates and four graduate students will participate in the research
activities in China. The project focuses on a very topical area of interest
(i.e. sustainability), which has growing importance considering the world's
current dependence on fossil fuels and the concomitant rise in greenhouse-gas
levels. It involves a unique collaboration between the U.S. universities and the
institutions in China. The substance of the research efforts should lead to
better understanding of complex environmental dynamics in urban settings, which
should have application in the U.S. and China as in other parts of the world and
promote effective mitigation strategies. Also, the involvement of an HBCU in the
IRES program should make a positive contribution to human-resource development
in this field.