* 1131833
* Interdisciplinary Transport Phenomena VII, September 18-23, 2011, Dresden,  Germany
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Satwindar Sadhal, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 07/31/2012
* USD 16,000.00

Award 1131833&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sadhal, S. S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objectives of the conference are to disseminate and exchange new technical
information and ideas among the various scientists and engineers working in
Science and Technology with Fluid, Thermal, Biological, Materials and Space
Sciences, and focusing on Transport Phenomena. Under this common theme, the
conference will provide for the exchange of information on new scientific
results, particularly concerning interdisciplinary aspects. Transport Phenomena
encompassing both heat and mass transfer is indeed ubiquitous to many areas in
the natural sciences, as well as engineering. While research over the last two
decades has provided significant new insight into various physical phenomena,
the new and upcoming scientific problems have brought about the
interdisciplinary dimension to modern scientific research. Presently, there
continues to be a need to provide direction for research in which fluid flow and
other transport processes to form a common basis for many investigations. For
example, in physiology and medicine, as well as materials processing, fluid,
thermal and mass-transport aspects have gained primacy among various
researchers, and the sharing of expertise has become a necessity for technical
and scientific progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from NSF will enable some
of the key US-based organizers to participate in the conference, and also
provide support to attract some top-level keynote speakers, and additionally
give some support to students, women and under-represented minorities. The
organizers have recognized the importance of providing a forum for the exchange
of ideas from a diverse group of researchers belonging to various types of
research organizations. The proposed conference will provide for the free flow
of ideas under this common theme of ?Transport Phenomena? to promote healthy new
research programs, and seek to bring interaction whereby scientists may be able
to compliment each others? diverse expertise in new areas of interdisciplinary
character.