* 1131671
* Microbial Activities in Deep-Subsurface Sediments Beneath Mid-Ocean Gyres
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Wiebke Ziebis, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2013
* USD 287,773.00

The nature of subsurface life is very poorly known. Ocean gyres are the major
oceanographic provinces on our planet but the seafloor underlying these
oligotrophic open ocean regions is the least explored. Most sub-seafloor
investigations have focused on high productivity regions near continental
margins. This project proposes to use innovative and experimental stable and
radio - isotopiv approaches to address the metabolic activity and the
biogeochemical cycling of key compounds (C, N, O) in oligotrophic sub-seafloor
sediments underlying the oligotrophic South Pacific Gyre and South Atlantic
Gyre.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The primary objectives of this
proposal are to determine metabolic activities (aerobic respiration,
heterotrophy/autotrophy) and to track potential routes of C, N and P fixation
and turnover using sensitive stable and radioisotope methods, cell extractions
and single cell analyses including nano-scale secondary mass spectrometry
(nanoSIMS). The fundamental goals are to document geographic variation in
subsurface habitat conditions and microbial metabolic activities and to test the
factors controlling those activities. The proposed study will test for and
quantify heterotrophic and autotrophic metabolisms in a comparison of (a) ocean
regions (gyre center to gyre margin in both the Atlantic and Pacific), b)
sediment depth and c) relation to processes in the underlying basalt. This
research will addresses key questions in sub-seafloor investigations: What are
the principal microbial activities in open ocean sub-seafloor sediments? What
are the principal sources of metabolic energy? What are the rates of these
activities? The results of the proposed investigations will be transformative to
the fields of deep-biosphere microbial ecology and biogeochemistry, as they will
significantly advance our understanding of the subsurface biome that may be
representative for major areas of the ocean floor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: One postdoctoral fellow will take part in this project and will receive
training in research, mentoring, and career preparation. This project will
engage undergraduate students who will participate in the research. The proposed
research is directly in support and advances large investments made for IODP
expeditions 329 (South Pacific Gyre) and 336 (South Atlantic Gyre), which have a
unique focus on subsurface microbiology. This project will strengthen
international collaborations between IODP scientists and includes close
collaborations with the MPI in Bremen, Germany. The NSF Center for Dark Energy
Biosphere Investigations at USC (C-DEBI) provides educational opportunities for
teachers, K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate students, as well as post-
doctoral researchers to train with the aim to foster the next generation of deep
subseafloor biosphere researchers, as well as to translate knowledge in the
field of deep biosphere research to the broader public.