* 1132009
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Coding and Propagation of Uncertainty Information During Perceptual Decisions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Wei Ji Ma, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 862,263.00

Like Miss Marple in an Agathie Christie detective novel, the brain is often
faced with the task of inferring a state of the world from noisy and ambiguous
clues. An important question is whether, and if so how, the brain performs such
inference in a near-optimal manner. This project combines visual decision-making
experiments in humans and monkeys with computational modeling and state-of-the-
art population recordings in monkey to investigate this question. The project
will lead to new insights into the neural code and the relation between neurons
and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A task is used in which an observer
classifies a briefly flashed oriented stimulus into one of two classes. The
classes are defined by fixed, overlapping probability distributions over
orientation. Two common forms of uncertainty play a role in this task. Noise in
the sensory observation causes sensory uncertainty, but even if this noise were
taken away, a given observation would be consistent with either class; this is
an example of ambiguity or class uncertainty. The optimal decision strategy
requires the observer to keep track of sensory uncertainty on every trial and to
appropriately combine this information with knowledge of the two
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this project will determine
whether the computational strategy taken by humans and monkeys during this task
is near-optimal. The second part is concerned with whether and how sensory
uncertainty is encoded on a trial-by-trial basis in monkey primary visual
cortex, and subsequently used in the monkey's decision. This study will put to
the test well-known theoretical frameworks for the representation of sensory
uncertainty. In the third part, the propagation of sensory uncertainty
information from visual cortex to a higher-level decision area, prefrontal
cortex, will be examined. Taken together, this project will constitute the first
comprehensive test of optimal inference at the level of cortical populations.