* 1132031
* NCRN-MN:  Improving the Interpretability and Usability of the American Community Survey Through Hierarchical Multiscale Spatio-Temporal Statistical Models
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2019
* Scott Holan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2019
* USD 3,667,215.00

The American Community Survey (ACS) is an ongoing survey that releases data
annually, providing communities with the timely information needed to plan the
distribution of resources and services. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the
data from the survey provides input into how more than $400 billion in federal
and state funds are distributed annually. Census released the first five-year
period estimates associated with the ACS for all standard tabulation areas in
2010. This marks an interesting time in U.S. history as Census shifts from the
decennial census long-form data to using an ongoing survey that releases data
annually. Making this transition presents many methodological challenges, both
for Census and for data users. The hierarchical multiscale spatio-temporal
statistical models and expansive statistical methodology in this project will
address many of these challenges and facilitate broader and more effective
utilization of the ACS. In particular, this project will develop an efficient
framework for carrying out small area estimation while preserving geographical
and temporal constraints that arise from the aggregate structure found in the
ACS. Further, by borrowing strength across multiple scales in space and time and
multiple outcomes, the approach will reduce the variance in the ACS small area
estimates and its derivatives. Additionally, from a data-user perspective, the
methodology will simultaneously provide coherent estimates on several temporal
scales rather than being hampered by the published multiyear estimates, allowing
researchers to compare trends across different geographic scales and
units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate methodology that
provides novel solutions across a wide-range of applied problems. The research
will improve the interpretability and usability of the ACS through the
development of hierarchical multiscale spatio-temporal statistical models. In
addition, the project will provide a variety of methods that are of independent
interest and can be used in many other surveys administered by Census and other
federal statistics agencies. Several of the proposed methods also will directly
carry over to the area of disease mapping and thus provide important tools for
public health. The project will contribute to the statistics literature and will
be of value to the work of government agencies and many subject-matter
disciplines. One of the major focuses of this project will be to educate and
train graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. It is expected that
students will acquire the requisite skills for possible integration into the
federal sector. This activity is supported by the NSF-Census Research Network
funding opportunity.