* 1132079
* U.S.-India International Research Experience for Students in Self-Assembling Stimuli-Responsive Biomimetic Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Daniel Savin, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

1132079&lt;br/&gt;Morgan &lt;br/&gt;University of Southern Mississippi
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S.-India International Research Experience for Students
(IRES) in Self-Assembling Stimuli-Responsive Biomimetic Polymers
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Sarah Morgan, University of Southern Mississippi
School of Polymers &amp; High Performance Materials (SPHPM) will launch a 3-year
IRES program with Professor Veena Choudhary, Indian Institute of Technology
Delhi (IIT-D), Center for Polymer Science &amp; Engineering. The IRES builds on
an existing collaboration between Morgan and Choudhary in nanomaterials and will
allow US graduate and undergraduates to conduct research at IIT-D that focuses
on the design of biomimetic stimuli-responsive self-assembling polymers for
potential application in biomaterials or controlled release applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration involves the design of polymers for
architectures capable of mimicking biological response through controlled
radical polymerization techniques. This project combines IIT-D strengths in
design and analysis of biomaterials with SPHPM expertise in controlled polymer
synthesis, solution and surface analysis, and development of self-assembling
polymeric structures. The investigators will explore two biomimetic systems- 1)
the structural factors in synthetic biomimetic polymers that affect protein
binding in polymers, and 2) the encapsulation and release behavior of pH-
responsive polymersomes to determine self-assembling properties of polymers as a
function of processing and environmental conditions. Web technology will
facilitate the exchange of data and ideas, accelerate the research process, as
well as the development of new materials for application in sensing and
diagnostics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a unique opportunity for under-
represented groups at the University of Southern Mississippi to participate in
international research at one of India's premier institutes of technology. US
students participate in international research to a much lesser degree than
students from other countries, and among minorities, there are significantly
fewer participants. Apart from conducting laboratory research with IIT-D
mentors, IRES students will experience a strong cultural program while in India
and will have the opportunity to visit local polymer businesses along with
research centers established by leading multinational companies in order to gain
some appreciation of the global research enterprise.