* 1132628
* RET Site: Inquiry-Based Bioengineering Research and Design Experiences for Middle-School Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Terri Camesano, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/29/2016
* USD 374,818.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) entitled, "RET Site: Inquiry-Based
Bioengineering Research and Design Experiences for Middle-School Teachers",
under the direction of Dr. Terri A. Camesano. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposed RET site, which builds on an existing RET in Engineering Site program,
a total of 30 middle-school science teachers (10 per summer over three years)
from Worcester and Framingham Public Schools (WPS and FPS) and neighboring
communities will be recruited to participate in a 6-week intensive and authentic
summer research experience in bioengineering. The teachers will work alongside
WPI faculty and students on cutting edge research projects in fields such as
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. They will gain hands-on exposure
to the engineering design process through their own research experience. In
addition, the teachers will use the engineering design process to develop an
engineering unit for use in their science/technology
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By engaging 10 middle-school teachers per year,
several hundred students per year can be reached on a continuous basis. WPS and
FPS middle-school teachers are excellent target groups because both districts
have high percentages of students from minority populations, as well as high
percentages of at-risk students who are 2nd language learners and students from
low-income or high mobility families.