* 1132176
* Dissecting the ROS Signaling Network of Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Gary Blomquist, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 02/28/2013
* USD 224,469.00

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) control many different processes in cells
including cell death, stress responses, aging and cancer. Because the potential
risk of oxidative stress is common to all aerobic organisms, elucidating the
ROS-signaling network of plant cells would have a significant impact in medicine
and agriculture. The long-term goal of the project is to dissect the ROS
signaling network of cells and determine how ROS signals are sensed and
transduced in plant cells. The experimental approach employed in the program
will be to use a combination of genetic, molecular, biochemical and
bioinformatic research tools to identify, clone and characterize different genes
involved in ROS signaling in cells. The identification of genes involved in ROS
sensing, the pathway for ROS signaling, and the collection of ROS-mutants,
generated during the course of the proposed research, would serve as a valuable
resource for the entire scientific community. The information generated from the
project will enhance overall understanding of plant biology, and help determine
to what extent and in what manner ROS are involved in different biological
process. Broader impacts. To increase interest and understanding of science in
young people, high school students and undergraduates, including minorities,
will be recruited into the project and trained in ROS biology, molecular
biology, and bioinformatics. This project will provide training to 2 graduate
students, 8 undergraduates and 8 high school students. In addition, four 1 week
summer workshops, 25 high school students each, are planned for the duration of
the grant. The proposed project will provide interdisciplinary training that has
become imperative for success in plant sciences. To enhance the awareness of
high school students, teachers and undergraduates, two teaching-oriented
websites targeted to high school students and undergraduates, and an online
presentation targeted to high school teachers will be developed to share
knowledge and enhance awareness to ROS metabolism in plants, mammals and other
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;