* 1132994
* Using ecological theory to restore invaded Mediterranean-climate ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Jennifer Funk, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 13,200.00

Invasive species represent one of the most serious threats to vegetation
community composition and ecosystem function worldwide. However, science-driven
techniques needed to restore these invaded communities are lacking. One specific
hypothesis is that community resistance to invasion can be strengthened by
selecting native species that are similar to invasive species in resource use,
thus increasing competition. This is based on the theory of limiting similarity,
which posits that there is a finite limit to the similarity between the
resource-use of co-existing species. The first step in elucidating the utility
of limiting similarity approach to restoration is quantifying differences in
resource use between native and invasive species across a variety of invaded
systems. Through this project, functional trait data will be collected from
native and invasive plant species in two vegetation communities in Spain. The
data will be combined with existing data from three other mediterranean-climate
ecosystems (MCEs) to test how one ecological theory ? limiting similarity ? can
be used to restore invaded vegetation communities. Results from the present
Catalyzing research will be incorporated into a subsequent proposal that will
use these trait data to select native species that are functionally similar to
invaders and to monitor community composition in these restored systems over
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will contribute to an
understanding of conservation issues in MCEs, which are highly diverse and
increasingly threatened by human activity. The work will directly contribute to
the practice of restoration by exploring how easy-to-measure plant traits can be
used to select native plants that will increase invasion resistance of restored
communities. In addition, this project will promote a new collaboration between
an early career, female U.S. scientist at an undergraduate institution and an
internationally renowned plant ecologist in Spain. An undergraduate student will
participate in the activities in Spain, benefitting from close faculty-student
mentoring and the opportunity to engage in international research at the early
stage of an academic career.