* 1132053
* Water Diplomacy Workshop: Strengthening Science and Enhancing International Partnerships in a Globalized World, Medford, Massachusetts, June, 2011
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Lawrence Susskind, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2012
* USD 8,850.00

1132053 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports participation of three foreign experts
in a meeting: Water Diplomacy Workshop, Strengthening Science and Enhancing
International Partnership in a Globalized World scheduled to be held in Medford,
MA June 13-17, 2011. The workshop is organized by Dr. Shafiqul Islam, Department
of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Tufts University, with participation
by faculty from MIT and Harvard University. The objective of the three-day
workshop is to bring experts in water issues in the physical sciences (e.g.
civil and environmental engineering and geological scienes), with experts in
water issues in social and economic sciences (e.g. economics, sociology,
anthropology, political science) to identify issues and solutions that can be
provided to decision-makers. A major objective is to facilitate and encourage
collaborations between researchers in physical sciences and in social sciences
in identifying solutions to problems of water resources and use in the US and
other countries. The foreign participants will be from Egypt, Sudan and
Pakistan, countries with significant water- related border disputes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The workshop has two main goals: (a)
to integrate knowledge about science, policy, and politics to formulate and
frame questions about water network management; and (b) to generate actionable
knowledge that will help stakeholders and decision-makers negotiate solutions to
water management problems. It is hoped that participants will engage in real-
world problem-solving, through domestic and international partnerships, as a way
of merging theory and practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
workshop is to help a Water Diplomacy initiative started at Tufts University,
aimed at preparing a new cadre of interdisciplinary water professionals who are
not only scholars with strong disciplinary grounding but also problem-solvers
with interdisciplinary expertise and negotiation skills. The proposed workshop
(WDW) will show members of the growing informal network of water professionals
how to present what they learn to groups and organizations back in their
communities. Spreading this actionable knowledge and helping as many people as
possible is essential to addressing the world?s water problems. The diversity of
the national and international participants involved will ensure that people
with different backgrounds and viewpoints will be engaged. Such sharing of
knowledge is critical to solving boundary crossing water problems in a
globalized world. The format of the workshop will allow US scientists an
opportunity to build collaborative partnerships that are not attainable within
the typical international workshop format.