* 1132984
* RAPID: Seismic Imaging of the Salton Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Neal Driscoll, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/2012
* USD 139,180.00

The Salton Trough is a critical structure where two very different styles of
deformation meet; spreading-center dominated deformation to the south in the
Gulf of California and dextral strike-slip deformation along the San Andreas
fault system. Extremely high heat flow, young volcanism, shallow metamorphism
and micro-seismicity led early researchers to interpret the southern Salton Sea
as a buried spreading center with a NE-striking system of normal faults. To
date, however, a critical portion of this system at the intersection between the
San Andreas Fault with the Brawley Seismic Zone (BSZ) in the southern Salton Sea
remains poorly understood, in large part, due to a lack of seismic imaging in
the Salton Sea. To address this problem, the NSF has funded two projects, one a
marine seismic study of the Salton Trough and the other an onshore study. These
projects are highly complementary in that seismic signals from both onshore and
offshore will be recorded by both experiments, but the deployments of airguns
for the projects requires a boat of sufficient size to deploy the ocean bottom
seismometers and safely operate the airguns. The project is scheduled to
commence in March, 2011, and this award will provide funds for a suitable
platform to carry out the project. The broader impacts of the combined projects
include improved understanding of earthquake hazards in southern California and
benefits to State of California studies of the Salton Sea, a research experience
for a science educator through the California Center for Ocean Science Education
Excellence (CACOSEE), and support for a graduate student.