* 1132284
* Noyce Scholarship Track Phase I: UTeaChattanooga Noyce Scholarship Program (UNSP)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2018
* Stephen Kuhn, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,199,727.00

The University of Chattanooga's (UTC) College of Arts and Science, College of
Health, Education and Professional Studies, Hamilton County schools and four
other area school systems are collaborating to produce more and better quality
secondary mathematics and science teachers. Specifically, the Noyce Scholarship
Program is providing up to 30 two-year scholarships to 15 junior and senior STEM
majors in the UTeaChattanooga program at UTC who commit to completing four years
of teaching at the high school level in high-needs school districts and up to 80
internships for Freshman and Sophomore STEM majors. The goals of the
UTeaChattanooga Noyce Scholarship Program are: (1) to attract highly qualified
STEM majors to secondary science and mathematics teaching careers in high-needs
schools; (2) to encourage traditionally underrepresented groups in the STEM
disciplines to major in STEM fields and seek secondary teacher licensure in
mathematics and science; (3) to provide pedagogically and content/research rich
experiences to STEM majors seeking secondary teaching licensure; (4) to increase
the number of secondary math and science secondary educators, (5) to improve the
mathematical and scientific preparation of these educators and (6) to provide
comprehensive induction support for UTeaChattanooga Noyce Scholarship Program
Scholars (UNSPSs) during their first two years of teaching, with special
emphasis on the unique challenges of high-needs schools and their students. The
UNSP program provides a choice of six intensive summer internships that
strengthen the Scholars' content and research knowledge and provide
pedagogically rich experiences for up to 110 UTeaChattanooga students across the
five-year grant period. The UNSP initiative is enhancing the infrastructure for
research and education through its research and pedagogical opportunities and
partnerships with UTC faculty, Department of Energy National Laboratories, the
Tennessee Aquarium and UTC's Upward Bound program.