* 1132792
* U.S.-France Planning Visit:  Investigating Upland Glaciation in the Pangaean Tropics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jong-on Hahm
* 08/31/2013
* USD 33,242.00

The objective of this international planning grant is to meet with French
colleagues and conduct a reconnaissance field trip to investigate Late Paleozoic
paleoclimate in sedimentary rocks of the Central Pangaean mountains (Massif
Central region), with the aim of developing a future international collaboration
on this topic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Late Paleozoic (Pennsylvanian-Permian)
records Earth?s most recent example of so-called ?icehouse? conditions, in which
atmospheric CO2 levels were low and glaciation persisted at high latitudes,
similar to Earth?s current and recent state. Moreover, the Late Paleozoic (300
million years ago) is Earth?s last example of the transition from a planet that
hosted large ice sheets and alpine glaciers to one that was essentially ice-
free. Although the former existence of Late Paleozoic ice sheets in high-
latitude regions has been long accepted, the existence of glaciation at low
latitudes is in question; if ice existed in the tropics, then our models for
Earth?s climate behavior during this time require revision.&lt;br/&gt; This
project stems from independent work by PI Soreghan in the U.S., and
geoscientists in France, on the hypothesis of glaciation in the Late Paleozoic
tropics -- i.e., the mountains of low-latitude Pangaea, which spanned from
Europe to North America. The hypothesis of alpine glaciation in the Permo-
Pennsylvanian strata of France dates back a century, but has only resurfaced in
the last few years, coincident with Soreghan?s work in the U.S. This travel
grant is to begin a new research collaboration, building upon incidental email
exchanges between Soreghan and French colleagues over the last year. The project
will occur in three phases, as follows: 1) initial planning, involving all
collaborators, via email and video-conferencing; 2) the planning visit,
involving PI Soreghan, and three students from the University of Oklahoma
(undergraduate and graduate). This visit will involve colloquia at the French
institutions, followed by a day field excursion to canvass research localities.
3) Post-trip activities will entail data analysis in U.S. and French labs, and
data sharing with the intent of developing a future research project to
undertake a comprehensive assessment of those localities that show the best
promise for preserving an upland record of paleoclimate.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: If results continue to indicate glaciation in upland tropical Pangaea,
then this implies an enormous shift in long-accepted reconstructions of Pangaean
climate. The Late Paleozoic Ice Age is Earth?s most recent pre-Quaternary
glaciation, and thus a common target for climate modelers, using the same models
as those employed to predict future climate. Hence, calibrations to these models
are critical for understanding broader aspects of Earth?s climate
system.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The collaborative research will enhance the
research skills of both U.S. and French collaborators. A planning trip to
France, with the promise of a longer-term research project, will afford
participating US students from OU an extraordinary opportunity to experience
both the scientific experience of inception of an interdisciplinary,
international research collaboration, and the cultural experience of visiting
and conducting geology in a foreign locale. The proposed research will
contribute to the experience base and expertise in sedimentologic and tectonic
analyses of all collaborators, while developing datasets and results that will
assist a number of other researchers and research projects.