* 1132508
* CAREER:Sensors for Quantification of Degradation in Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Matthew Mench, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2012
* USD 204,680.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Matthew Mench Institution: Pennsylvania State University Proposal Number:
0644811 Title: CAREER: Sensors for Quantification of Degradation in Polymer
Electrolyte Fuel Cells

Intellectual merit

Many complex systems suffer gradual degradation that can result in catastrophic
failure. Because the time scale of degradation is relatively slow, these types
of anomalous faults are nearly impossible to detect at an early stage with
conventional sensing technology. The PI is planning an approach that is to
enable early detection and quantification of potentially catastrophic evolving
faults in polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFCs). The objective is early
detection that will precede implementation of anomaly mitigation and graceful
degradation strategies, extending service availability, mean performance, and
enabling a more aggressive initial design. This objective is essential to
achieve the extended longevity that currently limits PEFCs. The methodology to
achieve this sensing capability is heuristically similar to an
electrocardiogram, in which the time series data of a heart's response to
external stress are used to rapidly diagnose ailments that have evolved over
many years.

This sensing and quantification methodology provides early stage diagnosis of
relatively slowly varying anomalies through a fast time scale stimulus-response
approach. Following a chosen externally applied stimulus, the time series data
are partitioned into a response vector using symbolic dynamics. The dynamic
response vector characteristics are compared to a nominal response vector to
precisely quantify the anomaly level. This early fault detection technique will
enable nearly imperceptible slow time scale anomalies to be quantified online in
a fast time scale, well before significant degradation occurs.

Broader Impact:

The broader impact of this research should help generate the infrastructure and
knowledge base needed to enable ubiquitous PEFC implementation, and reduce long
term United States dependence of fossil fuels. The CO sensor will be developed
into a prototype under a collaboration between Nuvera and TA&D, a technology
development company, maximizing impact. Educationally, the program will expose
hundreds of students, from high school through graduate school, to fuel cell
technology. Three Ph.D. students will be directly involved, and forty
undergraduates per year will be enrolled in an upgraded senior level course
including industrial speakers and a collaboration with the University of
Arizona. A textbook currently in development will also benefit from the output
of this research. High school students and teachers will participate in an
summer program, and a new graduate-level course will be developed. Overall, the
integrated research and educational program will help establish a permanent
infrastructure to address key technical challenges that presently hinder
widespread PEFC adoption.

