* 1132579
* Transport of cells and drug delivery particles in blood flow
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 313,984.00

1132579&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael D. Graham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of
blood cells in the circulation is complex, and although many important phenomena
have been observed, the principles that underlie and couple these phenomena
remain poorly understood. Understanding transport in flowing blood takes on
additional significance in light of recent research into synthesis of particles
for drug delivery. Advances in synthesis methods have led to recent attention to
physical aspects such as size, shape and mechanical properties for drug delivery
particle behavior. Rational design of blood-borne drug delivery particles can
only occur with an understanding of how these particles will actually behave in
the blood, but there is at present no predictive understanding of how drug
delivery particles are distributed in the circulation. For example, the
biological activity of a particle targeting the coronary artery walls will
depend strongly on whether that particle tends to remain near blood vessel walls
in flow or remains in the center of blood vessels where it does not interact
with the blood vessel walls. The design principles for synthesizing a particle
that remains near vessel walls (as, for example, a white blood cell tends to do)
are not known. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this work is to
establish these principles, by accomplishing the following aims: (1) Use
particle level simulations and analysis to predict the dynamics of drug carrier
particles in flowing suspensions of red blood cells, and in particular the
dependence of cross-stream migration and shear-induced diffusion on the size,
shape and deformability of the particles; (2) Integrate these results with a
transport modeling framework that enables systematic predictions of the
distribution of particles in flowing blood; (3) Make comparisons between
predicted results and experimental observations. These aims will be fulfilled by
a concerted effort that integrates large scale, detailed simulations with a
fundamental theoretical framework for understanding and predicting migration and
margination phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work performed with this award
will lead to concerted advances in complex fluids and drug delivery. It will
break new ground in the study of multiphase complex fluids in general and the
dynamics of blood flow in the microcirculation in particular. It addresses the
physical dynamics of drug delivery particles in the blood and thus will be
foundational for future translational research in the field, which necessarily
must begin to consider issues beyond the specific chemical and biological
interactions that have been the focus of most research in this area. The highly
interdisciplinary nature of the work and collaboration with an experimental
group focused on biomedical problems will contribute to an outstanding education
for the members of the PI's research group. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work
will also lead to educational opportunities for undergraduate and K-12 students.
Undergraduate students will be involved in the research, and the the PI and his
group will work with the Institute for Chemical Education and the Madison Boys
and Girls Club to develop educational materials for K-12 students under the
theme: Mechanics of swimming microorganisms. These materials will include
demonstrations for teachers as well as kits with which children can build their
own functioning swimmers.