* 1132581
* Developing a Spatially-Explicit Agent-Based Life Cycle Analysis Framework for Improving the Environmental Sustainability of Bioenergy Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ming Xu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 309,097.00

1132581 (Xu). This project has two major goals. First, a spatially-explicit
agent-based LCA framework will be developed to improve the standard LCA modeling
technique by overcoming the issues involved with analyzing emerging technologies
with dynamic and evolving supply chains. The achievement of this goal will
advance LCA methodology and provide a new tool for environmental sustainability
analysis. Second, this improved LCA modeling framework will be applied to the
U.S. switchgrass bioenergy system (biofuels and biomass electricity) to examine
the future supply chain dynamics and evolution under a variety of policy
scenarios and evaluate the associated life cycle environmental impacts. The
completion of this work will provide a roadmap for the nation and selected
states to achieve bioenergy development goals while meeting market demand and
minimizing environmental impact. The proposed spatially-explicit agent-based LCA
modeling framework will integrate conventional LCA modeling with an agent-based
modeling technique to allow feedback between the environmental intervention
database and the dynamics and evolution of supply chain. The model will be
spatially-explicit by incorporating geospatial data and tools. The proposed
framework addresses some of the grand challenges identified by the LCA community
in both bioenergy LCA and LCA methodology in general, and will be generally
applicable to other systems beyond the bioenergy case study. The success of this
project will improve the state of the LCA method to analyze dynamic, emerging
systems. In addition to this methodological advancement, results of this project
may directly impact decisions pertaining to bioenergy development. Through this
project, we will be able to 1) understand how the entire bioenergy supply chain
will respond to different policy interventions, 2) provide decision support
information for the development and deployment of biofuels and biomass
electricity at national and state levels, 3) guide the biofuel and biomass
electricity industries to advance technology development, and 4) educate the
next generation of engineers and policy makers for understanding complex issues
in the bioenergy system and obtaining multidisciplinary skills. The impacts of
this research are potentiallly broader than providing critical information about
switchgrass bioenergy development and its environmental impacts. The techniques
established using a coupled agent-based model with LCA can be used for any
developing system. The method developed in this research can address one of the
key challenges of trying to predict the environmental impacts of a non-
established system, adding dynamic components that assist in the understanding
of developing complex adaptive systems and the aggregate effect of a technology
change. The educational impact of this project includes integration of
undergraduate and graduate courses and curricula. One PhD student will be
trained working on cutting edge research on a topic of intense international
interest. Master's students will see aspects of this research integrated into
the curriculum of the Engineering Sustainable Systems dual degree program
between the UM College of Engineering and School of Natural Resources and
Environment. The project team will also participate in the UM UROP program which
provides mentoring and research experiences for underrepresented minority
undergraduate students. To broadly disseminate research results for educational
purposes, the team will develop and submit relevant course modules to the Center
for Sustainable Engineering's electronic library for peer review. The models
developed in this project will be shared with the scientific community through
the OpenABM Consortium.