* 1132413
* CAREER: RF/Microwave components and devices using micro-/nano machined metamaterial
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Yong-Kyu Yoon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 01/31/2014
* USD 222,403.00

Abstract

RF/Microwave components and devices using micro-/nano machined metamaterial:

The objectives of this research are (1) to investigate and implement low loss,
multidimensional high quality metamaterials using advanced micromachining and
nanotechnology, and (2) to translate the developed metamaterial technologies to
highly efficient, compact, and multifunctional radio frequency (RF) devices and
components. Metamaterials due to their unique properties have a potential to
drastically impact RF devices. Compact and multifunctional metamaterial RF
devices have recently emerged. However, several unsolved issues hamper the
practical applications of current metamaterial technology: reduction of material
loss, construction of three dimensional (3-D) structures, and development of
cost-effective fabrication processes.

The intellectual merit for this research includes: 1) a novel air-lifted
architecture and a lateral nano lamination conductor architecture to
respectively reduce dielectric loss and conductor loss of metamaterials, 2) the
development of 3-D micro-/nano fabrication technique development, and 3) a new
class of multifunctional RF devices utilizing the developed metamaterials such
as a flexible invisibililty cloak, a compact low loss dual band coupler, and a
compact high efficient dual band antenna. The envisioned micro-/nano machined
metamaterial and its RF device applications will provide a major breakthrough in
the field.

The broad impacts of the proposal include integrated education and research at
various fronts, such as new courses, minority and undergraduate research
support, and outreach activities at the University at Buffalo. Also supported
will be an on-line course encompassing three State University of New York
campuses. The technical and societal impacts of this research will occur in
diverse areas such as telecommunications, defense, microelectronics, and medical
imaging.

