* 1132562
* Learning Progressions Footprint Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Charles Anderson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 09/30/2012
* USD 180,482.00

Through the "Learning Progressions Footprint Conference," leading researchers in
science and mathematics education are bringing together leaders in the field for
a workshop - to take place in Washington, DC, in July, 2011 - that will enable
them to take stock of the progress of learning progressions research to date and
to suggest productive directions for future research and development. The year
2011 promises to be a watershed year in science and mathematics education as
many important developments are currently taking place that will shape
mathematics and science education for years to come. In particular, new national
standards are under development in both mathematics and science education, with
revisions in state standards and assessments to follow. Learning progressions
are informing Common Core standards and assessments for mathematics and are
expected to play a central role in the conceptual framework for new National
Science Education Standards. As new standards and assessments are introduced to
the field, it will be critical (a) to assess current standards and contributions
of learning progressions research, and (b) to turn attention to research on how
to support implementation of practices and related products and technologies
informed by a learning progressions perspective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning
progressions research seeks to establish empirically grounded accounts of the
development of students' scientific and mathematical knowledge and practice over
broad spans of time, and of the instructional means of support that enable that
development. Well-grounded learning progressions or learning trajectories can
serve as valuable resources for science and mathematics education researchers,
developers of standards documents, assessment developers, and curriculum
developers. A critical evaluation of learning progressions research at this time
is enabling the field to set priorities and invest resources wisely. The
conference is framed to focus on these issues and is to be attended by about 40
leading researchers, developers, and practitioners in mathematics and science
education, as well as representatives of NSF and other federal agencies. In
preparation for the conference, participants are considering five key
questions:&lt;br/&gt; 1. What is the important work that has taken place over
the last 20 years? How strong is the evidence base and how can it be
strengthened?&lt;br/&gt; 2. What are learning progressions good for? How have
they been used in practice, and with what consequences? What additional uses
might they legitimately have?&lt;br/&gt; 3. What methodological advances have
been made in learning progressions work? To what extent are current standards of
evidence adequate and where are further refinements needed?&lt;br/&gt; 4. How
can we develop the interdisciplinary teams, possibly including potential users,
to do this type of work?&lt;br/&gt; 5. What recommendations do conference
members have for policies and priorities for future learning progressions
work?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The products of the conference will include: (a) a
conference report that assesses the evidence base around learning progressions,
evaluates methodological approaches, and considers implications for policy and
practice, (b) proposals for sessions at professional conferences, and (c)
position papers to be submitted to journals for publication.