* 1132755
* DRRC:  Baseline Indicators for Monitoring Disaster Resilience in Rural Places
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Susan Cutter, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2015
* USD 275,000.00

Disaster losses continue to increase in the United States, yet we lack a
fundamental understanding of the pattern of disaster losses for the nation and
their impacts on rural and non-rural places. If a policy goal is to improve
community resilience to disasters, empirically defined baselines are a necessary
starting point. This project integrates physical and social datasets through a
suite of statistical and geospatial techniques in the construction of
theoretically based and methodologically sound indicators of resilience for the
nation at the county level. The goal is to provide a set of quantitative
baseline indicators for measuring disaster resilience. Once the indicators are
developed, the composite index will be validated (using uncertainty and
sensitivity analyses). Exploration of the statistical and spatial variability in
the composition of indicators identifies and analyzes the relationship between
resilience, vulnerability, and the relative impact of disasters on rural and
non-rural places. In addition to spatial analyses of resilience, the project
identifies differences in the drivers of resilience among counties. This work
helps identify opportunities for intervention strategies to improve resilience,
opportunities that may be dramatically different between rural and non-rural
counties and within rural counties as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance
of this project is twofold. First, there is considerable local, state, and
federal programmatic interest in community disaster resilience. At present,
there is little agreement on what to measure, how to measure it, and in
determining which metrics are the most useful. Second, in order to judge the
effectiveness of any policy or program, there needs to be a starting point for
assessments. This project provides just such a starting point with the
development of baseline indicators for tracking changes in resilience over time.
Monitoring changes in the indicators provides the evidentiary basis for programs
to gauge their success in enhancing the nation?s resilience. The research team
will disseminate results to stakeholders at county, state, and national levels.