* 1132157
* An Innovative, Unorthodox, and General Strategy for the Synthesis of Zeolitic-Imidazolate Framework (ZIF) Membranes for Olefin/Paraffin Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Hae-Kwon Jeong, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2015
* USD 280,447.00

1132157&lt;br/&gt;Jeong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to
develop an innovative, unorthodox, and general strategy to synthesize metal-
organic framework (specifically zeolitic-imidazolate framework) membranes in a
commercially viable manner for high resolution separations of olefin/paraffin
mixtures such as propene/propane and ethene/ethane.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), a subclass of
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), offer unique opportunities in gas separations
due to their ultra-micropores (pores smaller than 5 Ã…), their unique
thermal/chemical stabilities, and their unparalleled framework flexibilities.
For example, in ZIFs, the fundamental separation mechanism based on the
differences in the solubilities and the diffusivities of gases can be controlled
due to a so called gate-opening effect (more broadly known as a breathing
effect) in which the adsorption and diffusion of specific molecules can be
regulated by threshold pressures (i.e., flexible frameworks). Since these
threshold pressures vary for different gas molecules, ZIFs possess tremendous
flexibility for separation applications. However, many of the fundamental
challenges hindering zeolite membranes from being more widely used in commercial
applications still remain for ZIF membranes. These challenges include slow batch
crystallization, grain boundary defects, and expensive porous supports.
Additionally, zeolite membranes of different topology are often synthesized by
trial-and-error approaches and reproducibility is still a major problem. A
fundamentally different strategy needs to be developed in order to fully harvest
the potential of this emerging class of nanoporous framework materials for
membrane-based gas separations. Many researchers working on MOF membranes come
from a zeolite membrane background and thus try to apply the same techniques and
experiences that they have used in the past. In contrast, the PI proposes to
take a unique perspective on the synthesis of ZIF membranes that breaks away
from conventional thought. The key hypothesis is that a radically different
transformative approach to synthesizing MOF membranes can be developed due to
the fact that the chemistry of these materials are fundamentally different from
zeolite chemistry. The proposed work will be built upon the rapid thermal
deposition (RTD) technique developed in the PI's group. The proposed plan has
three main objectives: 1) development of an innovative, unorthodox, and general
synthesis strategy based on the RTD technique, 2) characterization and control
of ZIF membrane microstructure, and 3) testing of membrane performance. The
innovative strategy proposed here will be applicable for the large-scale
synthesis of any MOF membrane in an unprecedented manner, thereby potentially
rendering their practical applications a reality.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
work will enable the PI to determine if a transformative synthesis strategy
based on rapid thermal deposition can be successfully developed for ZIF
membranes. The proposed fundamental research will lead to a set of design rules
for the rapid synthesis of any ZIF membrane with a unique microstructure. ZIF
membrane microstructures (in particular, grain boundary defects) will be
characterized for the first time and then controlled to maximize separation
performance. The effects of the ZIFs' framework flexibility on the pore and
grain boundary structures will be determined which will in turn determine the
performance of the ZIF membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
membranes capable of performing olefin/paraffin separations will lead to a
technology that consumes less energy than the current practice of distillation,
thereby leaving a much smaller carbon footprint. While the focus of this work is
olefin/paraffin separations, the materials and their membranes investigated here
will be relevant to other difficult separations facing the chemical and
petrochemical industries. The interdisciplinary nature of the work, spanning
material design and synthesis, characterization, and membrane fabrication and
testing, will lead to a truly multidisciplinary research experience for the
students (one graduate and one REU undergraduate) involved. The educational
outreach activity development of science videos based on the proposed research
will positively impact K-12 education by increasing public interest in science
and engineering.