* 1132028
* Postsecondary Pathways into STEM for Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Chandra Muller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2015
* USD 392,628.00

The "Postsecondary Pathways into STEM for Students with Disabilities" is
designed to investigate the effects of high school context, social and academic
processes and experiences, and institutional context on pathways to
postsecondary STEM success and completion of students with disabilities in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data analyses will be conducted using information from the
Education Longitudinal Study (ELS) of 2002 and the 2004-2009 Beginning
Postsecondary Students Longitudinal Study (BPS); these datasets follow a
nationally representative sample of students as they transition from high school
into adulthood and post-secondary settings. This research will focus on the
diverse postsecondary educational pathways of students with and without
disabilities and will address the following three question
sets:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I. College Preparation and the Transition into
Postsecondary Education or Work: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first line of inquiry
will estimate the effects of high school outcomes such as graduation, course-
taking, grades, test scores, and social-psychological factors on the transition
into STEM postsecondary education and work. Special attention will be paid to
differences among students with disabilities depending on disability type,
socioeconomic status, gender, and race/ethnicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II.
Postsecondary Pathways into STEM:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second line of
investigation will look at the effects of college preparation, early college
experiences, and institutional characteristics on students' postsecondary
pathways into STEM. The researchers aim to identify and predict students'
successful pathways through postsecondary into and through STEM fields of study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;III. Postsecondary STEN
Attainment:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third line of the study will investigate
the impact of postsecondary experiences and institutions on the completion of
STEM degrees. The research will evaluate differences in persistence and time to
STEM degree or certification between students with and without disabilities.
Transcript data will be used to ascertain differences in STEM literacy.
Ultimately, the researchers will seek to identify the policy-relevant factors
that promote successful postsecondary degree completion among students with
disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be evaluated by an
independent evaluator utilizing a logic model detailing the anticipated
activities, outputs, outcomes and impact of the research. Dissemination
activities will target researchers, practitioners, and advocates. Peer-reviewed
journals will also advance dissemination to researchers, faculty, employers, and
other stakeholders.