* 1132412
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Isolation, purification, and characterization of novel halophilic, alkalithermophilic enzymes of industrial interest from alkaline hypersaline lake
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Juergen Wiegel, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2016
* USD 23,040.00

1132412 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research Dr.
by Jurgen Wiegel, Department of Microbiology at the University of Georgia in
Athens, GA and Noha Mesbah, Department of Biochemistry at Suez Canal University,
Ismailia, Egypt. They plan to isolate and identify novel microorganisms, known
as extremophiles that grow at the present-day physiochemical boundaries for
growth, and to conduct detailed characterization of biotechnologically useful
enzymes from these extremophiles. The selected enzymes will allow industries,
such as the detergent, pulp, paper, and chemical industries, to improve and
modify their products using natural resources and ecologically sound methods.
The aims of the project include: (1) Isolation and identification of aerobic and
anaerobic extremophiles; halophilic alkaliphiles and alkalithermophiles from the
lakes of the Wadi An Natrun in Egypt; microorganisms harboring specialized
enzymes with unique and novel properties of great potential for industrial
processes will be enriched for using selective methods (2) Screening the
isolates for enzyme production. Enzymes to be screened for include proteases,
lipases, esterases, cellulases and xylanases, (3) Large scale culture and
purification of extremozymes from isolates, (4) Characterization of promising
novel enzymes, with a focus on enzyme stability, activity and substrate
specificity under extreme conditions, and (5) Heterologous expression of
selected promising enzymes for possible modification and mass production.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project will allow the isolation
and characterization of halo/alkaliphilic and alkali/thermophilic prokaryotes
from extreme habitats in Egypt in collaboration with counterparts in that
country, and using these organisms in bioprospecting for industrially useful
enzymes. The research is to lead to the isolation and identification of novel
microorganisms, extremophiles, which grow at the present-day physiochemical
boundaries for growth. In addition, it will lead to the identification and
detailed characterization of biotechnologically useful enzymes from these
extremophiles, which can allow different industries, particularly the detergent
/ pulp / paper / chemical industries, present locally in Egypt and the United
States, to improve and modify their products using natural resources and
ecologically sound methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to
natural product discovery of benefit to society, and the likely improvement in
the environmental output of the affected industries, broader impacts would
include the training of graduate and undergraduate scientists in the US and
Egypt in modern and interdisciplinary microbial, molecular and biochemical
methods.