* 1132446
* Cellular and Biomolecular Interactions with Graphene-Family Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Agnes Kane, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 414,731.00

1132446&lt;br/&gt;Hurt&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Environmental Health and
Safety of Nanotechnology program supports work by Professors Robert Hurt and
Agnes Kane to characterize the biological interactions of graphene-based
nanomaterials. Most research in nanomaterial safety focuses on a select group of
high-volume materials for which significant human and environmental exposures
are possible. Recently a new nanomaterial must be added to this list: graphene,
the single-atom-thick sheet of graphite, which has attracted intense scientific
and commercial interest since its discovery in 2004. Graphene and related
materials with small numbers of layers (few-layer graphene) and chemical
modified surfaces (graphene oxide), are now being manufactured at increasing
volumes to meet research and development needs for a wide range of applications
in electronics, structural materials, chemical sensors, inks and papers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a multidisciplinary team of engineers and
toxicologists will investigate the interactions of graphene-family nanomaterials
with biological molecules and with cells. A panel of commercial and
developmental graphene-family materials has been assembled with variations in
layer number (1 ? 30), lateral dimension (500 nm ? 25 um), and surface chemistry
(pristine vs. graphene oxide) and will be thoroughly characterized for their
relevant material properties as a first task. A second task will use high-
throughput media profiling techniques to determine if graphene-family
nanomaterials with very high surface areas will deplete vitamins and amino
acids, or will interfere with dye-based measurement techniques used in toxicity
testing. In a third task, the panel of graphene-family materials will be
incubated with macrophages, a type of immune system cell that forms the first
line of defense against microorganisms and foreign particulates inhaled into the
lungs. These experiments will provide information on cell uptake, cell
structure, oxidant production, cell viability, and production of inflammatory
signaling agents as a function of mass does and surface area dose and using
well-established, commercial, non-graphene, carbons as reference
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts -- This project will aid in risk
assessment for graphene materials by providing data at doses relevant to
occupational exposures. The results will also provide an early screening of the
potential of these materials to pose risks to diverse biological systems, both
human and environmental. Comparisons across the graphene material family suggest
rationale grouping of graphene-based nanomaterials into regulatory or risk
categories and can suggest safe design strategies. Additional broader impacts
will arise through the investigators? continued commitment to public engagement
on the regulatory and societal issues surrounding nanosafety. Broader impacts on
human resources for U.S. science will be made through the support of young
female and Hispanic researchers in the project and the investigators?
participation in summer enrichment programs with Rhode Island high-school
science teachers.