* 1132972
* Planning visit to the University of Bari, Italy to initiate a collaborative study on the processes controlling slow moving landslides in Southeastern Italy.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Nicole Gasparini, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 14,463.00

This award supports a planning visit to Bari, Italy to establish a collaborative
research project on the processes controlling slow moving landslides. The US
researchers will work with counterpart at the University of Bari and the Italian
National Research Council (CNR). The international research team brings together
geotechnical and geological scientists with both applied and theoretical
knowledge in the processes controlling landscape change in mountainous regions.
This catalytic research activity is designed to share preliminary knowledge and
data between the US and Italian researchers and to commence initial field
activity. The study will focus on two hilltop towns in the Appenine Mountains of
Southeastern Italy. These towns are nearly encircled by landslides that are
slowly undermining the towns and destroying infrastructure. In order to prevent
infrastructure damage imparted by landslides, the variables that enhance and
inhibit landslide movement must be identified and quantified.

Results from this research will contribute to better management of landscapes
prone to slow landsliding events. A planned outcome of this project is
competitive proposals for ongoing international research collaborations between
the participants. In addition, the project will enable a graduate student at
Tulane University to conduct extensive field work in Italy, use unique Italian
facilities, and develop an international network of collaborators at an early
stage in her academic career.