* 1132549
* Partial Support of the the Committee on Atomic, Molucular and Optical Sciences
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The National Research Council's (NRC) Committee on Atomic, Molecular, and
Optical Sciences (CAMOS) is a standing committee with membership drawn from
universities, industry, and government laboratories. Its members have expertise
that is intended to cover the full breadth of the atomic, molecular, and optical
(AMO) sciences. The operating guidelines of CAMOS include the following
objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To provide active stewardship of the agenda
laid out by the most recent decadal study prepared for AMO sciences,
"Controlling the Quantum World";&lt;br/&gt;- To provide a means by which federal
agencies can request technical information and assistance from the NRC about AMO
science and related fields, and by which other units in the NRC can obtain
expertise on AMO science;&lt;br/&gt;- To initiate ad hoc studies and workshops
on important timely topics in AMO science and/or its multidisciplinary
connections with other fields of science and technology;&lt;br/&gt;- To develop
brief informational summaries of emerging topics and/or questions of current
interest; &lt;br/&gt;- To provide an interface for communication among the
subfields of the AMO community as well as with the staff of federal agencies
that support research in the field;&lt;br/&gt;- To begin preparations for the
next decadal survey of AMO science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out those
objectives, CAMOS meets annually in person in Washington, D.C. and between those
meetings, conducts its business through telephone
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of CAMOS will generate broader
impacts in two ways. First, these activities engage a group of leading
scientists from across the subfields of AMO science in joint deliberations and
provide a learning environment for that body regarding the public-policy process
for science and the position of AMO in the broader context of the physical
sciences. Second, CAMOS activities lead to an improved understanding of AMO
science by the broader scientific and policy-making communities. By holding
multi-disciplinary workshops, preparing short, nontechnical documents, and
initiating studies, CAMOS will continue to educate researchers, policy makers,
and the general public about advances in AMO science that have impact in other
fields of science and technology.