* 1132324
* A Novel Stochastic Formulation for Predicting and Shaping the Particle Size Distribution in Crystallization Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Jose Romagnoli, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 278,455.00

PI: Romagnoli, Jose &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Louisiana State University &amp;
Agricultural and Mechanical College&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1132324&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Novel Stochastic Formulation for Predicting and
Shaping the Particle Size Distribution in Crystallization
Processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystallization is a widely used technology for
solid-liquid separation in the process industry. It is extensively used in the
pharmaceuticals industry to separate the drug from the solvent mixture as well
as to ensure the drug crystal product conforms to size and morphology
regulations. The crystal size in crystallization processes is one of the most
important variables since it influences factors such as filtration rate, de-
watering rate, dissolution rate and bioavailability amongst others. The
development of mathematical models describing the crystal growth dynamics is a
bottleneck towards finding the optimal process performance and to control the
crystal size and distribution. Previous studies exploited this by developing
population balance models, which implied first principle assumptions and
required a detailed knowledge of the physics and thermodynamics of the process.
In this project, in place of trying to understand the complex interactions at
the microscopic level along the crystallization process, the PI will seek to
explain the observed macroscopic behavior towards the development of models to
describe the crystal growth dynamics and control of crystal size distribution
(CSD). Thus, in an effort to explain the observed macroscopic behavior of
crystal growth in an anti-solvent aided crystallization, the PI will incorporate
the Fokker?Planck equation (FPE) as the centerpiece of his approach. This is a
change in the way crystallization modeling has been done so far and this study
is expected to provide new and previously unavailable insight into this
fundamental problem. Within this context, the use of FPE represents a new
direction in developing a population balance model, taking into account the
natural fluctuations present in the crystallization process, and allowing a
novel description, in a compact form, of the PSD in time. The research
directions will create a new and generic platform for addressing the control of
particle size distribution in crystallization operations. The PI plans to
formulate and asses the performance of alternative stochastic models. He will
investigate analytical solutions for the temporal behavior of the PSD. A multi-
model formulation will be used to merge multiple sets of parameters to a single
model for the whole operating envelope. Model-based dynamic optimization studies
will be performed towards developing optimal operational policies and will be
validated using experimental investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
of the Proposed Activity: Crystallization is a particulate technology that is
becoming more and more important industrially. It is estimated that 60% of all
products sold by chemical companies are crystalline, polymeric or amorphous
solids. Many processes that utilize crystallization apply established ?rule-of-
thumb? techniques and know-how in their operations. This work could bring a more
scientific foundation into this field. From a practical operation and control
point of view the availability of analytical solutions will be valuable for
designing practical online model based control strategies. The pilot scale
crystallization facilities at LSU, operated using industrial control systems
will provide the environment to showcase the results. Although the focus in this
project will be on cooling/antisolvent crystallization, the results are generic
and could be used for other applications involving particle processes and
particle size distribution characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of
Research and Education: The mathematical/experimental approach, which forms the
core of this research, will contribute to training chemical engineering
undergraduate and graduate students in the area of mathematical modeling and
optimization, thus broadening their knowledge base and better preparing them to
tackle real life problems in areas other than traditional process design and
operation. The simulations to be developed for the crystallization process
operations will be used in class settings. The LSU curriculum already
incorporates as part of the Unit Operation Laboratory a section on
crystallization. The PI plans to couple the simulations with the experimental
work by involving these topics in existing undergraduate courses as class
exercises or small projects and then perform validations in the Unit Operations
Laboratory through a vertical integration of the topics through a continuing
project throughout the semester. It is expected that the results of this project
will have immediate effect on undergraduate education and will be used to
improve the proficiency of undergraduate students in areas that are not
traditionally included in chemical engineering curricula.