* 1132585
* RET Site: Research Experiences for Teachers in Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2014
* Murali Varanasi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2014
* USD 499,932.00

This award provides funding for a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
Site focused on Sensor Networks at the University of North Texas. Each year 12
K-12 teachers from school districts in North Texas will participate in research
projects at the university. The teachers will also develop modules related to
their research which they will implement in their classes in the following
school year. The teachers will organize Family Run Tech Fests to share their
work with the communities around their schools. Through participation in the RET
Site the teachers will have an enhanced knowledge base in engineering and
computer science and the skills to translate this into their classroom
practices, thus impacting their students and motivating them towards science,
technology, computing, and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of
this project revolves around the expertise of the research team and outstanding
research environment in which the teachers will work. The project is built
around a prior pilot project and thus can benefit from lessons learned during
the pilot. The project takes advantage of an excellent network of partner
schools developed through the research and outreach of the project faculty. The
research projects are compelling and are in areas of national interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this project
include substantial impact on the area schools and dissemination to a broad
community. Teachers will incorporate new computing and engineering topics into
their classes and develop hands-on ways to impart these topics to secondary
students. The teachers will also engage in public outreach to convey the
concepts and appreciation of computer science and engineering to the public.
Through this project, a long-term relationship between the university and the
schools will be forged and cemented. A permanent video and audio link between
the university and schools will be established thus enabling the partners to
work together to build a foundation of outstanding computing and engineering at
their partner schools and in the region.