* 1132687
* U.S.-Mexico Planning Workshop:  International Collaboration to Advance Sustainability Science in the U.S. and Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* George Basile, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 09/30/2014
* USD 59,893.00

In this international planning workshop, researchers from the U.S. and Mexico
will catalyze a new research collaboration based in sustainability science
between Arizona State University (ASU) and the National Autonomous University of
Mexico (UNAM). This new collaboration will be initiated through a plenary
planning session hosted by UNAM and attended by 30 scientists from both
institutions, who will develop a conceptual framework that will serve as the
common basis for research proposals to NSF and regional funding agencies. Key
policy decision-makers in Mexico will be consulted to define the focal problem
domains of the studies. The research that emerges from this collaboration is
expected to be innovative in terms of the ideas and concepts brought to bear on
specific resource management problems that now appear intractable, and
transformative in the structure and process of the cross-border collaboration as
well as in the intended impacts on decision-outcomes and planning. A replicable
structure and approach is expected to be provided as an example for other
research initiatives around the globe. The interdependency of Mexican and US
futures adds additional salience to this endeavor. The ASU researchers will
interface primarily with UNAM counterparts in the Institute of Ecology, whose
Director is Dr. Dominguez PÃ©rez-Tejada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded
activities will result in a research agenda formulated together with key
stakeholders from outside the academic community who have a strong interest in
the projects' results. The primary benefit is the establishment of a research
partnership addressing complex sustainability problems. The project will not
only contribute new scientific insights, but also enable the formulation of new
decision support tools that will aid managers and policy makers at both local
and national levels. The initiative will involve early career scholars in both
US and Mexico and will enable them to establish themselves within a cutting-edge
international research agenda and intellectual network. Arizona State University
is well placed geographically and institutionally to support this endeavor. By
coordinating this collaboration with an ongoing grant in sustainability science
curriculum and education from US AID, graduate students from both institutions
will be involved in the development of the research agenda and leverage
complementary pedagogical work in sustainability science education. Involvement
of junior researchers in international research is a major goal of OISE.