* 1132566
* Inorganic Carbon Measurements on the 2010/2011 North Atlantic GEOTRACES Cruise
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,576.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) is being made to a research team
at the Bermuda Institute for Ocean Sciences (BIOS) in response to an urgent need
for seawater inorganic carbon measurements for the US GEOTRACES Zonal North
Atlantic Survey Section. An initial cruise was aborted in late 2010 because of
serious mechanical failure in the research vessel; the remainder of the North
Atlantic study has been rescheduled for completion with a resumption of the
cruise in October 2011. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with other
GEOTRACES colleagues at the University of Miami, the effort of the BIOS team
will be focused on collecting samples for dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) and
total alkalinity (TA), laboratory analyses of these samples, and subsequent
entrainment/merging of these datasets into the U.S. GEOTRACES Zonal North
Atlantic Survey Section core hydrography/bottle dataset for distribution to the
project investigators and the broader scientific community. In total, 600
samples will be collected for this cruise with 300 samples being analyzed at
BIOS and 300 samples analyzed at RSMAS. Approximately 200 samples were collected
on the aborted 2010 cruise, and once returned to respective labs will be
analyzed for DIC and TA. Additional samples will be collected on the resumed
2011 GEOTRACES cruises with samples analyzed in respective labs, and the entire
dataset undergoing standard QC/QA protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. It is widely agreed that the ocean biogeochemical research community
needs a global view of the key and ancillary GEOTRACES properties. The major
impact of this project will be its contribution to the U.S. GEOTRACES Zonal
North Atlantic Survey Section through measurements of inorganic carbon. This
contributes broadly to improved understanding of the inorganic carbon cycle in
the North Atlantic Ocean. Although no graduate student is supported, this award
will support improved skills of two research technicians, and data will be
incorporated into a teaching module about the ocean carbon cycle for the Nippon
Foundation-POGO centre of excellence at BIOS.