* 1132790
* RIG/CAA: The Chimaera's Beak: the Mechanics and Performance Consequences of an Ancient Feeding Mechanism
* BIO,IOS
* 02/02/2011,06/30/2012
* Lara Ferry, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 06/30/2012
* USD 6,840.00

PI: Lara A. Ferry-Graham &lt;br/&gt;Award No.: IOS-0641286
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chimaera's beak: &lt;br/&gt;the mechanics and
performance consequences of an ancient feeding
mechanism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because animals must catch and handle prey,
traits associated with feeding are important, and expected to evolve through
natural selection. The evolution of feeding traits is thought to be responsible
for facilitating the evolution vertebrates, especially fishes and their
relatives. Biting/crushing and ram/suction are two suites of fundamentally
different, yet equally prominent feeding behaviors in these animals. Studies of
actinopterygians and elasmobranchs, two major and well-studied groups of aquatic
vertebrates, suggest that species specialized in ram or suction have flexible.
producible jaws, and stealthy attack behaviors. Species that are specialized for
biting or crushing tend to have enlarged muscles, reinforced skeletons, and
robust teeth. However, these trends have been inferred without considering a
third group of aquatic vertebrates, the Chimaeroidei. These are an ancient group
of fishes that have dealt with the problem of biting and crushing by evolving
beak-like tooth plates and an upper jaw secondarily fused to the neurocranium -
traits consistent with those seen in other aquatic vertebrates. It has been
suggested that the most recently evolved members of the chimaeroids are suction
feeders, yet these animals retain the morphology of their biting/crushing
ancestors. This study will experimentally investigate the performance and
function of feeding mechanisms in this third group of aquatic vertebrates. As
there is substantial information on the other two major groups of aquatic
vertebrates, this study will provide pivotal information regarding the origin
and evolution of the vertebrate feeding mechanism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work integrates Biology and Engineering principles, and will be conducted at a
minority serving institution. It will include the training of both undergraduate
and graduate students in research, many of whom will be from groups
underrepresented in Biology. Students will be trained in state-of-the-art
techniques for assessing morphology and performance, as well as the integration
of Biology and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;