* 1132020
* Frontiers of Electron Microscopy in Materials Science 2011 (FEMMS 2011; Sonoma, CA; September 18 - 23, 2011
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Masashi Watanabe, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 08/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The 13th conference on Frontiers of Electron Microscopy in
Materials Science (FEMMS) 2011, will be held in Sonoma, CA, September 18 to 23.
FEMMS is a biennial meeting focused on the most recent developments in the use
of electron microscopy (primarily TEM) for materials science. This year's
meeting is timely given the recent revolution in the development of aberration
correctors and the increasing interest in the use of in-situ and ultrafast TEM
methods. In this year's conference 46 speakers have been invited to discuss
topics that include high resolution imaging and spectroscopy, ultrafast and in-
situ microscopy, 3-D imaging techniques and various microscopy applications in
nanoscience, including materials interfaces/defects and organic materials in
bioengineering. The conference also features a distinguished lecturer, Professor
Archie Howie, who has been selected for his long outstanding and exceptional
contributions to the field of electron microscopy.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The conference is typically attended by about 100
participants. Details about the location, organization and history of the FEMMS
conference can be found on the conference website: http://femms2011.llnl.gov/.
The proceedings of this year's conference will be published in Ultramicroscopy
and Microscopy and Microanalysis (depending on the content). Publication of the
proceedings provides not only benefits to the conference attendees, including
graduate students, but also provides opportunities for others who cannot
participate in the conference. NSF support for this conference will be used to
cover the registration and accommodation support for 10 graduate students. A
main goal of the NSF proposal is to provide support for underrepresented
graduate students (women and minorities) to learn about the latest capabilities
in electron microscopy and to establish contacts and possible collaborations
with leaders in the field.