* 1132791
* Evolutionary Genomics Collaborative: Origins, evolution and structure of viral and cellular proteomes
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Gustavo Caetano-Anolles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,721.00

Understanding the history of life on Earth and the emergence and evolution of
biological function constitute fundamental challenges of biological research.
One major goal is to characterize the origin, evolution and structure of
complete repertoires of proteins (PROTEOMES) in the viral world and compare it
to the repertoires of the cellular world, mapping their function, and studying
how structure and function evolve along the branches of a truly universal TREE
OF LIFE (ToL). The current ToL depicts the branching history of inheritance
(phylogeny) of cellular lineages but does not incorporate the viral world. To
integrate viral and cellular knowledge at global level, we here request funding
to catalyze a 3-partner international collaboration between the University of
Illinois (UIUC), the Korean Bioinformation Center (KOBIC), and the Pasteur
Institute (Paris). This Evolutionary Genomics Collaborative (EGC) initiative
will involve visits of UIUC team members to Korea and France to seed
collaborative research and enhance educational opportunities for UIUC graduate
students and early career personnel. We will integrate research and education
through (i) mentoring experiences for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers that foster bioinformatics in the U.S. and abroad, (ii)
undergraduate research and mentoring experiences to U.S. students, (iii)
bioinformatics outreach programs, and (iv) research experiences in
bioinformatics for Middle School teachers to enhance STEM in the classroom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Synthesis is an essential component of
scientific inquiry. Here we use molecular survey, history reconstruction, and
computational analysis to integrate research related to evolution of the modern
macromolecular world and of life. The direct linking of structure and function
in macromolecules provides manifold benefits, both basic and applied, and is key
to our understanding of cellular functions and how these evolve. For example,
metabolism is responsible for the energetic demands of biological complexity,
yet we know little of how it originated or evolved. The project broadens
educational opportunities by exposing postdoctoral researchers, graduate
students, undergraduates, and schoolteachers to international frontier research
in evolutionary genomics and systems biology. Research will also impact the
community through scientific meetings and conferences, public workshops, and
other activities.