* 1132651
* GSE/RES: Peer Matters: When and how do peers influence young women's participation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)?
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Nilanjana Dasgupta, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2015
* USD 524,579.00

Intellectual Merit: The University of Massachusetts proposes a study using a
Stereotype Inoculation Model which proposes that students' interest in STEM is,
at best, a constrained choice heavily influenced by the environments in which
these disciplines are learned, particularly the socializing agents in them
(e.g., peers, teachers). This model predicts that increased contact with same-
sex individuals in STEM environments is critical to inoculate young women's
academic self-concept against stereotype threat and to increase interest in STEM
pursuits. The project will shed light on the role of peers by investigating
whether variations in the gender composition of peers in STEM settings
differentially affect women's attitudes toward STEM, identification with it,
self-efficacy, performance, and career aspirations; and identifying underlying
processes that mediate the predicted effects. This project bridges the divide
between "basic" (process-oriented) and "applied" (problem-oriented) research by
seeking converging evidence from controlled lab experiments and naturalistic
field studies to tackle an important social problem and by testing processes
that might ameliorate it.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The symbiotic
relationships among research, education, teaching, and practice are at the heart
of this proposal. Underrepresented students in STEM will inform the research
process and emerging findings will be used to educate research and practitioner
communities in K-12 schools, colleges, universities, and national organizations
through presentations and workshops. The emerging data will be used to develop
concrete interventions that may be field-tested in future work.