* 1132682
* RET SITE: Milwaukee Regional Energy Education Initiative
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ilya Avdeev, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2015
* USD 374,601.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) entitled, RET SITE: Milwaukee
Regional Energy Education Initiative (MREEI), under the direction of Dr. David
C. Yu. The rationale for the MREEI RET site is to train secondary teachers
through fundamental energy-related research and translational activities that
are tied to industry, and then leverage curricular approaches that allow them to
directly transition this knowledge into highly inspirational STEM experiences
for their students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three engineering colleges in
Milwaukee-the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Marquette University, and the
Milwaukee School of Engineering-are partnering with regional industry and the
Milwaukee Public School (MPS) system, to develop a collaborative RET Site
focusing on the theme of energy. MREEI will annually engage 10 local mathematics
and science high school teachers for six summer weeks in hands-on, cutting edge
engineering research projects in energy-related fields. Energy was specifically
chosen for the theme because it is a current topic of direct interest to
students and teachers, it can be easily embedded into the high school science
curriculum, and it is a core area of research for the three participating
engineering schools and regional industry. Potential research topics for the RET
participants include renewable and alternative energy, nano-scale sensor
development, advanced materials, wind turbine blade design, and carbon capture
and sequestration. As part of their scientific research projects, the teachers
will be linked with real-world applications through collaborations with industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MREEI will impact 30 teachers and 4500 students
from high-need urban public high schools in the city of Milwaukee. More
importantly, this proposal and its activities directly align with Milwaukee
Public School systems new vision for science and mathematics and its
Comprehensive Math and Science Plan (CMSP) which will be implemented during the
2011 academic year.