* 1132393
* Imagining the Future of Learning: Systems, People, and Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Sherry Hsi, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Kolodner
* 07/31/2012
* USD 284,425.00

Realizing the power of CyberLearning to transform education will require vision,
strategy, and an engaged, talented community. Activities are needed to energize
the community, refine and sharpen the path forward, and provide a more active
and ongoing forum for clarifying the big ideas and challenging questions. In
response to this need, SRI International, together with the Lawrence Hall of
Science and with key support from the National Geographic Society, will organize
a set of activities to advance a shared vision of the future of learning,
encompassing the systems, people, and technology dimensions mutually necessary
for any scalable and lasting advances in education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
innovative format for these activities is inspired by the TED talks, Wikipedia,
and social networking. As in TED, a small set of leading researchers will be
selected to give very short, very high quality, stimulating talks. These
CyberLearning Talks will be featured at a 1-day summit meeting in Washington,
DC, streamed so that local cyberlearning research communities may participate at
a distance, and posted on a website. As in Wikipedia, CyberLearning Pages will
be created, each page featuring a synopsis of a big idea in CyberLearning and
the relevant research challenges. The 1-day conference will be followed by a
small 1-day workshop focusing on how to evaluate cyberlearning efforts, identify
progress, and identify important new directions. Finally, to disseminate and
stimulate conversation about both the video talks and Wikipedia entries, a
presence for the community will be created on social networking
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target outcomes of the effort will be (i) a
cyberlearning research community with participants from across the many current
constituent communities, and fostered awareness and appreciation of the broad
range of expertise and interests across that wider community; (ii) foundations
for sustained discussion of big ideas, insights, and challenges to help this new
community define a more engaged, crisper vision of its own future, (iii) a
community resource that can become a site for interconnecting stakeholders in
the CyberLearning community and supporting investigators in improving field-
generated proposals, and (iv) an emerging sense of direction for CyberLearning
among a wider audience of leaders. Such community building and awareness is
expected to foster collaborations that will lead to innovative and research-
grounded ways of using technology to transform education -- formal and informal
and across a lifetime.