* 1132297
* Conference title: "SZXHuntsville 2011: Cosmology with X-ray and Sunyaev-Zel'dovich Effect Observations of galaxy clusters"
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Massimiliano Bonamente, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 01/31/2012
* USD 20,555.00

Understanding the origin of the Universe, cosmology, is one of humankind's
fundamental endeavors. Close study of clusters of galaxies remains a critical
element in this pursuit. The aim of this conference is for the first time to
gather scientists worldwide for the study of cosmology with X-ray, Suyaev-
Zel'dovich Effect (SZE) and associated astronomical observations of
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One important feature of clusters of galaxies is
the huge volume and mass of hot gas that permeates the space between member
galaxies. This hot gas is visible in X-rays and is substantial enough that it
causes the light remaining from the birth of the Universe---known as the Cosmic
Microwave Background (CMB)---to shift ever so slightly toward the blue end of
the light spectrum. This slight shift of the CMB is detectable and can be used
to locate large clusters of galaxies over a wide range of distances and to
measure important cosmological parameters that describe and characterize the
origin of the Universe. This conference will bring together many American and
international scientists involved in current X-ray and SZE experiments to
discuss current progress, the latest results, and the many remaining puzzles.
The unique aspect of this conference is to facilitate interactions of scientists
focused on different observational approaches (i.e., X-ray, SZE, others) so that
the community will gain greater insight by combining the knowledge base of these
different approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed four-day conference is
structured as a workshop to allow ample time for substantial discussions
following each talk and each session. A key objective is to involve students and
recent graduates. NSF, which is funding about 25% of the total estimated cost of
the conference, will be primarily supporting the modest travel expenses of 30
students and recent graduates to attend the conference. The organizers are
committing substantial effort to recruit speakers, participants, and students
from groups underrepresented in the sciences. The organizers will also produce a
volume of the proceedings, including all oral and poster presentations. Holding
this conference in the United States will benefit many US students and
scientists who would otherwise be unable to attend a similar or related
conference overseas. Finally, the proposed effort should have a substantial
impact on the training of young STEM researchers and to connect them with
international collaborators---supporting the two NSF Strategic Goals that
follow: To prepare and engage a diverse STEM workforce motivated to participate
at the frontiers. To keep the United States globally competitive at the
frontiers of knowledge by increasing international partnerships and
collaborations.