* 1132167
* Workshop: Simulation in Complex Service Systems; Montreal, Canada; July 18-20, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Shane Henderson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 04/30/2012
* USD 22,600.00

The objectives of this workshop are to identify and study the key difficulties
and set an agenda for advanced research in the mathematical modeling and
simulation of complex service systems that involve uncertainty. This includes
health-care systems, emergency systems (ambulances, police, fire fighting,
natural disasters, etc.), logistic and delivery systems, transportation systems,
telephone call centers, communication networks, and so on. The aim is to develop
appropriate mathematical models that account for the uncertainty in these
systems, develop simulation tools based on those models, and develop algorithms
and software to optimize or improve the design and management of those systems
using simulation.

Large and complex service systems have enormous importance for the well-being of
our communities. Yet the design and management of those systems is a very
difficult talk, mainly because of their high complexity and the large amount of
uncertainty that they involve. Stochastic models and computer-based simulation
are appropriate tools for this task, but developing sufficiently realistic and
reliable models is still at the research stage. The workshop will serve to
identify the most important and relevant research issues for the modeling,
simulation, and management of service systems. It will expose researchers and
students to multiple perspectives on complex systems in a range of application
areas, foster exchanges of expertise and new research collaborations across
those areas, and set an agenda for future research. A special issue of a highly-
ranked scientific journal on stochastic simulation will be devoted to selected
contributions from this workshop. Presentations will also be made available on
the internet after the workshop.