* 1132515
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Atlantic Section: Mercury Speciation Along a Zonal Section in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2011,11/30/2012
* Carl Lamborg, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2012
* USD 2,527.00

The U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic zonal section cruise was scheduled for 15
October through 5 December 2010. Because of a major irresolvable mechanical
failure of the ship's propulsion system, the expedition had to be terminated in
the Cape Verde Islands on 4 November after completing about one third of the
planned track. This required on-the-spot changes in return travel for all sea-
going investigators as well as in shipping arrangements for all their samples
and equipment. The funds requested in this proposal address the PIs need to
cover salary, travel, shipping, and supplies associated with their participation
in the continuation of the North Atlantic section cruise scheduled for autumn
2011. The scientist from Wright State College requests one month of summer
salary to prepare and participate in the cruise. Travel funds will ensure the
scientists can return to their home institutions at the end of the cruise and
shipping costs will get the equipment and supplies to the ship and back to their
institutions, as well as demobilize the ship once it returns to port. Given that
some of the supplies needed to carry out mercury analysis are time sensitive and
expire, funds are needed to replace some of the supplies for the second leg of
the cruise. The proposed mercury measurements planned for this cruise would
significantly further our understanding of how this element cycles in the ocean
and bioaccumulates in fish.