* 1132377
* Workshop: How Molecules Come to Life: Biophysics Vision 2016 on April 28-29, 2011 in Arlington, VA
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Taekjip Ha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2012
* USD 37,869.00

This award is in support of a two-day meeting entitled "How Molecules Come to
Life: Biophysics Vision 2016" to be held in the Westin Arlington Gateway,
Arlington, Virginia, April 28-29, 2011. This meeting will convene about 20
speakers that represent new emerging areas of biophysics research, and will be
attended by NSF personnel, including program directors. The goal of physics is
to explain the world around us using a set of guiding principles that are
quantitative, simple and universal all at the same time. One of the great
challenges for physics in this new millennium is to achieve this goal with
regards to the world of living systems. The goal of the meeting is to address
the creation of a quantitative narrative for the living organism, and to attempt
to apply simple physical principles towards the understanding of living systems.
This meeting will bring together scientists to present their views on where the
physics of living cells stands and where it can go in the coming years. The
format of the meeting is designed to provide attendees with ample opportunities
to actively participate in the scientific discourse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Workshop represents a unique vehicle to
promote the development of new technologies and the dissemination of emerging
technologies with novel applications to important biological problems. The
members of the workshop represent diverse scientists at different stages of
their careers, from both academia and industry, from both the life and physical
sciences. At least 25% of the members are women. Part of the discussion of this
workshop will be to explore how best to educate a new generation of scientists
to think about how molecules come to life. An understanding of the fundamental
relationships between living and non-living systems is critical to an
understanding of the life sciences and their impact on the world around
us.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is jointly supported by the Biomolecular
Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Physics
of Living Systems Program in the Physics Division in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.