* 1132567
* EAGER: Identification of Diagnostic Markers of Diapause Preparation in the Copepod Calanus Finmarchicus
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Ann Tarrant, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2015
* USD 299,128.00

Oceanic copepods in the family Calanidae, such as Calanus finmarchicus, are
among the most abundant animals on the planet, and they serve a key role in
marine food webs by transferring energy from phytoplankton to higher trophic
levels. The life history of these copepods has been well-studied, but
fundamental questions remain about the regulation of an important period of
dormancy called diapause. In the last juvenile stage of development, C.
finmarchicus either proceed to the terminal molt (i.e., molt into adults) or
vertically migrate to depth and initiate diapause. This divergence in
developmental pathways has critical implications for C. finmarchicus population
dynamics, but is difficult to study experimentally because C. finmarchicus, like
all other copepods in the family Calanidae, do not reliably enter diapause in
the laboratory. In addition, most temperate populations of calanoid copepods
have multiple generations in a single year with variability in the timing of
reproduction and development that causes significant heterogeneity in age
structure. Thus, field sampling of these heterogeneous populations yields a
mixture of copepods that are preparing for diapause, are preparing for the
terminal molt, or are not yet preparing for either fate. Studies of diapause
preparation in such populations are extremely difficult.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
enable direct investigation of the factors that influence diapause initiation,
we require markers that reliably predict the fate of individual copepods (entry
into diapause or continued maturation to adulthood) within heterogeneous
populations. Fortunately, the fjord population of C. finmarchicus off the coast
of Norway during the late spring is remarkably synchronous and is comprised of
juvenile copepods that are all destined to undergo diapause. This project will
use high-throughput 454 pyrosequencing to identify genes that change in
expression as these copepods progress toward diapause. In collaboration with
Norwegian researchers, the investigators will also rear copepods in a unique
continuous culture and conduct additional transcriptional profiling to identify
genes that change in expression as copepods prepare for the terminal molt.
Comparison of gene expression patterns in the wild and cultured populations will
enable the principal investigators to develop robust markers of diapauses
preparation that can be used to study diapause initiation in more heterogeneous
temperate populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Despite decades
of research, we are still ignorant of the processes that trigger diapause and
are therefore unable to model the population dynamics of calanoid copepods for
even a single generation. This is a long-standing and well-known gap in our
understanding of marine ecosystems, and progress on this research problem could
be transformative. By developing molecular markers to identify preparation for
diapause, the investigators seek to enable novel physiological and ecological
research that will ultimately identify both intrinsic and extrinsic factors that
control entry into diapause. Their approach is based on an assumption that gene
expression patterns in wild populations are sufficiently consistent to be used
as a reliable indicator of diapause preparation. This fundamental assumption has
yet to be tested; thus, this work is risky but with potentially high reward and
suitable for an EAGER project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will enable a highly complementary new collaboration between US and
Norwegian researchers and the training of undergraduate and graduate students.
The results will be communicated to broad audiences through social media.
Development and application of biomarkers of diapause preparation will
ultimately allow modelers to parameterize diapause and improve the ability of
ecosystem models to forecast changes associated with human impacts to oceans and
climate change