* 1132174
* Collaborative Research:  Measurements of Yield Strength and Local Viscoelastic Properties Using Nanoparticle Embedment Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Hongbing Lu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 118,933.00

The proposed work expands a novel nanosphere embedment experiment to the measure
of the yield behavior of surfaces. The method also promises a novel, high
spatial resolution method to map the surface mechanical/viscoelastic properties
of polymeric and composite materials. The work builds on CMMI supported work in
which it was found that nanoparticles smaller than a certain size sink into the
surface and become fully engulfed by the polymer. Analysis suggests that the
nanoparticles are fully engulfed only when the yield strength of the polymer
surface is exceeded, which opens a route to measure the surface yield strength,
as well as other properties at depths on the order of 20 nm. If successful, it
will also lead to a technique to provide a surface property map of mechanical,
including modulus, yield strength, and viscoelastic properties of polymer
surfaces using embedment of a monolayer of clustered nanoparticles. The work
also involves numerical analysis of the embedment process to include appropriate
elastic-plastic, viscoplastic or viscoelastic constitutive models to extract
nonlinear material properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By its interdisciplinary
nature, the project provides a rare training opportunity for students in both
chemical engineering and mechanical engineering to step into research in the
thermo-mechanical behavior of polymers at the nanoscale. In addition, it is a
collaborative project in which the graduate students will have the opportunity
to interact with students from another institution and work with them. Part of
the work in this project will be divided into smaller projects for use in term
projects in courses such as viscoelasticity and polymer physics offered by the
PIs in this project. All significant results will be published in journals to
disseminate the findings. It is anticipated that the graduate students working
on the project will present their findings at national/international
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;