* 1132220
* GOALI: Thermal Properties of Nanocluster Suspensions: Engineering Nanofluids Through Colloidal Science and Multiscale Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Tapan Desai, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2015
* USD 310,692.00

CBET 1132220&lt;br/&gt;Matsoukas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI
Proposal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adding small amounts of nanoparticles to thermal
fluids is known to increase the thermal conductivity of the liquid
substantially. Enhancements of the order of 30% to 40% can be achieved with as
little particulate content as 10% by volume. The potential benefits of such
enhancement are substantial: smaller size of heat transfer equipment, faster
rate of heat exchange, and overall higher efficiency of energy utilization.
Nanoparticle suspensions, more commonly referred to as nanofluids, have the
potential to produce energy savings of several trillion BTU per year in the
electric power industry, with a corresponding reduction of emissions in carbon
dioxide, nitrogen and sulfur oxides. The ideal nanofluid should exhibit maximum
heat transfer properties with minimal increase in viscosity and maximum
stability of performance over repeated cycles of operation under shear and
temperature swings. At present, there is no established theory by which such
optimization can be attempted. If the presence of clusters is in fact
beneficial, as it is has been suggested, it is not known how their size,
structure, or volume fraction affects their heat transfer rate or their flow
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will apply the tools of colloid
engineering and computational material science to produce and study stable
nanofluids with controlled degree of clustering. Nanoparticles will be surface
treated with molecules of varying chain length and ionic character to produce a
thin surface layer that protects particles against aggregation. The same
technique will be used to produce stable nanoclusters of well-defined size. The
formulated nanofluids will be used to test the prevailing theories for heat
enhancement and in particular, to determine whether chain-like clusters could in
fact enhance heat transfer by providing efficient pathways for the conduction of
heat. Multiscale simulations will employ molecular dynamics, for atomistic-level
detail, and dissipative particle dynamics, for mesoscale modeling, to study the
effect of clustering on heat transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader aim of
this research project is directed towards enhanced energy utilization through
the application of colloid science and state-of-the-art multiscale modeling with
the ultimate goal to formulate commercial nanofluids. The collaboration between
academia (Penn State) and industry (Advanced Cooling Technologies) will provide
the graduate and undergraduate students in this program with the opportunity to
contribute to research that is both fundamental and industrially relevant. The
interdisciplinary character of the proposed research and the integration of
science and technology, both at the experimental and computational levels, are
particularly suited for a presentation to a wider audience. The PIs will produce
a computer animation based on atomistic simulations, to demonstrate heat
transfer through nanoparticles nanocluster and serve a demonstration module for
elementary and middle-school students.