* 1132110
* 12th International Workshop on Modeling of Mantle Convection and Lithospheric Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Saswata Hier-Majumder, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 05/31/2012
* USD 26,650.00

This proposal requests for partial support for US-based scientists to travel to
the 12th International Workshop on Modeling of Mantle Convection and
Lithospheric Dynamics (IW12), in Gross Dolln, Germany, from August 20th to
August 25th, 2011. Approximately 22 participants, including key note speakers
Mike Gurnis, Laurent Montesi, Barabara Romanowicz, and Shun Karato, are
anticipated to attend the conference from the US. The main objectives of the
Conference are (a) detailed discussions on scientific and technical aspects of
geodynamic modeling, and interaction with neighboring disciplines, (b)
introducing students and postdocs in an informal environment to the current
leading areas of geodynamic research and (c) Interdisciplinary and international
Collaboration. Invited keynote speeches will concentrate on a number areas
including the rheology and dynamics of the lithosphere, interaction between the
lithosphere and the asthenosphere, melt production and its effect on mantle
dynamics, chemical heterogeneity, convection and lithospheric dynamics in other
planets, early Earth dynamics, new numerical techniques, and
benchmarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geodynamic models answer fundamental questions
on the internal processes, thermal structure, and evolution of Earth and planets
using the principals of mechanics. Over the last half of the 20th century, there
has been a tremendous growth in collaborative research topics in geodynamics.
Coupled with exciting new discoveries in the areas of rock and mineral physics,
seismology, and geodesy, geodynamics has provided answers to some fundamental
questions in Earth and planetary sciences. This workshop provides an arena for
interaction among various sub disciplines of geodynamics as well as experts from
other fields providing the latest information on the developments. This is a
relatively focused, small scale conference that fosters collaboration between
scientists across geographical boundaries. For the early career participants,
this workshop will provide a unique opportunity to acquire new information, form
a cohort of early career scientists, encouraging future collaboration. The
informal set up of the conference and sessions involving in-depth discussion
with senior members of the community will also be beneficial for the graduate
student and post- doctoral participants.