* 1132670
* Berkeley Engineering Research Experiences for In-Service and Pre-Service Teachers: RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* George Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2016
* USD 499,479.00

This award provides funding for a three year continuing award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of California Berkeley entitled, "Berkeley Engineering
Research Experiences for In-Service and Pre-Service Teachers (BERET)", under the
direction of Dr. George C. Johnson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will focus
on the intersection between engineering, science, and mathematics through the
interdisciplinary lens of synthetic biology. This program will place a total of
52 middle and high school STEM teachers (26 in-service teachers from the
Berkeley Unified School District and the Oakland Unified School District and 26
UC Berkeley pre-service teachers enrolled in Cal Teach) within a variety of
engineering-related research laboratories associated with UC Berkeley and will
guide them to develop curricula based on their research that is relevant to the
subjects that they teach in school and aligned with the educational standards
for the subject addressed. BERET will be run jointly by the Cal Teach science
and mathematics teacher education program and the NSF Synthetic Biology
Engineering Research Center (SynBERC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BERET will increase
the understanding of math, science and engineering concepts, skills and careers
for K-12 students in high need urban schools, and in so doing, contribute to
increasing the number of women and under-represented minority students in the
STEM pipeline, particularly in engineering fields. The rigorous K-12 curricula
developed through BERET will be reviewed, tested and disseminated broadly
through web-based resources such as the Industry Initiatives for Science and
Math Education (IISME) Community website and the TeachEngineering digital
library. The program will also help to build a vibrant network of in-service
teachers, pre-service teachers, and faculty, postdoctoral, and graduate student
researchers that will produce long-term collaborative partnerships among
individuals and institutions.