* 1132173
* Conference:   A walk on the wild side: a conference on IACUC oversight of wildlife research. Albuquerque, NM,  Oct 26-28th
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Robert Sikes, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Use of vertebrate animals in research and education in the United States is
regulated such that institutions receiving federal funds must maintain a Letter
of Assurance regarding compliance with these regulations. Oversight of animal
use when research involves wild and free-ranging native species, however, often
leads to lively debate among IACUC members and others as well because the animal
welfare act and its implementing regulations were written primarily for
application to captive animals used in the biomedical arena. Available
guidelines, reference materials and examples, including the Guidelines to the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the Institute of Laboratory
Animal Research (ILAR) of the National Research Council and the American
Veterinary Medical Association?s Guidelines for Euthanasia, give only scant
coverage to wildlife and consideration of the settings in which field research
is conducted. This conference aims to foster dialogue and education among
researchers, IACUC members, and government officials responsible for oversight
of animal research. These discussions will lead to more meaningful and
appropriate application of animal welfare laws in the context of wildlife
research and, in turn, to improved care and use of wild animals in wildlife
research. These outcomes strike at a central tenet of every study that uses
animals?a respect for the animals used in research and a desire to treat them
ethically and humanely. The conference will convene speakers and participants
from the various sectors that interact in the animal welfare arena: wildlife
biologists, IACUC members, veterinarians, government officials from relevant
agencies (primarily the Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare of the National
Institutes of Health and the USDA APHIS Animal Care program), and key private
organizations such as AAALAC International, PRIM&amp;R, and the Scientists
Center for Animal Welfare.