* 1132351
* Fourth International Workshop on Iron and Copper Homeostasis, Pucon, Chile, November 28 - December 3, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Michael Garrick, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 08/31/2012
* USD 18,170.00

1132351, Garrick

The Fourth International Workshop on Iron and Copper Homeostasis (4IWICH) will
be held in Pucón, Chile 28 November - 3 December. As "Fourth" implies, it is the
latest in a highly successful series, all held in Chile. The workshop brings
together researchers who study iron or copper metabolism or both. Bringing
selected members of the first two communities together helps to increase
membership in the community that appreciates, understands and actively
investigates the overlap between these areas of research. This overlap occurs in
multiple ways, some first announced / explored at an IWICH. For examples,
presentations and discussions have covered how divalent metal transporter (DMT1,
aka SLC11A2, Nramp2, DCT1) transports both metals and considered whether ferrous
or ferric (answer ferrous) ions are the substrate or similarly whether cuprous
or cupric (answer still debated) ions are transported. Also 3IWICH was where a
young American investigator first announced that Menkes Copper Atpase (Atp7a)
transcript was elevated in iron deficient rats? intestinal cells establishing a
new link between the two metals. Participation of Cu in the activity of
ceruloplasmin and hephaestin (multi-copper ferroxidases) also serves as a topic
of presentations and discussions at IWICHs. Increasingly roles of the two metals
in neurodegenerative disorders are features of the workshop while other links
novel and known have been topics at each of the first three IWICHs as well as
well as at TEMA (Trace Elements for Man and Animals) 13, an international
meeting that intervened after the 3rd workshop and essentially served to
postpone the need for the 4th workshop. The international workshops clearly
demonstrate the intellectual merit of having such assemblies as does the
publication of two special issues of journals (BioMetals and Biological
Research) covering the proceedings. Multiple international collaborations have
also developed from the formal and informal interactions. Attending one of these
conferences has been an important stimulus that attracted multiple young
investigators particularly from Chile but also from Asia, Australia, Brazil,
Canada, Europe and the USA into research in iron and copper homeostasis. Like 2
of the meetings before it, the 4th workshop will be held at the Gran Hotel in
Pucón, Chile, a facility that has full provisions for disabled guests. The host
country also has a strong motive for research into copper toxicity because the
Andes, the geological backbone of Chile, not only provide a strong economic
basis for Chile by being a great source of copper, but also lead to
contamination of nearly all fresh water sources with substantial levels of
copper. Chile needs to know the long term effects of these exposures. Given that
this workshop has already established itself to fit descriptives like strong
intellectual impact, promoting international collaborations and having a broad
impact on basic research, medical research and environmental studies, one may
wonder why there is a need for NSF support. The answer is that the workshop will
independently attract from the USA some senior investigators who will use their
own research grants or other resources to support their coming, but younger
investigators must have travel support in order to attend. The First and Second
IWICHs had adequate support from various US grant agencies, but US support
declined for the next meeting. The organizers focused their limited resources on
bringing some young American scientists to Chile and propose now that the NSF
help in this critical function of keeping the newer investigators involved in
(and one hopes helping to lead) this field. Particular attention also needs to
be paid to how it fits with Biomedical Engineering. Issues like the potential
effects of high levels of Cu in the water supply, the meeting?s continuing focus
on the roles of Fe, Cu and Mn in neurodegeneration are among the answers.
Prevention and treatment through interventions involving metal ions as well as
their roles in mitochondria, the suppliers of most cellular energy for cellular
movements and function, as critical loci for steps in iron and copper metabolism
that are only recently yielding to the new molecular and genomic approaches
place 4IWICH on target for bridging basic, medical and environmental sciences as
applied to metal ion homeostasis and thus as fitting BME?s themes of neural
engineering and cellular biomechanics.