* 1132240
* CAREER: Theory and Practices of Flapping Flight: From Biological to Robotic Insects
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Xinyan Deng, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 12/31/2011
* USD 121,395.00

Abstract

This research encompasses novel attempts in several research topics on flapping
flight in insects and birds. The goal of this research is to a) quantitatively
study the flight trajectory feasibility and stability observed in insects and
birds; b) investigate the underlying principles that cause their flight
stability and performance differences in order to develop a methodology and
guideline for designing flapping wing micro-aerial vehicles; and c) design and
fabricate flapping wing micro-aerial vehicles capable of stable and maneuverable
flight with biomimetic sensors. Our previous study on the theory of nonlinear
systems including harmonic balance and bifurcation methods will be utilized to
conduct theoretical and mathematical modeling of flapping flight. We will verify
our analysis using the free-flight measurements on the fruit fly and the
experimental data from the current generation of fabricated Micromechanical
Flying Insects (MFIs). Based on our analysis, we will develop guidelines to aid
the design and fabrication of future MFIs and flapping wing micro-aerial vehicle
in general, with the capability to ensure the flight feasibility and stability
of the vehicle.

The theories developed from this research will provide new understanding of the
inherent flight stability and maneuverability present in insects and birds, and
hopefully will lead to developing a new theory describing the underlying
principles of the different flight phenomena observed in nature.

The educational activities include incorporating research materials into
graduate and undergraduate curricula, and the developed research and educational
activities will be outreached to the K-12 students and teachers as well as
underrepresented and women groups in Delaware through the University of
Delaware's Design and Discovery summer camp for girls. Another broader impact of
this program will be to create an Internet-based flapping flight gait simulator
accessible to students and researchers to simulate and visualize realistic
flight patterns of different insects and birds, given their morphological data.