* 1132648
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: Research to Inspire Students about Engineering (RISE) through Inquiry
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Karen Graham, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2017
* USD 449,999.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of New Hampshire (UNH) entitled, "RET in Engineering
and Computer Science Site: Research to Inspire Students about Engineering (RISE)
through Inquiry", under the direction of Dr. Brad
Kinsey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objectives of this program are to
strengthen STEM learning and motivation and to promote engineering by:
&lt;br/&gt; -Providing pre- and in-service middle and high school teacher-
leaders with an intensive summer research experience in an engineering
field.&lt;br/&gt; -Creating a community of educators, including teacher-leaders,
faculty members, and university students, with research experience and teaching
knowledge to assist one another as they develop and implement inquiry-based
engineering activities.&lt;br/&gt; -Providing access to equipment and materials
for inquiry-based learning modules through the established UNH Advancing Science
Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these objectives RISE will create
an effective and sustainable infrastructure to support RET opportunities at UNH
for teachers throughout New Hampshire. During each summer of the project a
cohort of twelve in-service and five pre-service teachers will participate in a
seven week experience which will include orientation, intensive research, and
curriculum development. School year follow-up to support the integration of the
summer research experience and inquiry-based activities within the curriculum
will also be provided, both in person with classroom visits by RET faculty and
graduate/undergraduate students and through an electronic discussion board. The
UNH Leitzel Center, which is well known in the region for facilitating exemplary
teacher development activities, will provide the administrative structure for
all project activities. Inquiry was selected as the theme for this proposal due
to the expertise of the Leitzel Center in this area and the focus on inquiry
based learning at UNH. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of RISE include
the creation of a sustainable community of educators, including teachers and
faculty, to collaborate on developing and implementing inquiry-based activities
in classrooms. Participating UNH faculty and graduate students will experience
the teachers' perspectives in designing learning activities that engage a
variety of student learners. In addition, the inclusion of rural and urban
communities and women faculty members as mentors will attract underrepresented
individuals to engineering.