* 1132015
* Medium Node: Reducing Error in Computerized Survey Data Collection
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2018
* Allan McCutcheon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2018
* USD 3,446,353.00

Rising costs of survey data collection and researchers' growing concerns about
the quality of survey data necessitate the development of innovative approaches
to data collection. This research will focus on improving survey data collected
from computer-assisted methods. The project will include research related to
internet data collection and computer-assisted telephone interviews (CATI) data
collection systems, along with the variants of these computer-assisted data
collection systems. With an overall goal of improving the quality of data
derived from surveys, the research will focus on accomplishing three objectives.
First, the study will evaluate the use of four diagnostic tools for identifying
measurement errors in computer-assisted, interviewer-administered data
collection instruments, and it will use these findings to inform visual redesign
of common features of computer-assisted, interviewer-administered data
collection instruments. Second, the study will evaluate the use of
adaptive/responsive designs in which a dynamic modeling of collected data is
used to modify the questionnaire as the data are being collected. Third, the
study will evaluate the application of calendar- and time diary-based data
collection methods to aid in the accuracy of behavioral self-reports by
tailoring questions to the needs of individual respondents. The tasks under
these objectives will be integrative, allowing researchers to improve survey
designs/instruments and enhance data quality by reducing interviewer and
respondent burden. The interdisciplinary project team includes experts in
statistics, psychology, sociology, survey research and methodology, and computer
science. The team will leverage long-term collaborations and partner with
industry leaders -- Gallup and Abt SRBI -- as well as Census to accomplish its
goal and objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance scientific
knowledge in survey methodology and related fields. Reducing measurement errors
in survey data is critical to accurate inference from survey data, and
identifying new tools that minimize or reduce measurement errors in survey data
will improve conclusions made from surveys across fields. In addition to
advancing discovery and understanding in survey data collection, the project
will contribute significantly to the training of future survey research
professionals through implementation of an education plan designed to: (1)
recruit and retain a diverse methodologically-oriented student pool from related
social science and statistical disciplines; (2) integrate research into existing
and new curricula at UNL; (3) provide all participating students with hands-on
research opportunities; and (4) develop student researchers' professional
skills. The results will be broadly relevant and broadly disseminated at
multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary conferences and workshops, to the
federal statistical agencies, and to researchers in the survey industry. This
activity is supported by the NSF-Census Research Network funding opportunity.