* 1132267
* Ionospheric Disturbances Related to the Stratospheric Sudden Warmings
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Anthea Coster, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 205,490.00

The investigators will conduct a focused on the ionospheric effects of sudden
stratospheric warmings. This project will focus on comprehensive experimental
studies, using existing experimental data as well as new data from dedicated
experimental campaigns. The aim is to (1) improve understanding of the
relationship between sudden stratospheric warmings (SSW) and the variations in
the ionosphere/thermosphere system and (2) to characterize these
variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic coupling of the atmosphere-
ionosphere system is a complex interdisciplinary problem. Current thinking
suggests that the upward propagation of internal atmospheric waves (planetary
waves, tides, gravity waves) from the lower atmosphere is an important source of
energy and momentum for the thermosphere and embedded ionosphere. SSW is the
clearest and strongest manifestation of the coupling in the atmosphere-
ionosphere system. Recent studies suggest that a SSW couples all atmospheric
layers from the ground to the thermosphere and from the poles to the equator.
However, the mechanism of this coupling is only partly resolved. While the
processes in the lower and middle atmosphere are related to planetary wave
anomalies, the coupling to the upper layers and the roles of planetary waves,
tides and gravity waves, are less clear. This research will be based on a unique
combination of new measurements at the NSF Incoherent Scatter Radar facilities
and in-depth case studies of multiple ionospheric parameters over a large
altitude range. The results will illuminate the kind of variations can occur in
the ionosphere and thermosphere during large changes in stratospheric dynamics
and temperature. The focus on large dynamical events with strong vertical
coupling holds promise for discovering new sources and mechanisms of quiet-time
ionospheric and thermospheric variability. Understanding the roles played by
planetary waves and tides is a crucial step in understanding and predicting the
state of ionosphere and thermosphere. The study will foster collaboration
between international researchers, support a young scientist from an
underrepresented group, and involve several undergraduate students through MIT's
Undergraduate Research Opportunities (UROP) program and the NSF's Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program.