* 1132140
* The Virginia Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (VAGEP)
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Karen DePauw, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

It is well recognized that university faculty do not reflect the gender or
ethnic composition of the&lt;br/&gt;United States population, particularly in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;(STEM) fields. This
reflects critical shortages of US domestic graduate students, and
minority&lt;br/&gt;graduate students in particular. While the number of minority
students earning STEM doctoral degrees&lt;br/&gt;has increased over the past 20
years, national data show that there remains a need to enhance diversity among
STEM doctoral degrees recipients.&lt;br/&gt;The Virginia Alliance for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (VAGEP) will serve as the&lt;br/&gt;facilitating
organization for this project in partnership with Virginia
Community&lt;br/&gt;Colleges, HBCUs, and the Appalachian Colleges Association.
As part of the project, these institutions&lt;br/&gt;will conduct a state-wide
survey of students in STEM programs to assess the reasons why they succeed (or
not) in STEM disciplines. In addition, they will hold two state-wide
conferences/workshops to discuss best practices across the state; the needs of
students as assessed from the survey; and, next steps. Their ultimate goal is to
create a structured mentoring network to attract talented students through
undergraduate studies to graduate education and ultimately to the
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;According to numerous
reports, the competitive edge of the Nation is at stake unless colleges and
universities dramatically increase the number of students studying in STEM
areas. It is imperative to&lt;br/&gt;understand the reasons why members of
underrepresented groups are not pursuing careers in&lt;br/&gt;these disciplines.
This project will focus on underrepresented groups in Virginia and formulate a
plan of action based on findings that will address the issue of under-
representation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the proposed work includes the benefits to society of a more diverse faculty
serving as role models to attract students to the professoriate; enhanced
collaborations between universities in Virginia to develop scientists in the
Commonwealth; and, the creation of a model to help other states develop
strategic networks to enhance their STEM enterprise.