* 1132225
* External Cavity Laser Biosensor for Label-Free and Enhanced Fluorescence Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Brian Cunningham, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 365,595.00

1132225&lt;br/&gt;Cunningham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PI proposes a development
of a new type of optical biosensor that utilizes a photonic crystal (PC) surface
as one end facet of a diode-pumped external cavity laser that is capable of both
high resolution label-free detection and fluorescence enhancement. The PC is
fabricated inexpensively using plastic materials over large surface areas by
nanoreplica molding for incorporation into multiwell microplates, and is
designed to operate as a resonant reflection filter. For label-free biosensing,
adsorption of biomaterial onto the PC surface results in a shift in its resonant
wavelength, producing tuning of the external cavity laser operating wavelength.
For enhanced fluorescence, rapid buildup of optical standing waves upon the PC
surface at the laser emission wavelength will be designed to coincide with the
optical absorption wavelength of fluorescent dye molecules used as biomolecule
tags, resulting in amplified fluorophore excitation compared to an ordinary
glass surface. The external cavity configuration provides single mode,
continuous wave, widely tunable, narrowband laser output in which the stimulated
emission process, with gain provided by a semiconductor diode, generates an
active optical biosensor, in contrast to the wide variety of previous
generations of passive reflectors/transmitters. The approach described in this
proposal represents an unprecedented combination of high sensitivity + high
resolution label-free detection. The project will expand upon recent preliminary
demonstration of the external cavity laser biosensor to implement PC sensor
surfaces and detection instrumentation capable of multi-mode operation for
highly accurate referencing, sub-pm wavelength tuning, and reduction in
detection limits for both label-free and fluorescence-tagged biomolecular
assays.