* 1132614
* Nonlinear Droplet Electrohydrodynamics in Stokes Flow Regime
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Petia Vlahovska, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 12/31/2014
* USD 271,215.00

1132614&lt;br/&gt;Vlahovska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electric fields provide a
versatile means to control small-scale fluid and particle motion. Recent
experiments in the PI's group have discovered unusual droplet behavior such as
tumbling, oscillations and chaotic dynamics in response to uniform DC electric
fields. The proposed research is motivated by (1) the scientific intrigue of
these new nonlinear phenomena occurring under creeping flow conditions and (2)
applied interest to exploit them in technologies related to microfluidics and
electrorheological materials. The objective of this proposal is to uncover the
mechanisms by which interface deformation and charging give rise to nonlinear
droplet electrohydrodynamics. To this end, the PI will integrate (1) dynamical
systems theory to analyze drop behavior in the small-deformation regime and the
transition to chaos; (2) numerical simulations based on the Boundary Integral
Method to explore large drop deformations and the collective dynamics of drops;
and (3) experiments to guide and test the theoretical analyses and
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed combination
of theory, computation and experiment will provide a comprehensive understanding
of droplet electrodeformation and electrorheology of emulsions. These are
challenging and unexplored problems at the intersection of fluid mechanics,
dynamical systems, and soft condensed matter. The potentially transformative
nature of the proposal lies in identifying yet unexplained physics that could
yield new applications related to microscale flows and complex fluids. The work
could become a prototypical physical example of chaotic nonlinear
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The research outcomes of this
proposal are relevant to many natural and industrial processes involving
disperse two-phase systems in electric fields, including the break-up of rain
droplets in thunderstorms, ink-jet printing, electrohydrodynamic atomization,
and separation of emulsified water from oil in the petroleum refining process.
More specifically, the research will help advance engineering applications such
as microfluidics, where the chaotic particle dynamics can be utilized for in-
situ micro-mixing. &lt;br/&gt; The project blends physics, applied math, and
engineering approaches and thus provides excellent training ground for doctoral
and undergraduate students. By means of the synergy between theory and
experiment, the project will excite the more experimentally inclined students
about theory, and conversely, inspire curiosity in the students who are more
focused on theory about the experiments that motivate the mathematical models.
The PI will leverage well-established and successful outreach programs at Brown
University to attract underrepresented minorities in science and engineering.
The research and related advances in science and technology will be broadly
disseminated by presentations at meetings, workshops and summer schools.
Droplets oscillations, tumbling, and break up are visually appealing effects
that naturally excite both general public and science and engineering audiences.