* 1132766
* GEOTRACES Atlantic Section: Aerosol and Rainfall collection and analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* William Landing, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 27,091.00

In the fall of 2010, the US GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section cruise began its
survey of the distribution of trace metals and isotopes across a basin where
there is an enhanced influence from atmospheric deposition. Due to damages to
the ship's (R/V Knorr) propulsion system, the cruise was halted at an early
stage when less of a third of the cruise track was completed. The completion of
this section has been rescheduled for the fall of
2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding through this Grant for Rapid Response
Research (RAPID), a research team at Florida State University will continue
collection of aerosol and rainfall samples on the GEOTRACES North Atlantic
section cruise in 2011, thereby completing work initiated in 2010. With
collaboration from researchers around the world, the 24-hour integrated aerosol
samples, and event-based rain samples, will be analyzed for a large suite of
TEIs. The team will analyze all aerosol samples for ultra-pure water soluble,
seawater soluble, and total (residual) TEIs. Rain samples will be analyzed both
filtered and unfiltered, to quantify the soluble and particulate TEI
concentrations. Air mass back-trajectories for all sampling days will be modeled
using the NOAA HySplit program. Those aerosol samples and a series of seawater
samples will be analyzed for Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, and Pb with a shore-
based column extraction method utilizing isotope dilution and high-resolution
magnetic sector ICPMS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Education and
training of graduate students are essential components of this research. The PI
regularly teaches undergraduate and graduate classes and incorporates the
results of his fieldwork into lecture materials to motivate the next generation
of Earth scientists. The researchers (PI and graduate student) will benefit from
participation in large projects that will create multiple collaborations.
Undergraduate FSU chemistry and/or biology majors (males, females, minorities)
are involved in the research via annual requests for REU supplements. Results
will be presented at national/international scientific meetings, and published
in peer-reviewed journals. The data will be submitted in a timely manner
according to the requirements of NSF/OCE and the GEOTRACES program.