* 1132381
* RAPID: Learning From Earthquakes: Targeted Research Questions Emerging from the February 22, 2011 Christchurch Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Jay Berger, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 43,818.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award provides funding to send a
small team of researchers to address several focused questions arising from the
magnitude 6.3 earthquake which struck Christchurch, New Zealand, at 12:51 p.m.
local time on February 22, 2011. This earthquake was an aftershock of the
magnitude 7.1 September 3, 2010 (UTC) earthquake, but because of the time of
day, the shallow depth of the earthquake and its closer proximity to the city
the infrastructure damage, economic impacts and casualties are much greater than
from the main shock of September 4, 2010. It is rare for a modern infrastructure
inventory to be shaken by two strong and damaging earthquakes -- a major event
followed by another at the same place within a six-month period. It is essential
to explore this pair of events so that the research aspects of this rare
concurrence will not be overlooked. The team will be tasked with addressing
specific questions, and keeping an eye open to research opportunities not yet
recognized, so that it can report back to the US research community in a timely
fashion, thereby facilitating subsequent research as may be proposed by the US
research community. In this project, three research themes have been identified
as critical issues in need of immediate investigation before ephemeral data is
compromised or lost. The focused reconnaissance themes that will be investigated
are: Building collapse; Use of social media and risk communication; and
Community resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has an explicit goal to
broaden participation in the earthquake reconnaissance process as much as
possible, engaging younger and underrepresented community members to participate
on the team. In addition, this study addresses two of NSF?s broader goals: to
promote US leadership in science and engineering, and to build longer-term
international collaboration. The findings from the reconnaissance investigations
will be shared widely with the broader research and practicing earthquake
engineering community. The deliverables include contributions to a summary
report that will be published in the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
(EERI) newsletter, research summaries immediately posted on the web and shared
with the community, a webcast briefing with Pacific Earthquake Engineering
Research Center at the University of California, Berkeley and the EERI/George E.
Brown Network of Earthquake Engineering Simulation webinar on these research
themes.