* 1132916
* Molecular phylogenetics of Cecropia: a keystone neotropical pioneer, US-Colombia collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Santiago Madrinan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 57,386.00

Abstract Proposal: OISE-1132916 &lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Weiblen, George D.,
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. George Weiblen from
the University of Minnesota and Dr. Santiago Madri√±an from the Universidad de
Los Andes in Colombia propose a new international collaboration to lay down the
systematic foundations for studying the ecology and evolution of an important
tropical tree,Cecropia,and its ant inhabitants. Specifically the PIs plan to
apply a network analytical approach to quantify ant associations with plants
across six Colombian bio-geographical regions where the diversity of Cecropia
species is high. For each study site the PIs will develop an ant-plant
association matrix to quantify the relative importance of ecological and
evolutionary processes in assembling ecological communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are committed to including junior scientists in
the proposed collaboration. In particular this project will give a US PhD
student the opportunity to receive interdisciplinary training in systematics and
ecology and be mentored by Colombian colleagues with expertise in phylogenetics,
plant DNA analysis and ant ecology. Furthermore, the proposed collaboration
where the PIs locate the molecular work in the same country where samples
originate while sharing digital data, represents a new model for rapid
systematic progress. This model addresses a requirement under the International
Convention on Biodiversity which restricts material transfer in developing
countries. Additionally, the PIs and the students will exchange information
between Colombia and the US through the submission of DNA sequences to GenBank,
scientific publications, and presentations at professional meetings.