* 1132364
* EAGER: Accurate and Efficient Surrogate Modeling Applied to Computational Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Spandan Maiti, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 01/31/2013
* USD 106,123.00

The objective of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to apply High Dimensional Model Representation (HDMR) technique to
construct highly accurate and efficient surrogate computational mechanics
models. Advanced computational mechanics simulations typically deal with very
large scale models that are extremely time consuming. HDMR technique uses
systemic sampling procedure relating outputs of the original physical model to
its inputs to produce highly accurate and computationally cheap equivalent
models. These low order surrogate models are expected to dramatically reduce the
cost of very large scale simulations while maintaining the accuracy of the
original models. The proposed methodology is extendable to other fields of
engineering besides computational mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
has the potential to transform current state of modeling philosophy and
simulation capability in computational mechanics, and enable very large scale
simulations at a reasonable cost. Simulations hitherto intractable due to very
high computational burden can be performed efficiently with the proposed
methodology. Additionally, it will provide new avenues in the development of
accurate yet efficient simulation methods. Educational objectives will focus on
(1) training graduate as well as undergraduate students in the area of surrogate
modeling, and (2) developing new course materials for the existing courses on
computational mechanics. The research being at the confluence of diverse areas
of science and engineering such as mechanics, statistics and computational
methods, will provide rich educational and research experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art computational modeling
and simulation.