* 1132482
* RET Site: Science and Mechatronics Aided Research for Teachers with an Entrepreneurship expeRience (SMARTER)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Vikram Kapila, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 530,537.00

This award provides funding for a three year continuing award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at Polytechnic University of New York, entitled, RET Site: Science and
Mechatronics Aided Research for Teachers with an Entrepreneurship expeRience
(SMARTER) Program, under the direction of Dr. Vikram Kapila. This is a renewal
of a successful 3 year RET Site program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SMARTER
program will provide a professional development opportunity to a total of 36
middle and high school in-service teachers (12 per year for three years) in the
areas of science, technology, engineering, mathematics and entrepreneurship from
the New York City Public Schools. During each year of the project, under the
guidance of Dr. Kapila and six senior personnel, 12 teachers will receive
mentoring and conduct inquiry-based, hands-on, engineering research in the
exciting field of mechatronics through six-week long summer workshops.
Collaborative activities involving Technology Management faculty and the Centers
for Entrepreneurship and Technology will enable teachers to learn about
entrepreneurship, conduct innovation case-studies, and shadow entrepreneurs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will benefit the teachers by reinforcing their
science and math skills; enriching their STEM experience through exposure to
real-world engineering research; developing and honing their research skills;
cultivating and sustaining creativity, innovation, and entrepreneurship traits;
and providing opportunities to network with tech-entrepreneurs. Moreover, the
teachers' schools will benefit since the participants will be able to provide
their students with a solid foundation for college-level study in STEM;
integrate hands-on activities with content and performance standards in
curriculum; and mentor students to participate in an Inno/Vention student idea
competition. A business-philanthropy partnership will allow teachers' students
to gain real-world entrepreneurial experience through summer internships at
start-up technology businesses. The project will serve as a catalyst to induce a
cultural change that will transform students from being mere consumers of
technology to becoming creators of novel technological products.