* 1132694
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site - Chicago Science Teacher Research (CSTR) Program
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Andreas Linninger, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2016
* USD 499,934.00

This award provides funding for a three year continuing award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) entitled, RET in Engineering and
Computer Science Site-Chicago Science Teacher Research (CSTR) Program, under the
direction of Dr. Andreas A. Linninger. This is a renewal of a successful 3 year
RET Site program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSTR program is an initiative by the
faculty of three UIC Colleges, Engineering, Education and Liberal Arts and
Sciences, in a strategic partnership with the Chicago Public School authorities
and industrial interest groups to engage a total of 39 in-service teachers, 13
per year for 3 years, in emerging technologies and cutting edge research in the
areas of life sciences, nanotechnology, bioengineering and biomedical
engineering. The program will improve the mathematics and science performance of
elementary, middle and high-school students through better trained teachers and
bridge the gap between experience in pre-college classrooms and cutting-edge
university science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
objectives of the CSTR program are to advance math and science skills taught in
Chicago area schools through the following three-tiered approach:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1) Nurture a science education coalition engaging K-12 teachers with
university faculty mentors.&lt;br/&gt;2) Conduct a seven-week summer
apprenticeship for in-service teachers using a learning-by-doing approach at
experimental facilities at UIC, including formal graduate education combined
with an all year around follow-up program for the development of discovery-based
experiments, lectures, and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;3) Integrate the RET program
with a concurrent undergraduate research site (REU) on novel materials and
processes in bioengineering and a high-school student mentoring program.