* 1132597
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site on Engineering a More Sustainable Energy Future
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Jay Brockman, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2015
* USD 494,948.00

This award provides funding for a three year continuing award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at the University of Notre Dame entitled, RET in Engineering and Computer
Science Site on Engineering a More Sustainable Energy Future", under the
direction of Dr. Joan F. Brennecke. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed RET site
will fund a total of 54 middle and high school STEM teachers, up to 18 teachers
per year for three years, to participate in engineering research aimed at
solving challenges to create a more sustainable energy future. Teachers from
local schools in greater South Bend, Indiana and the national Alliance for
Catholic Education (ACE) network will complete eight weeks of state-of-the-art
research working with engineering faculty members during the summer. Using
hands-on experiences and learning, teachers will develop STEM teaching materials
with the assistance of an experienced STEM curriculum development professional
which meet respective state curricular guidelines and are appropriate for middle
and high school aged students. Since the curriculum development working groups
will include participants working in varied labs, many aspects of energy science
and technology can be incorporated in the materials, and this will allow
teachers to draw from a variety of topics to fit the educational needs of their
schools. Research areas may include CO2 capture, solar to fuels, safer nuclear
power, new wind technology, biofuels, and improved grid technologies. These
important topics will allow teachers to address STEM education through the
framework of a real-world challenge (energy) to which most all students can
relate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The addition of ACE teachers will expand the RET
program to schools throughout the country and therefore significantly multiply
the number of students who will be reached, particularly minority students, as
greater than 50% of ACE schools serve predominantly minority student bodies.
Finally, educating students on energy production, use, and sustainability is
critical to move society toward adoption of a more sustainable energy future.