* 1132229
* Collaborative Research: Jaws and Backbone: Chondrichthyan Phylogeny and a Spine for the Vertebrate Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 02/04/2011,08/31/2016
* Gavin Naylor, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,340,054.00

The Chondrichthyans, or sharks, rays and chimaeras, are some of the best known
marine animals in popular culture but poorly known in terms of their evolution.
Despite being an ancient group, we know surprisingly little about the patterns
and processes that gave rise to their current diversity - a diversity that is
increasingly under threat through environmental and fishing pressures. This
project will catalog the diversity of sharks, skates, rays and chimaeras,
provide a genealogy of relationships based on DNA sequence comparisons, and
provide a data base of 3-D virtual skeletons based on CT scan data to document
all of the physical variations that characterize the major
lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve the development of
technologies that will impact the way DNA sequences are collected for the
purpose of comparison across organisms. This could have far reaching benefits
for disciplines such as comparative biochemistry, physiology and medicine that
are based on comparative approaches. The outreach component of the project will
exploit the popular appeal of sharks to show how modern molecular biology and
computer visualization techniques are being applied to better understand the
evolution of the world's increasingly threatened
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of a 10-year effort to
digitize and mobilize the scientific information associated with biological
specimens held in U.S. research collections. The images and digitized data from
this project will be integrated into the online national resource as outlined in
the community strategic plan available at
http://digbiocol.files.wordpress.com/2010/05/digistratplanfinaldraft.pdf.