* 1132188
* Automation of Natural History Collections and Bioinformatics: Rapid Optical Data Acquisition and Automated Computerization at INHS
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Paul Tinerella, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 326,457.00

This project will digitize and computerize approximately 489,000 specimens of
Collembola (springtails), Thysanoptera (thrips), Phthiraptera (lice), and
Psocoptera (book and bark lice) into a rapid data acquisition imaging/database
workflow recently developed in the entomology collections at the Illinois
Natural History Survey. Digitization and computerization will be achieved by
optical scanning of glass slide preparations and collection labels from ethanol-
preserved material (vials). Upon batch scanning, programming language scripts
will be used to a) automate capture of each collection object image into the
database as an individual specimen record; and b) semi-automate data entry into
relational database fields. The first pass of semi-automated parsing of specimen
data results in an average of 60% of the complete individual record
automatically parsed into the database. A second pass using computer scripts and
interactive data entry, recovers the remaining collection object data. An
important contribution of this proposed natural history collections digitization
solution is the implementation of a database/software workflow that allows
integration of verbatim label data (imaged) with the traditional specimen-level
database. This newly developed imaging/database solution will transform the way,
and accurately accelerate the rate, in which invaluable natural history
collections are digitized. The workflow will be integrated with the NSF-
supported Specify collections management software and be made available for
broader use in the natural history collections community. Application of this
workflow solution will facilitate complete curation for the groups of INHS
insects listed, making available a wealth of critical historical and modern-day
collections data to researchers and the public, worldwide. The project will
provide training for two graduate students, one database technician, and select
undergraduates in biodiversity informatics. Availability of this solution will
benefit the greater biological collections community with efforts to rapidly
digitize, integrate, and mobilize collections data. This project is part of a
10-year effort to digitize and mobilize the scientific information associated
with biological specimens held in U.S. research collections. The images and
digitized data from this project will be integrated into the online national
resource as outlined in the community strategic plan available at
http://digbiocol.files.wordpress.com/2010/05/digistratplanfinaldraft.pdf.