* 1132278
* Student Support for GEC 2011 Conference to be held at GEC on November 14-18, 2011 in Salt Lake City, Utah.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Don Madison, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

The GEC (Gaseous Electronics Conference) is the leading international conference
in the science and technology of LTP (Low Temperature Plasmas) combined with
collision physics (CP). The conference has been the venue of the first
presentations on world leading developments in investigations of LTP and CP,
from lighting and lasers, to plasma materials processing and plasma-medicine.
The invited speakers represent the world's leading scientists in LTP and CP. The
future of any field depends upon attracting bright young people. The GEC has a
strong tradition of encouraging and promoting student participation. The GEC has
an enviable reputation of being the first conference that many of the leading
members of the community presented their first research results as graduate
students. This award pays partial travel support for PhD students in the US to
attend and present the results of their work at the meeting.

The broader impacts of this proposal include the opportunity for young US
scientists to attend one of the most important conferences in their field. They
will have the opportunity to observe firsthand the scientific and cultural
diversity of the field, and establish what will hopefully be career long
collaborations with their international counterparts. The GEC makes a special
effort to support graduate students who are women and underrepresented
minorities.