* 1132058
* Field-Induced Point Defect Redistribution in Metal Oxides: Mesoscopic Length Scale Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Dickey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Oxide materials are being used increasingly in
electronic and memory devices, and the properties of this class of materials are
strongly influenced by the material's stoichiometry and the concomitant defects
in the material's crystalline lattice. The redistribution of defects under an
applied voltage leads to failure of many capacitive devices, but the
redistribution can also lead to unique material functionalities such as
resistive switching, which is being explored as a future memory technology. This
research program aims to understand fundamental issues of the point defect
redistribution process under applied voltage, focusing on the interactions of
point defects with higher dimensional lattice defects and the effects of the
metallic electrodes. The program utilizes and trains students in a variety of
state-of-the-art electron imaging and spectroscopy techniques to study the
dynamic evolution of defects under applied bias and the implications for the
material electrical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
mobility of charged lattice defects under applied electrical bias can have far
reaching ramifications for functional electroceramic devices. For example, the
redistribution of point defects during prolonged DC biasing is responsible for
leakage current enhancement in oxide-based capacitors. Conversely, electric-
field-induced defect migration in oxides can give rise to useful device
properties such as resistive switching, which is being explored aggressively for
nonvolatile memory. The overall objective of the proposed research is to develop
a phenomenological and kinetic understanding of point defect distribution at the
mesoscopic length scale. The proposed methodology is to conduct studies on a
well-controlled model material system, rutile TiO2, as a function of the initial
defect chemistry state, electrode boundary conditions, dislocation
concentration, and crystallographic orientation. The experimental approach
couples electrical transport measurements with local-stoichiometry and atomic-
structure analysis. The advancement of fundamental science in the proposed
research is enabling to the development of next-generation functional ceramics,
and the program trains both graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-
art electron microscopy and materials research.