* 1132936
* US-Mexico Workshop: Catalyzing International Collaborations to Develop a Platform for Ecohydrological Research - Chamela, Jalisco, Mexico, September 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Charles Redman, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 08/31/2013
* USD 48,017.00

In this U.S.-Mexico workshop social scientists and ecohydrologists from the U.S.
and Mexico will will gather together to discuss collaborative research exploring
the tension between water abstraction for human use and water needed to sustain
aquatic ecosystems. The goal of the workshop is an improved understanding of the
water-resource challenges facing Mexico and the United States and the
development of a new network-level framework in which to conduct social and
ecohydrological research. The anticipated projects use pairs of biophysically
similar Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites across regionally diverse
ecosystems in the U.S. and Mexico. Potentially transformative new perspectives
will be gained by interacting with colleagues working in a similar biophysical
setting but in a different cultural context to address similar water resource
challenges and the cultural response to these challenges. The workshop will be
held at the Chamela LTER site in Jalisco state, Mexico. One of the outcomes is
expected to be a cross-cutting research proposal for a Research Coordination
Network (RCN) with emphasis appropriate to Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems (CNH) or Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
(SEES).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the broader impacts of the workshop is the
development of new collaborative partnerships between scientists at US and
Mexican LTER sites that will result in greater accessibility to international
ecohydrological and socioecological datasets, data sharing, and knowledge
transfer. The resulting research platform will be the basis for further
education and research opportunities and will include a catalog of
ecohydrological, economic and social data from the twelve sites. The involvement
of six U.S. LTER sites is expected to be a significant contribution to national
environmental science networking. Other impacts include training of graduate
students, exposing them to experiences in international collaboration and
international research opportunities, and the development of new, network-level
international collaborations. Graduate students and early-career scientists will
benefit from inclusion in the planning process for this research and in writing
a proposal with international partners. Involvement of young researchers in
collaborative international activities is a major goal of OISE.