* 1132061
* Exploratory Research into Arctic Climate Change and Ancient Maya Response: Paleoclimate Reconstruction and Archaeological Investigation at the Puuc Region of Yucatan, Mexico
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Ezra B. Zubrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,001.00

This is an EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) to provide
funding to take advantage of new discoveries that occurred during the 2010 and
2011 season of the Xcoch Archaeological project, funded in part through the
Arctic Social Science Program. The broad vision of the project is to investigate
the ways in which ancient Mayan social and political structures responded to
climate change that occurred during the Medieval Climatic Optimum (AD 800-900)
in the Puuc Hill region of Yucatan, Mexico. The Xcoch Archaeological project is
investigating how Arctic climate processes during this critical change period
may have affected weather in tropical Yucatan, Mexico which experienced severe
droughts. These environmental changes influenced a series of dramatic social and
material adaptations, such as the construction and maintenance of large scale
irrigation systems, aguadas (engineered cave systems for storing water) and huge
catchment systems funneling water into the aguadas.

The 2010-2011 field season was focused on intensive surveying, surface
collecting, and mapping of architectural features in the Xcoch urban zone.
During this intensive surveying activity the research team located a cave system
near to Xcoch that appears to be active in terms of the type of water filtration
needed for collecting data relevant to paleoclimate analyses. The discovery of
the new cave offers a new opportunity to gather close proximity data that
directly relates to the natural and social environment at Xcoch.

The Xcoch project is part of a growing body of research investigating north-
south teleconnections of global human ecodynamics. Smyth's research is part of
the Global Human Ecodynamics Alliance (GHEA) whose stated objective is to
"incentivize" the expansion, integration, and augmentation of cutting human
ecodynamics research globally and at short, medium and deep time scales.
Although this seems like an odd fit for the Arctic Social Sciences Program,
Smyth's participation in the Global Human Ecodynamics Alliance and the discovery
of potential teleconnections between Arctic climatic changes and those occurring
in the Yucutan, make this project of interest to the ASSP. Questions of how
Arctic environmental processes not only affected northern social change, but
potentially affected social change at the lower latitudes are an important issue
even today. This research is not about direct social contact and associated
change, but rather how people respond to change at a structural level, what
triggers certain decisions in response to global environmental processes. Before
we can understand the complexities of social change and adaptive decisions it is
necessary to have global comparisons not just regional ones.