* 1132940
* US-Morocco Workshop on Nano-Materials and Renewable Energies, Fez, Morocco, November 17-20, 2011
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Abdelkader Kara, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2012
* USD 28,240.00

1132940&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the participation of U.S. scientists in
the ?US-Morocco Workshop on Nano-Materials and Renewable Energies?, Fez,
Morocco, November 17-20, 2011.? The Moroccan organizers are Drs. Mimouna Baitoul
and Anouar Jorio at University Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdallah, Fez, Morocco. The
objectives of the workshop are: to provide a platform for promoting scientific
collaborations on nano-materials between researchers from the U.S. and those
from the North Africa, and Morocco in particular, and to facilitate interaction
between students from the U.S. and from North Africa with researchers from
Europe. The workshop is planned as a satellite to a larger international
meeting, the 1st Euro-Med Conference on Materials and Renewable Energies, to be
held in Marrakesh, Morocco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
workshop will include presentations from world experts on nano-materials in
Europe, the US and North Africa. The focus of their potential use will be on
renewable energies. These presentations will be delivered at an introductory
level, followed by an overview of the recent advances on nano-materials, and
their possible applications for renewable energies. Students and postdocs from
the US will present their work. Discussions between US scientists and those in
Morocco will be held to explore possible collaborative projects. Special
attention will be paid to materials for solar energy applications as Morocco is
embarking on a major solar program of multi-billion dollars over the next ten
years to produce 2 GW by 2020. The topics will include how semiconductor and
silicon in particular nanostructures including particles and wires as well as
organic material are used to enhance solar photovoltaic cells and lighting
devices. This is also to include computation and simulations. The NSF funding is
to support the travel of three US senior scientists and five US students and
post-docs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The workshop should foster a
better scientific foundation to support solar energy, and other energy
technologies, in North Africa and thus help in the development of renewable
energy for worldwide use. Because some aspects of nanotechnology are low cost it
allows participation by scientists from developing countries with scientists
from industrially advanced countries, in research at the forefront of science
and technology. The choice of Morocco for the site of the workshop is
appropriate since the government of Morocco has been focusing on this area and
has allocated significant funding to developing solar energy. Also the Islamic
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (ISESCO) has it?s headquarter
in Rabat, and thus the workshop would have an impact on other countries of North
Africa and the Middle East. The workshop is to provide an opportunity for the US
scientists, post-docs, and students to get involved with the science and with
people of North Africa. It has the potential to produce long lasting
collaborations between countries from three continents, and involve countries
that have committed themselves to renewable energy. Fez is an excellent choice
to hold the proposed activity since it is classified as a UNESCO world heritage
site.