* 1132563
* Catalyzing an International Collaboration to Examine the Impact of Poverty and Culture on Children's Development in the Slums of Nairobi
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Paul Erwin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 88,864.00

This award supports creation of a new international research collaboration
between a Kenyan academic institution (Kenyatta University), a Kenyan non-
governmental organization (The Orphans and Vulnerable Childrens Project), and a
U.S. academic institution (University of Tennessee, Knoxville), who together
will study how culture may modify the effects of poverty on child development.
Slum communities in Kenya provide an ideal context to examine how culture may
modify the effects of poverty on child development, as there is tremendous
cultural diversity in individual slum communities. Such diversity provides the
unique opportunity to research cultural and individual variation in caregiving
within one environment, thus avoiding common confounding between culture and the
environment of poverty and advancing the science of child development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new collaboration will bring together unique
expertise; Kenyatta University collaborators bring specialized expertise that
will be crucial in designing the longitudinal study, particularly as relates to
the diverse caregiving configurations of slum-dwelling children as well as
determining culturally relevant child outcomes. The NGO collaborators provide
expertise in how to work effectively in slum communities and how to identify and
observe children from various cultural groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
involved in the project will receive valuable research training and experience
with inter-cultural collaboration. This training and subsequent data collection
in the slums will enhance their abilities to apply theories of socio-cultural
factors in child development learned in the classroom to real life experiences.
The project promotes diversity and the research capacity of early career
scholars in science through the involvement by minority students, as well as the
PI, a co-PI, and two senior personnel. This inter-disciplinary and international
project also provides benefits to society by supporting development of
scientifically grounded interventions aimed at increasing the health and well
being of children in poverty.