* 1132410
* Multiscale Simulations of Multiphase Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Gretar Tryggvason, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2014
* USD 277,047.00

Direct numerical simulations (DNS) are perhaps the biggest new development in
studies of multiphase flows and such simulations are already starting to have a
major impact. As their use has increased, it has become clear that in many
situations the formation of small-scale features such as thin films or drops
require excessive (and often unachievable) resolution. Here it is proposed to
develop multi-scale direct numerical simulations to allow the inclusion of such
small scale phenomenon in simulations where everything else is fully resolved.
The proposed work has the following objectives:

The development of a general strategy to include multi-scale description of
small-scale phenomenon in numerical simulations of the dynamics of multiphase
flows. The approach is based on the observation that many small-scale features
(films, threads, boundary layers, strained advection-diffusion reaction layers,
very small drops and bubbles, and so on) have a relatively simple structure and
can therefore be described relatively accurately by analytical or semi-
analytical models that are evolved concurrently with the fully resolved larger-
scale motion. The challenges include identifying when and where to use such a
description, how to efficiently and accurately couple the small-scale
description and the numerically resolved flow, and the development of efficient
data structures to implement the different descriptions in a way that does not
overwhelm developers of such codes.

The development of specific multi-scale descriptions for thin films and threads,
mass transfer, and chemical reactions to describe under-resolved features in
direct numerical simulations of multifluid and multiphase flows. The need for
multi-scale approach in these situations arises both because very thin films and
threads can form naturally in multiphase flows, and since there is usually a
large discrepancy between the length and time scales of the fluid motion on the
one hand and mass transfer and reactions on the other. This work, which can be
divided into the modeling of small scale flow features (films and threads), thin
boundary layers in mass transfer problems, and reaction layers, will build on
ideas currently being developed for boiling and an approach originally developed
some time ago in the context of modeling of diffusion gas flames, where we
showed that we could capture reasonably complex chemical reactions using a
surprisingly simple approximation strategy. The numerical methods will be made
available through an online repository, along with a thorough documentation of
the methodology and the use of the codes.

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity: While direct numerical
simulations (DNS) of multiphase flows have already had major impact on our
understanding of such flow, and many opportunities still exist for applications
of currently existing methods, it is also clear that in many cases the range of
scales is too large to handle within the same numerical approach, even using
adaptive grid refinement. Small-scale features in multiphase flows do, however,
often exhibit a relatively simple structure that can be captured analytically or
semi-analytically. In the present work we propose to extend DNS to include such
multi-scale descriptions. This will greatly extend the range of multiphase flows
that can be studied using DNS. It will, in particular, allow us to consider
reacting systems for a realistic range of governing parameters.

The broader impacts of the proposed activity: Multiphase flows are critical in
energy conversion, material processing, the chemical industry, atmospheric
processes, and living systems. Incremental improvement in the efficiency of such
processes translates into billions of dollars in savings and new discoveries
have the potential to transform whole industries. Computational studies will
bring about both incremental and transformative changes in the management of
multiphase systems. Enlarging the community of users by providing online codes
and documentations will help make that happen. In addition to training graduate
students and postdocs, this project will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students.