* 1132124
* Early Career: Acquisition of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Facility for Earth Science Research at Baylor University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Boris Lau, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 92,801.00

This award will be used to purchase components for the upgrade of a solid-state
300 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer (NMR) for the analysis of
environmental samples at Baylor University. The NMR facility will be part of the
Geology Department?s organic geochemistry laboratory. The purchase of a solid-
state probe with cross-polarization and magic angle spinning will facilitate the
acquisition of NMR spectra for nuclei of low abundance in geomedia (e.g. 13C and
15N)?providing information on the structure, identity, and molecular dynamics of
the organic matter in modern and ancient soil and sediment. NSF funds will be
used to establish an NMR summer school ? an internationally-publicized short-
course intended to equip students in the Earth and environmental sciences with
the technical expertise necessary to apply NMR spectroscopy to their research
interests&lt;br/&gt;The solid-state NMR facility will support the research of
Baylor faculty and students in the department of geology as well as 3
interdisciplinary initiatives: the terrestrial paleoclimate research group (7
faculty members), the institute of ecological, Earth, and environmental sciences
(19 faculty members), and the center for reservoir and aquatic systems research
(19 faculty members). Research areas that will immediately benefit from the
access to the NMR facility include: 1) characterizing the oxidation state of
global soil carbon pools and the response of ecosystem oxidative ratio to
climate change, 2) assessing the impact of developing-world land use on the
quality of riverine organic matter delivered to the oceans (NSF GEO OCE-funded),
3) developing ecosystem biochemical inventories as a tool for understanding soil
carbon dynamics, 4) development and validation of a paleo-fire temperature proxy
for studying the role of fire in the Earth system, 5) application of the
paleofire temperature proxy to several NSF-EAR funded studies of Pleistocene
-Holocene climate variability using paleosol records 6) calibrating the paleosol
CO2 barometer for vertic paleosols by monitoring carbon cycling in modern
Vertisols (NSF EAR-funded), 7) elucidating mechanisms of natural organic matter
interactions with nanoscale mineral particles, and 8) investigations of the
aggregate structure in melanins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid-state nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) is a powerful analytical tool capable of non-invasively
extracting a host of chemical structure information from environmental samples
(soil, sediment, biomass, etc). However, NMR spectroscopy remains underutilized
in the geosciences because it is not a part of traditional Earth and
environmental science curricula. Baylor University has recently undertaken
several major initiatives to meet the society?s increasing need for scientists
with interdisciplinary training in the Earth and environmental sciences with the
establishment of a terrestrial paleoclimate research team, a PhD-granting
institute in the ecological, Earth, and Environmental systems (TIEEES), and a
center for reservoir and aquatic systems research (CRASR). We propose the
establishment of a facility that would give the faculty and students
participating in these programs access to solid-state NMR spectroscopy for
geological, biogeochemical, and environmental studies. &lt;br/&gt; The solid-
state NMR facility will be integrated into Baylor University?s Advanced
Instrumentation Workshop, which is held annually for student and faculty from
the area?s small colleges. Additionally, NSF funds will be used to establish an
NMR summer school ? an internationally-publicized short-course intended to equip
students in the Earth and environmental sciences with the technical expertise
necessary to apply NMR spectroscopy to their research interests. The intended
outcome of the proposed research is to help the geoscience community utilize an
undeveloped geoanalytical capability that exists at many major research
institutions.