* 1132776
* Establishing a U.S.-Turkey collaboration on the introduction of blue crabs to the Mediterranean and their effects on the native ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Pablo Munguia, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,666.00

This award supports an international collaborative project to study the invasion
of blue crabs from its native (North America) to an introduced range
(Mediterranean and surrounding seas). The research is to be carried out by a
team including two U.S. (UT Austin and Duke) and two Turkish (Canakkale Onsekiz
Mart University and Ege University) universities. The U.S. team provides
expertise in marine community ecology, blue crab biology, marine molecular
analysis and physical oceanography. The Turkish team provides expertise in the
ecology of benthic invertebrates as well as fisheries biology and population
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this study derives from
its interdisciplinary (combining biology and ecology) and comparative nature, as
few studies examine invasive species in both their native and introduced ranges.
The project will demonstrate the power of genome-wide association studies to
determine genetic structure and relationships of invasive to source populations.
Also, through a small-scale survey of blue crab stomach contents the study will
provide a first step towards understanding the role of blue crabs in the native
and introduced range communities. Specific goals include sharing techniques,
applying a state of the art genetics approach to examine the blue crab
population structure and Mediterranean introduction history, comparing prey
species in the native and introduced ranges, and making detailed plans for
subsequent proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will generate enhanced
understanding of the behaviors and impacts of invasive species, a critical
problem in the U.S. and around the world. The detailed knowledge of the blue
crab itself will enhance fisheries management in North Carolina as well as
broader wildlife management in Texas, where blue crabs are the primary food
source for whooping cranes. Further, the project will contribute to a globally
engaged scientific workforce through the inclusion of graduate and post-doctoral
students, as well as junior faculty. &lt;br/&gt;