* 1132808
* Workshop: Promote Use of High Energy X-Ray Diffraction Experiments &amp; Detailed Computational Analyses for Understanding Multiscale Phenomena in Crystalline Materials, 13-15 Oct
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Matthew Miller, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Demitris Kouris
* 06/30/2012
* USD 49,998.00

This grant will fund a workshop to be held on October 13-15, 2011 at the
Advanced Photon Source designed to advance research in the general area of
micromechanics of polycrystalline materials. In particular presentations will be
given by international experts who: (i) conduct synchrotron x-ray diffraction
experiments, (ii) model material behaviors on various size scales, or (iii)
design systems with significant structural material selection challenges. The
purpose of the workshop is to establish contacts and promote synergy between
specialists from these areas. The ultimate goal is to optimize the impact of the
high value data that arise from the diffraction experiments and the
computationally intense multiscale simulations. By determining the nature of the
most relevant and timely studies that can currently be performed these results
can serve as templates for future collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
societal benefits of the project should be significant. It is the hope of the
organizers (Professor Robert Suter from Carnegie Mellon University, Dr. Ulrich
Lienert from the Advanced Photon Source and the PI) that this workshop will
nurture a research community around the theme of combining high energy x-ray
diffraction with micromechanical modeling for an improved understanding of
complex polycrystalline systems and for more sophisticated micromechanical
models. For this reason, a group of young investigators will be invited to
attend the workshop to understand the challenges and potential successes that
may be realized by establishing careers within this area. The industrial
speakers will introduce pertinent application-related challenges currently
facing some of the nations most important manufacturers.