* 1132241
* International Conference: Perspectives and Future Directions in Systems and Control Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Yuan Wang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James Alexander
* 03/31/2012
* USD 35,000.00

This award supports travel for participants in a Conference on Perspectives and
Future Directions in Systems and Control Theory, to take place at Rutgers
University, NJ, May 23-27, 2011. A primary goal of this conference is to bring
together leaders and junior researchers in the field of control theory, in order
to exchange ideas and results contrasting different theoretical approaches, and
to explore and discuss emerging application areas such as systems biology and
networks. Expository talks, technical presentations, and panel discussions will
provide opportunities for fostering collaborations among researchers working in
various different subfields, as well as for junior researchers, postdocs, and
graduate students interested in system and control theory to interact with the
established control theory community. The conference will cover a variety of
topics including nonlinear stability analysis, construction of feedback
mechanisms, systems with impulses, networked systems, control with communication
constraints, monotone systems, graph-theoretic approaches to biological
networks, and synchronization of interconnected systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control systems and feedback loops are ubiquitous in
engineering, in areas such as aerospace control, manufacturing and robotics,
active damping, climate control of buildings, process control in chemical
plants, electrical power systems, bioengineering, consumer products, and active
suspensions, automatic braking systems, and engine timing in the automobile
industry. One finds control and feedback in nature, as well, for example in the
homeostatic mechanisms that allow organisms to finely tune their internal
variables such as temperature, pressure, or chemical levels. The mathematical
theory of control formulates the basic theoretical principles and provides tools
to study problems in these fields. The conference will highlight the interplay
between theory and applications, will review some of the main past achievements
in the field, and will lead to discussions of future research directions.