* 1132444
* US-Mexico Collaborative Research: Afforestation Effects on Nitrogen Cycling in Mexico's Eastern Highlands
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,11/30/2014
* Feifei Pan, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 11/30/2014
* USD 46,705.00

In this U.S.-Mexico project researchers from the U.S. and Mexico will gain a
preliminary understanding of the consequences of tropical afforestation and its
spatial configuration across the landscape for nitrogen cycling, and to identify
and model landscapes where plantation establishment is likely to have the
greatest impact on nitrogen biogeochemistry. In this pilot study baseline
measurements of nitrogen fluxes and nitrogen cycling will be conducted, and the
ratios of carbon to nitrogen to phosphorus (C:N:P) in the litter and soils of
pine plantations and grasslands will be examined. By quantifying differences in
nitrogen cycling between pine plantations and grasslands, the research will shed
light on ecosystem response to afforestation, whether natural or intentional,
and to increasing levels of nitrogen deposition. Such investigations are needed
in order to scale ecosystem process rates such as nitrification across spatially
heterogeneous landscapes and to predict watershed nitrogen losses more
accurately. This pilot will be carried out by an interdisciplinary team of
researchers from two U.S. institutions, the University of North Texas and Cary
Institute of Ecosystem Studies, in conjunction with colleagues from Universidad
Veracruzana in Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project affords a valuable
opportunity to answer important questions at the intersection of ecosystem
science, global change, and land-cover change. This project should enable the
researchers to confirm previous findings and develop a model of the nitrogen-
cycling effects of afforestation, especially within the context of land-use
change, increased nitrogen deposition from urbanization, and phosphorus-limited
forests of tropical developing countries worldwide. The results of this study
will provide the foundations for a future international collaborative research
proposal that can provide important data for policy makers considering the
implications of reforestation and afforestation and the potential trade-offs and
unintended consequences of each. Graduate students and early-career scientists
from underrepresented groups will benefit from inclusion in these studies with
international research partners. Involvement of young researchers in
collaborative international activities is a major goal of OISE.