* 1132343
* Broadband Recording at the Site of Great Earthquake Rupture in the Alaska Megathrust
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Donna Shillington, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/2013
* USD 85,256.00

Funds are provided under this EAGER award that will capitalize on an opportunity
provided by an already funded active-source cruise on the R/V Langseth in the
summer of 2011. The PI will deploy seismometers on-land across one of the best-
known examples of variability in seismogenic behavior - the Alaska Peninsula
segment of the Aleutian megathrust to record the active-source shots and extend
imaging beyond the down-dip limit of seismicity. The funded active-source cruise
will image the megathrust along five transects. The eastern part of the study
area ruptured in a great (Mw=8.3) earthquake in 1938, and now shows nearly full
geodetic locking. By contrast, the western part lies in the Shumagin Gap, a site
of no clear seismicity larger than Mw=7.4, and where geodetic data suggest a
creeping plate boundary. Little else changes between the two segments: the
incoming Pacific plate is similar in age and sediment accumulation; the upper
plate is constructed of the same accreted terranes; and convergence is nearly
arc-normal. Thus, the proposed array, combined with active-source shots, will
test in a controlled setting the deeper structure of megathrusts across the
transition from locked to creeping faults. Because these two transitions (along-
strike and down-dip) will be sampled and imaged, these data will provide a
strong test of the notion that structural properties of the megathrust control
limits to seismogenesis. The PI will deploy 9 broadband onshore seismometers for
2 months during shooting of the active-source expedition in summer 2011, taking
advantage of the ship and technical staff present for the active-source imaging
experiment. These instruments will be deployed at easily-accessible airstrips.
These on-land instruments will greatly extend the active-source array aperture.
The proposed data will be analyzed and interpreted together with the collocated
active-source data in an integrated fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Megathrust events pose significant seismic hazard to urban centers in
Alaska, Cascadia, and elsewhere. Better knowledge of the geometry of seismogenic
zones and their seismicity will reduce the inherent uncertainty in probabilistic
seismic hazard maps around the Pacific Rim. The study area is also considered to
pose the greatest tsunami risk to the west coast of the US because of its
proximity and orientation. This work will also help public outreach on
earthquake hazards as the PIs plan to visit towns in the field area during the
experiment to communicate hazards and earthquake research. The study is planned
to be part of the graduate research for a student at OU, and will promote as PI
an early-career faculty member from an underrepresented group.