* 1132038
* Studying Eruptions and Lava Flows on Ontong Java Plateau with High-Precision Glass Chemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Peter Michael, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 191,756.00

Large igneous provinces, like the Snake River Plain in Washington State or the
Deccan Traps of India, represent huge outpourings of basalt from the mantle and
are prominent geologic features of the land and seafloor. Due to their immense
size and the vast amount of reduced fluids and other volatiles they release upon
eruption, these eruptive sequences have major impacts on local and global
environmental and atmospheric conditions. The Ontong Java Plateau in the Pacific
Ocean is one of these provinces and was erupted almost entirely underwater where
it affected global ocean chemistry. This research develops novel new methods for
determining the length, volume, duration, style, and depth of lava flow
emplacement at Ontong Java. Samples of basaltic glasses from cores collected by
the Ocean Drilling Program will be analyzed for volatile species (Cl, S, H2O,
CO2) by very precise electron microprobe, FTIR, and laser ablation ICPMS. Major
and trace elements will also be analyzed. Statistical methods will be used to
determine if different samples are from the same flow field and/or eruption.
Samples both within and between drill holes will be compared. Goals are to
determine if individual lava flows can be traced hundreds of kilometers and to
use this information to constrain lava flow size and emplacement rates. The
broader impacts of the work include a large service-learning component that will
engage undergraduates with K-12 students, as well as carry out an innovative
simulated oceanographic voyage that will integrate research and education and
impact over 100 undergraduates. In terms of other workforce development, a
graduate student will be trained and students will be taken to professional
society meetings to present the results of their work. Additional impacts
include the fact that funds will be provided to an institution in an EPSCoR
state (Oklahoma), international collaboration with German scientists, and the
interlaboratory calibration of volatile data. Results of the work are
complementary to those of the NSF-funded Ocean Drilling Program.