* 1132227
* Planning Grant: Integrating Computational Thinking Into Middle School Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Manuel Perez-Quinones, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 01/31/2015
* USD 215,998.00

Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VT) is partnering with the
Henrico County Public School District (HCPS) on a planning grant to develop a
CE21 project that will build Computational Thinking (CT) activities into current
instructional practices across core middle school curriculum. The project will
locate nascent CT activities in the existing curriculum, reinforce and develop
the overlap between the curricular area and the target CT area, and subsequently
reinforce the CT content in a short, reinforcing instructional unit. This
planning grant will be used to prepare for the research by creating, piloting,
testing and assembling instructional interventions and materials, approaches to
learning progressions in CT, management arrangements and practices across and
within VT and HCPS, and advisors across the areas that will need development and
oversight in full proposal. The overarching research questions for the full
proposal are (1) whether the approach of integrating CT is viable across diverse
educational environments, teachers and students, (2) whether the approach has
significant negative entailments ("show stoppers"), and (3) whether the approach
will prove to be scalable across different school systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CS department at VT has a long history of innovative
engagement with K-12 as well as university pedagogy in computational thinking,
mathematics, and science instruction. HCPS is a mixed SES, multi-racial district
of 50,000 students, with a ten-year history of integrating laptop use into
instruction in grades 6-12. The HCPS administration has identified CT as a
needed area for growth and has the backing of the District School Board. They
have a vision of 3-4 CT activities in every class in every grade across core
curricular areas. HCPS?s vision plus VT's CT expertise and the PI's prior
experience with the development and scaling up of educational research position
this project to produce transformative knowledge and practices.