* 1132130
* RAPID: Collaborative research: HF Radar surface current measurements in support of constraining shelf edge exchange in the SAB under wind, tidal and Gulf stream influence.
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2014
* George Voulgaris, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2014
* USD 111,273.00

This is a RAPID award, evaluated and funded on an accelerated schedule because
of critical time pressures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recently funded proposal
(NSF-OCE biological and physical oceanography programs, Awards 1032285 and
1032276) by Jim Nelson, H. Seim and C. Edwards focuses on physical-biological
coupling during winter on the outer shelf/upper slope off Long Bay (between Cape
Romain, SC and Cape Fear, NC. In this region, elongated shelf-edge phytoplankton
bloom features are common occurrences in wintertime satellite imagery. Unlike
other sections of the South Atlantic Bight shelf, where shelf edge upwelling
associated with Gulf Stream frontal eddies is the largest source of nutrients
supporting new production on the shelf, it appears that in Long Bay, other
processes must sustain the phytoplankton blooms throughout the winter months.
The Nelson et al. work will use mooring, glider, ship and satellite measurements
to investigate both physical and biological aspects of these other shelf-edge
physical mechanisms. This project will expand upon the scope of science made
possible by their suite of measurements by adding long-range HF radar surface
current measurements to the experiment, using existing HF radar instrumentation
available for this work. Deployment of the radars will enable the collection of
data on surface ocean current with a spatial resolution of 3000m and with a
temporal frequency of 30 min and over ranges reaching the Gulf
Stream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two beam forming, Wellen Radars (WERA) are
available at the University of South Carolina (Voulgaros) for use in this
project. A primary reason this deployment is suitable as a RAPID project is that
one of the two radars has only recently become available as a result of
unanticipated down-time in its dedicated mission as part of the national HF-
radar network. It would not have been possible to commit this radar to the
Nelson et al project at the time of their original proposal, but this
interruption in operation makes the system temporarily available for a focused
scientific research deployment. Necessary tasks for this deployment, such as
modifying the frequency of one of the radars, obtaining radio licenses from the
FCC, and finding suitable locations and obtaining permissions need to be started
quickly so as to deploy these systems in time for concurrent operation with the
Nelson et al. scheduled deployment in late January 2012.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The proposed data collection will
contribute substantially to the funded Nelson et al. work by providing a
significant improvement in their capacity to define Gulf Stream offshore
position and orientation at high spatial and temporal resolution. Assuming
availability of internet communications at the installations, real-time surface
current maps can contribute to the ship and glider operations of the Nelson et
al. project. With the addition of the Long Bay radar deployments to the existing
IOOS-supported radar coverage on the Georgia shelf, it will be possible to
contrast the surface expression of wind-forced alongshelf flow, internal tides
and shelf edge eddies between the Georgia shelf and Long Bay, and determine
their correspondence with different modes of Gulf Stream variability. This will
further permit the assessment of alongshelf convergence and off shelf
import/export between these contrasting regions of wind and Gulf Stream
influence at larger scales than have been possible in the
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Newly defined denitrification
processes (sinks) in the global coastal ocean imply much higher fixation and
input rates (sources) than are presently identified, requiring a more accurate
accounting of nitrate sources at the shelf edge. The export of shelf derived
carbon sources and the import of nitrate into the coastal ocean are both poorly
constrained in the South Atlantic Bight, and may contribute to global carbon and
nutrient cycles in important ways. These measurements will better constrain
those contributions for winter forcing in this region. This collaboration will
also enhance collaboration between the neighboring states of North Carolina,
South Carolina and Georgia, leading to a potential regional synergy in the area
of Physical Oceanography that could benefit all three regions.