* 1132243
* Conference Support for the XIX International Conference on Computational Methods in Water Resources (CMWR 2012)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Albert Valocchi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

The XIX International Conference on Computational Methods in Water Resources
will be held June 17-21, 2012, on the campus of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. This biennial series of meetings has served as the premier
venue for engineers, geoscientists, hydrologists, computer scientists and
applied mathematicians to present and discuss their latest research. The
increase in raw computational power, software developments, availability of on-
line hydrologic data, and recent advances in cyber-infrastructure make this a
particularly exciting time for computational applications to water resources and
geoscience challenges. The conference will serve as a unique forum to bring
together those from the computer science/applied math community who work in
methods and tools with those from engineering, geoscience, government and
industry who are responsible for addressing pressing water-related problems.
Topics of pressing societal relevance being emphasized in special sessions
include: climate change impacts on hydrology, river mechanics, circulation in
coastal oceans, ecohydrology, contaminant transport in surface water and
groundwater, and geological sequestration of carbon dioxide.

NSF support will allow undergraduate and graduate students to register at a
reduced rate, thereby facilitating participation by students. Students and post-
docs will benefit from the opportunity to present their work at a major
international conference. The conference will foster interactions among those
from academia, government, and industry, and will also enhance international
exchange. At the last meeting in the United States, approximately 40% of the
participants were international, representing more than 20 countries. Students
and other conference attendees will have the opportunity to interact with the
distinguished plenary speakers, who represent a diverse international group that
includes both senior and mid-career scholars. Students will submit full papers,
thus providing another opportunity for student training. The conference
proceedings will be openly available on the conference web site, thereby
benefitting the entire scientific community.