* 1132609
* RET Site: Research Experiences for Teachers in Emerging and Novel Engineering Technologies (RET-ENET) in the Rio Grande Valley
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Mounir Ben Ghalia, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 482,904.00

This award provides funding for a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
Site focused on Emerging and Novel Engineering Technologies at the University of
Texas-Pan American. Each year 12 middle and high school teachers from school
districts in the Rio Grande Valley will participate in research projects at the
university. The projects span a large array of topics in engineering and
computer science including control systems, power and energy, wireless networks,
algorithms, and robotics. The teachers will also develop modules related to
their research which they will implement in their classes in the following
school year. The teachers will showcase their work and build communities of
practice with other educators at an annual workshop. Through participation in
the RET Site the teachers will have an enhanced knowledge base in engineering
and computer science and the skills to translate this into their classroom
practices, thus impacting their students and motivating them towards science,
technology, computing, and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project revolves around the expertise of the research
team and the clearly-defined projects that are of current interest and relevant
to the teachers. K-12 curriculum units that are developed are tied to state and
national standards. The evaluation plan is outstanding. Overall the project is
conceptually sound with authentic research experiences tied to research goals
that are compelling and of interest as models for
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project lie in the
potential to impact STEM education in the Rio-Grande Valley, a region with a
population that is 86% Hispanic. Teachers will learn about engineering and
computer science through active participation in research combined with
professional development and sustained follow-up during the academic year. This
should motivate and prepare an untapped student talent pool to careers in
engineering and computer science. Materials will be disseminated to a large
number of teachers in the participating schools and broadly through the national
TeachEngineering.org Digital Library. The goal of the project is to build a
long-term collaborative partnership between the university and the area schools.
The project should enable the partners to work together to build a sustainable
foundation of outstanding computing and engineering education in the region.