* 1132801
* RUI/Collaborative Research: Development, Performance, &amp; Evolutionary Ramifications of Premaxillary Protrusion in Teleosts: A Transdisciplinary Study of Convergent Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 02/02/2011,08/31/2012
* Lara Ferry, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2012
* USD 61,813.00

This innovative collaborative project takes integrative, inter- and
transdisciplanary approaches from the fields of evolution, development,
biomechanics, engineering, and functional morphology, using experimentation and
modeling to examine the function and evolution of a complex structure, the
protrusible jaw of bony fishes. This feature is considered the major
evolutionary innovation that allowed for the evolution of the diversity of
fishes, which include more species than all other vertebrates together.
Interestingly, not all fishes produce this complex feature in the same way. This
project assesses how development may constrain or liberate the evolution of
complexity and tests hypotheses about convergent function generated by divergent
developmental mechanisms, and performance consequences. This proposal directly
addresses the question of why certain forms repeat in nature, while others do
not appear. This research will address the following questions: (1) How do
different developmental mechanisms generate convergent function? (2) What is the
performance advantage of upper jaw protrusion? (3) Are there performance
consequences for the different underlying mechanisms? In answering these
questions this research will determine the extent to which fishes are
constrained by development, and how they may escape these
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this research are
strong, including a PI that is a beginning investigator, one that is a member of
a group underrepresented in Biology, and the training of diverse students,
especially undergraduates at a Minority Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;