* 1132177
* Workshops: Multiscale Modeling for Multifunctional Analysis and Design (MMMAD) and Challenges in Computational Multiscale Materials Modeling (CCMMM); Arlington, VA; 2-5 May 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Somnath Ghosh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 05/31/2013
* USD 82,799.00

This grant provides partial funding to support workshops on Multiscale Modeling
for Multifunctional Analysis and Design (MMMAD) and Challenges in Computational
Multiscale Materials Modeling (CCMMM) to be held in Arlington, Virginia. These
workshops are part of a series of three interdisciplinary workshops that will
focus on experimental and computational methods in multiscale analysis and
design. The workshops will be held from 2 thru 5 May 2011 and are entitled: (i)
Experimental Multiscale Methods (EMM), (ii) Multiscale Modeling for
Multifunctional Analysis and Design (MMMAD), and (iii) Challenges in
Computational Multiscale Materials Modeling (CCMMM). The workshop series will be
sponsored by multiple government agencies, viz. ARO, AFOSR and NSF. The EMM
workshop will focus on measurement of deformation and experimental methods
across scales. It will also address validation of multiscale models by means of
multiscale experiments. The MMMAD workshop will discuss specific challenges
pertaining to the development of robust multiscale computational analysis-design
platforms for multifunctional materials and structures. The CCMMM workshop will
address critical issues that confront the computational multiscale materials
modeling research discipline for comprehensive analysis of complex material
structure interactions at a broad range of length and time scales. The workshops
will address critical challenges and needs in establishing robust spatio-
temporal multiscale modeling of material systems.

The potential of the multiscale modeling paradigm is unfathomable at the current
stages, given the tremendous growth in various aspects of this discipline. The
theme is consistent with current trends in Integrated Computational Materials
Science and Engineering (ICMSE) and Simulation based Engineering & Sciences
(SBES) to guide the design of novel systems that meet specifications of
performance and reliability. The proposed workshop series will bring together
researchers from academia, industry and national laboratories to identify major
challenges and research objectives for developing robust multiscale modeling and
design platforms. A comprehensive report will result from this workshop which
will be an important roadmap for future strategic developments in this field.