* 1132442
* Trophic Conversion of an Obligate Photoautotrophic Organism to Produce Isobutyraldehyde in the Absence of Light
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Shota Atsumi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 299,985.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Shota Atsumi Proposal Number: 1132442

Intellectual Merit

Global climate change has stimulated efforts towards a reduction of net carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions. One approach to reduce net CO2 emission is to recycle
the CO2 as a feedstock for producing fuels or chemicals using photosynthesis. In
any scalable process, continuous production of biofuel under natural light
conditions with a dinural (light/dark) cycle is critical to maximize production
and minimize costs. The proposed research aims to genetically modify
photosynthetic bacteria (cyanobacteria) to convert both CO2 and glucose into
isobutyraldehyde, which can be converted to butanol, a potential liquid
transportation fuel. Under light conditions, model cyanobacteria will be
metabolically engineered to produce isobutyraldehyde from CO2. Systems biology
approaches will be used to further engineer the cyanbacteria from an obligate
photoautotroph into a heterotroph to produce isobutyraldehyde from glucose under
dark conditions as well.

The overall goals of this proposed research are to construct a platform to
produce isobutyraldehyde in a cyanobacterium without light, gain understanding
of the complex behavior of obligate photoautotrophs, and engineer their
biological systems through rational design enabled by metabolic engineering and
synthetic biology. The research plan has three components: 1) Heterologous
expression of glucose transporter and 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase in the
cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus; 2) Improvement of heterotrophic growth
and production using evolutionary and genomic approaches; and 3)
Characterization the engineered strains. The research outcomes have the
potential to elucidate the critical mechanisms that cause obligate
photoautotrophy in photosynthetic bacteria.

Broader Impacts

The proposed education activities will train undergraduate and graduate students
in metabolic engineering and synthetic biology through team and peer mentorship
approaches. The proposed outreach activities will be designed to stimulate
interest of K-12 students in bioenergy topics using existing programs at
University of California at Davis (UCD), including the Teen Biotech Challenge
(TBC) program, and American Chemical Society (ACS) project SEED summer research
program, and the UCD Young Scholars program.