* 1132455
* Catalyzing US-India Collaboration: Mechanics of Materials in Extreme Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Vikas Tomar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 10,030.00

Vikas Tomar &lt;br/&gt;OISE- 1132455 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S.-India Planning
Visit: Catalyzing Collaboration on the Mechanics of Materials in Extreme
Environments &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning visit will initiate
collaborative research in mechanical engineering between Purdue University
Professor Vikas Tomar, School of Aeronautics and Astronautics and Indian
Institute of Technology Madras (IITM) Professor Srikanth Vedantam, Department of
Engineering Design. The focus of the research is to develop a modeling based
approach to predicting high temperature material (HTM) microstructure evolution
and its effect on material strength in high temperature environments. The PI and
graduate student will undertake a two-week visit to India's premier IITM in
Chennai to finalize preliminary calculations at the Indian facility in
preparation for submitting a research proposal to either CMMI's Materials and
Surface Engineering Program or DMR's Materials World Network Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research- microstructural development in high
temperature materials- is a challenging and fundamental problem in materials
science that could have broad impact on many areas in the materials sciences.
Successful completion of the research has potential to lead to new HTMs with
sustained strength in high temperature environments. Beyond this, the goal is to
develop a predictive framework and formation of scientific principles that will
transform the science of material microstructure prediction for sustained HTM
strength in extreme environments. The inclusion of a US graduate student in this
planning visit offers a unique opportunity to conduct research with
international investigators and contributes to the sustainability of
collaboration between Purdue and the IITM in Chennai, India.