* 1132087
* Group Travel to the 11th International Symposium on Antarctic Earth Sciences (ISAES), Edinburgh, Scotland
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* W. Berry Lyons, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 02/29/2012
* USD 49,834.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The International Symposium on Antarctic Earth
Sciences (ISAES) is held every four years and is a premier Antarctic research
conference. The 11th ISAES meeting will be held 10-16 July 2011 in Edinburgh,
Scotland. ISAES is a key platform for generating or augmenting international
collaborations and this travel grant will help make this conference accessible
for graduate students and early-career researchers. Symposium presentations and
publications will provide a key record of International Polar Year activities in
the earth sciences in Antarctica, and an invaluable resource for planning
future, international, collaborative research. Funds are requested to support
the attendance of 20- 25 U.S. researchers at this conference. In particular, the
funds will be used to support graduate students and young investigators who
currently do not have sufficient travel support. Requests for support will be
evaluated by the PIs and a group of geoscientists from the Byrd Polar Research
Center and School of Earth Sciences at The Ohio State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;These funds will
allow a more diverse group of researchers to participate in the ISAES
conference, which will encourage global collaboration and cooperation. Travel
funds will preferentially be provided for students and early career researcher
and thus will augment their training and career development.