* 1132812
* International: Early Intergenerational Cohesiveness and Later Proximity to Parents: Cross-National Contexts of Intergenerational Solidarity
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Brian Gillespie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 14,911.00

This project will support a U.S. graduate student to conduct research at the
Universiteit Utrecht in the Netherlands. Building on prior research with the
U.S. National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), the student will work using
the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study to investigate residential choice,
intergenerational solidarity, and the transition to adulthood. Intergenerational
exchanges between adult children and their parents are a critical resource for
young and old, and residential proximity is the best predictor of these
exchanges. No research to date has addressed the extent to which children who
are emotionally closer to parents choose to live nearby. This project has two
objectives: to test longitudinal models which evaluate the relationship between
earlier parent-child cohesion and later residential proximity of young adults
and their parents; and to compare intergenerational family dynamics for two
societal contexts, the U.S. and the Netherlands, which differ along a number of
salient dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will contribute
to determining whether early parent-child emotional closeness is related to
later spatial proximity to parents. Coupled with analysis from the United
States, the work using the Netherlands data set will provide the most persuasive
evidence to date of the relationship between affectual and structural parent-
child solidarity. The two country comparison will speak to the universality or
context dependency of the solidarity-proximity relation between children and
parents. The visit will also foster linkages between researchers working with
the Dutch and U.S. datasets, and enable a U.S. student to build a long-term
network with European collaborators.