* 1132383
* U.S.-Australia Catalyzing New International Collaboration:  Two-Phase Solar Reactor Development by the Novel Application of Advanced Laser Diagnostics and Modeling
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2013
* John Abraham, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 11/30/2013
* USD 24,752.00

1132383&lt;br/&gt;Abraham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
collaborative research visit to enable Professor John Abraham at Purdue
University in West Lafayette, Indiana to meet with Professors Graham Nathan,
Director of the Centre for Energy Technology (CET) at the University of Adelaide
in Australia. The researchers will begin planning a collaborative project on a
two-phase solar reactor development by the novel application of advanced laser
diagnostics and modeling. They will develop an optimization gasification process
for production of syngas from carbon feedstocks using solar radiation as the
heat source. Gasification of carbon feedstocks to produce syngas has been shown
to be a clean and efficient way to utilize coal and biomass. Improvements in the
performance of the reactor in which the gasification occurs can increase the
overall efficiency of the system. There are optimum pressure and temperature
conditions, flow and heat transfer conditions, and residence time requirements
within the reactor which can maximize the production of syngas. At the CET
reactor, concentrated solar radiation is employed to initiate the gasification
process. The CET has developed unique and advanced optical diagnostic techniques
to carry out fundamental experimental studies to achieve this improved
understanding. However, the proposed experiments alone cannot provide the
information needed to achieve a complete understanding of the physics in the
reactor. Advanced computational modeling is also required and will be provided
by the U.S. researchers by developing a reliable computational fluid dynamics
model suitable for compact, direct heat-exchange solar reactors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient overlap of interests between
researchers in the U.S and Australia to indicate that they can successfully
pursue the activities proposed, and that the interaction will benefit both sides
by developing the fundamental understanding needed to develop highly-efficient
reactors for gasification of carbon feedstocks. Both the U.S. and Australia
possess large coal reserves. Advanced coal gasifiers will significantly
accelerate the development of clean coal technologies in these countries and
this will help in the reduction of carbon emissions. Dependence on domestic
energy resources, such as coal, will also strengthen the energy security of both
countries. A U.S. graduate student will be taking part in this visit. This
project will provide the student with additional academic and cultural
experiences, as well as experience in all aspects of the research. It is
anticipated that the student will maintain contact with the Australian
collaborators for additional research projects in the future.&lt;br/&gt;