* 1132395
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Unpacking Personhood and Identity in the Hohokam Area of Southern Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Jessica Cerezo-Roman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 3,341.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Barbara J. Mills, Jessica I. Cerezo-Rom√°n will
analyze mortuary practices among the Southern Arizona Hohokam during the
Preclassic (A.D. 700-1150) and Classic periods (A.D. 1150-1450/1500) to look at
how identities were defined by the participation of individuals in different
social networks. They will use the concept of personhood to elucidate how
individuals' networks were defined through burial practices, spatial
distributions, and associated material culture. Prior research in the U.S.
Southwest typically focused on single attributes of identity, such as social
status and gender. However in the past decade archaeological approaches to
identity have broadened considerably and have gone beyond single attributes of
identity to look at the multiple ways in which identity was constructed. The
proposed research will focus on evidence from 12 archaeological sites in the
Tucson area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will build on
significant advances in identity studies of past populations, particularly by
looking beyond the study of a single attribute of identity to the multiple ways
a person's identity was constructed. It will employ an original approach that
has implications for refinement of archaeological method and theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine three problems related to the
identification of, and changes in, aspects of identity and
personhood:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the range of identity practices
found within a site's mortuary assemblage, and how do these intersect to reveal
different aspects of identity associated with the individual's age, sex, and
group identity, among others?&lt;br/&gt;2. What are the differences and
similarities between sites, and why do they or don't they occur?&lt;br/&gt;3.
What are the differences/similarities through time at different scales, and why
do they or don't they occur?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions a
multidimensional approach will be used that incorporates several spatial scales
through time, and that applies different statistical analyses. The approach used
will analyze how people were represented in mortuary rituals by analyzing human
skeletal remains from the sites, how people in the past treated those bodies,
and the archaeological contexts of burial. The combination of the study of the
skeletal remains, posthumous treatment of the body and archaeological context
will reveal clues to how people were remembered at death by their families and
community, and an individual's position(s) within multiple social networks.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Beyond research questions that are important to social
scientist the research will provide information on prehistoric populations that
may support links to contemporary indigenous groups. The data generated through
this research can be used by tribes and institutions for cultural affiliation
studies. Upon completion the results of the research will be broadly
disseminated to the scientific community, Native American communities, and to
the general public.