* 1132187
* Collaborative Research: Monotone Methods in Dynamic Screening Contracts
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Curtis Taylor, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 206,457.00

The research focus of this project is the provision of incentives in the face of
severe contemporaneous liquidity constraints. Hence, one way of framing this
project is as endeavoring to answer a natural economic question: what is the
best way for the owner of a firm (the principal) to incentivize an employee
operator (the agent) who has no wealth of his own? The posited answer is that
the principal should use 'sweat equity contracts' that reward the agent for good
outcomes (i.e., low cost realizations) by increasing his ownership stake in the
firm and punish him for bad outcomes (i.e., high cost realizations) by reducing
it. As such, the findings will have implications in numerous financial and
contractual settings including: franchising, venture capital, and investment
banking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the methods at the heart of this project
should give rise to robust empirical implications in such settings. For
instance, work-to-own franchise contracts should specify the path by which an
employee operator either becomes a vested owner of a franchise or is fired and
replace. Similarly, in the context of venture capital covenants, output growth
should be associated with the transfer of control rights from venture
capitalists to the founding entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
methods developed under the auspices of this project will have spillovers in
many applications of dynamic mechanism design. For example, in a setting of
multi-firm procurement, the theory developed under this project may help to
explain the endogenous emergence of long-term supply relationships. Whereas, in
the context of repeated sales to cash constrained customers, the theory may shed
light on such contractual arrangements as frequent-purchase discount plans.
Finally, in a setting of private wealth shocks, the methodology may advance
understanding of optimal mutual insurance
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the purpose of this
project is to investigate the structure and implementation of optimal dynamic
screening contracts. Specifically, the model proposed for study is an infinite-
horizon version of the canonical static monopolistic screening setting in which
the agent is privately informed about the stream of costs or revenues and is
severely liquidity constrained. The resulting dynamic mechanism-design problem
facing the principal will be formulated as a recursive dynamic program in which
the relevant state variable is promised future rents paid to the agent. It will
be shown that under certain assumptions all contractual terms (output,
contemporaneous rents, and future rents) are weakly increasing in the state
variable, affording a unique interpretation of the state as the agent's equity
in the firm. Higher levels of sweat equity are associated with lower output
distortions and less stringent liquidity constraints. Moreover, monotonicity in
type permits characterization of short-run dynamic adjustments in the
contractual environment -- high cost realizations result in lower sweat equity
and more distortions while low realizations have the reverse effects. Following
the optimal dynamic insurance literature, it may also be possible to establish
long-run contractual dynamics under which the agent ultimately either achieves a
vested ownership stake in the firm or is fired and replaced.