* 1132290
* International Symposium on Clusters and Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Purusottam Jena, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This award is made on funds from the Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation Division in the Engineering Directorate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides participant support for the
conference: 'International Symposium on Clusters and Nanostructures' to be held
in Richmond, Virginia on the dates November 7-10, 2011. The symposium will focus
on the roles clusters and nanostructures play in solving outstanding problems in
clean and sustainable energy, environment, and health; three of the most
important issues facing science and society. Many of the materials issues in
renewable energies, environmental impacts of energy technologies as well as
beneficial and toxicity issues of nanoparticles in health are intertwined.
Addressing both fundamental and applied materials issues requires a
multidisciplinary approach. The objective of the Richmond symposium is to
provide such a forum by bringing researchers from physics, chemistry, materials
science, and engineering fields to share their ideas and results, identify
outstanding problems, and develop new collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clean and sustainable energy will address challenges in
production, storage, conversion, and efficiency of alternate energies and will
cover solar, wind, bio, thermo-electric, and hydrogen. Environmental issues will
deal with air- and water-pollution and conservation, environmental remediation
and hydrocarbon processing. Topics in health will include therapeutic and
diagnostic methods as well as health hazards attributed to nanoparticles. Cross-
cutting topics such as reactions, catalysis, electronic, optical, and magnetic
properties will also be covered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a single forum, this
symposium will address important issues in energy, environment, and health and
the manner in which they are intertwined. With no parallel sessions and with
participants and speakers from academia, government laboratories and industry,
the symposium will foster an interacting environment where new ideas can be
brought into focus and pursued. The oral sessions will include invited talks as
well as hot-topics to be selected from contributed abstracts. Participants can
also present their research in two poster sessions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and minorities
will participate in the meeting. Invited talks will be made available through
the conference website and papers presented at the symposium will be published
either as conference proceedings or in an archival journal for wide
dissemination.