* 1132301
* Photonic Crystal Enhanced Microscopy for Characterization of Cell Attachment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Lawrence Schook, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

1132301&lt;br/&gt;Cunningham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;We propose the development of a photonic crystal enhanced
microscope (PCEM) as a&lt;br/&gt;powerful multimode imaging approach for
quantification and visualization of the interactions&lt;br/&gt;between cells and
surfaces. The PCEM is designed to utilize the properties of a
photonic&lt;br/&gt;crystal (PC) biosensor surface that is designed to produce
narrow bandwidth optical resonances&lt;br/&gt;for two distinct purposes. First,
the resonant coupling condition of the PC is modified by
cell&lt;br/&gt;attachment, and the PCEM is capable of producing images of the
spatial distribution of cell&lt;br/&gt;attachment with sufficient resolution to
quantify variations in the strength of attachment within&lt;br/&gt;individual
cells. Second, the PC surface enables efficient coupling to laser illumination,
resulting&lt;br/&gt;in the ability to enhance the output of fluorescent
molecules in close proximity to the PC by two&lt;br/&gt;orders of magnitude,
using a technique called "PC Enhanced Fluorescence." The PCEM will
be&lt;br/&gt;an enabling tool for a broad range of life science research and
pharmaceutical screening&lt;br/&gt;applications that require characterization of
the interaction between extracellular matrix&lt;br/&gt;materials and cell
membrane-expressed proteins in response to cell growth, pro-
apoptotic&lt;br/&gt;stimuli, forced differentiation protocols, chemotaxis, ion
channel activation, transmembrane&lt;br/&gt;protein activation, and
proliferation. PCEM offers the ability to perform assays with a
limited&lt;br/&gt;number of available cells for applications involving primary
cells or stem cells. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;system builds upon the successful
implementation and demonstration of the first PCEM system,&lt;br/&gt;which was
designed and built for applications involving DNA microarrays and
protein&lt;br/&gt;microarrays. The proposed instrument incorporates objective-
coupled illumination from above&lt;br/&gt;and below the PC for simultaneous
label-free imaging, bright field imaging, and enhanced&lt;br/&gt;fluorescence
imaging with optics designed to optimize the sensitivity and resolution of
each&lt;br/&gt;modality when the PC surface is immersed in cell media. The
system also incorporates a CO2&lt;br/&gt;environmental chamber to facilitate
continuous monitoring of cells for extended periods of
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Biologists are developing a
more sophisticated understanding of how cell membrane&lt;br/&gt;interactions
with surfaces, chemical stimuli, and other cells are modulated, and the role
of&lt;br/&gt;integrins, ion channels, G-coupled transmembrane proteins, and
filapodia in fundamental&lt;br/&gt;processes such as migration, wound healing,
differentiation, and apoptosis. Yet, there are few&lt;br/&gt;tools currently
available that allow visualization and quantification of these processes. While
the&lt;br/&gt;initial set of demonstrated applications for PCEM will include
cancer cell cytotoxicity, T-cell&lt;br/&gt;induced apoptosis, stem cell
differentiation, and cardiac cell stimulation, the
system's&lt;br/&gt;capabilities extend to any cell type and any process that can
be carried out upon a surface. The&lt;br/&gt;environment at Illinois, in which
the PI is an investigator within the NSF-sponsored Center for&lt;br/&gt;Cellular
Mechanics (CCMB) IGERT, and the NIH-sponsored Cancer Nanotechnology
training&lt;br/&gt;grant, and the location of the system within the Micro and
Nanotechnology Laboratory's&lt;br/&gt;BioNanotechnology Laboratory assures that
the system will be included in multidisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;training programs.
Users of the system will be comprised of faculty, graduate students,
and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students from Engineering, Pharmacology, Animal
Sciences, Microbiology, and&lt;br/&gt;Immunology. The project will develop
general-purpose methods for studying cell-surface&lt;br/&gt;interactions that
can be used broadly in pharmaceutical screening and life science research
-&lt;br/&gt;extending the applicability of photonic crystal biosensors. The PI
has a successful track record&lt;br/&gt;of biosensor instrumentation invention,
development, and commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal also describes an
education plan that is closely linked with the program's&lt;br/&gt;technical
goals with impact upon graduate student research, undergraduate
research,&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate classroom/laboratory learning, and teaching
biosensing/photonics concepts to a&lt;br/&gt;University-based all-girls middle
school. The PI has a strong track record for involving&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
students in his research, and for making the technology developed under
NSF&lt;br/&gt;funding available in his ECE416 "Biosensors" course, both in the
form of lecture topics and&lt;br/&gt;hands-on laboratory experience.