* 1132116
* Mechanism of alpha catenin tension sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Yingxiao Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

1132116 Leckband

Intellectual merit. This program extends recent innovative findings by this team
demonstrating that cadherin complexes--critical proteins at cell-to-cell
junctions in all soft tissues--sense the mechanical properties of the cell
environment and proportionally regulates cell functions. A major objective is to
use sensitive force probes to test proposed mechanisms of mechano-sensing at
cadherin junctions. A new innovation will be the development of a fluorescence-
based intracellular biosensor to directly test whether mechanical force induces
conformational changes in a putative force sensor at intercellular adhesions.
This sensor will enable direct visualization of dynamic, force-actuated changes
at cadherin-based adhesions in live cells. This will transform the ability to
investigate mechanotransduction at intercellular junctions, and enable the real-
time visualization of spatial maps of mechanotransduction, in a living cell.
This multidisciplinary research involves sensitive mechanical measurements,
probe development, and dynamic, subcellular imaging of live cells. This program
is innovative because cadherin-based, intercellular mechanosensing and its
impact on broader cell mechanics is an almost entirely unexplored research area.
This research will have broad impact because cadherins are critical for tissue
genesis, organized tissue remodeling, and regulating tissue barriers. Cadherins'
capacity to sense force would dramatically impact how they regulate cell
functions, and expand the impact of mechanical force on cell-cell communication.
Because cadherins are important for human health and tissue biology, this work
will impact fields ranging from developmental biology to bioengineering and the
clinic. The educational impact lies in the outreach to women and minorities at
pre-college and undergraduate levels through the "Girls Adventures in
Mathematics and Engineering" (GAMES) program and with the Summer Research
Opportunity Program for minorities (SROP) at the University of Illinois. This
grant will enable the implementation of technologies described in this proposal
in GAMES workshops and in SROP research projects, and the continued mentoring
women and underrepresented minorities.