* 1132545
* RAPID: Continuation of U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section: CFC and SF6 Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* William Smethie, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2013
* USD 31,462.00

The U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic campaign cruise was launched from Lisbon on
the R/V/ Knorr in October, 2010. Unfortunately, in mid-course, a problem with
the propulsion system developed, and the cruise had to be aborted. The Knorr
went to a shipyard in Charleston, SC for repairs where scientific equipment and
samples were offloaded there and shipped back to the various home institutions
of the various scientists.

This project addresses the efforts of one investigator originally funded through
an ARRA award to participate in the North Atlantic campaign -- to resume a set
of essential observations when the field program resumes in November, 2011.

With support through a Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID), a research
team at the Lamont-Dougherty earth Observatory will measure the CFC-11, CFC-12
and SF6 distributions along the autumn 2011 continuation of the previously
aborted US GEOTRACES North Atlantic transect. They will use these data to
identify the most recently ventilated cores of the North Atlantic water masses,
to estimate transit times of these water masses from their source regions, and
to estimate oxygen consumption rates and rates of production or decomposition of
selected trace elements measured on this program using the transit time
information. Such measurements are critically important to understanding how the
physical processes of advection, mixing, and water mass formation affect the
distributions of trace elements and isotopes in the ocean. The evolving CFC and
SF6 distributions in the ocean provide strong constraints on these processes.
Measurement of CFCs and SF6 on the GEOTRACES program places the GEOTRACES data
in the context of large scale ventilation patterns established by CFC/SF6
measurements on these cruises.

Broader Impacts. In addition to providing information on ventilation and transit
times for the GEOTRACES project, the CFC and SF6 data collected on this cruise
will also expand the transient tracer data base for the North Atlantic Ocean.
The data will be disseminated widely to the research community following NSF
guidelines. Several CLIVAR cruises to the North Atlantic are planned for the
2010 - 2012 time period, and the GEOTRACES cruise will increase the coverage for
CFCs and SF6. This database of the temporally evolving CFC and SF6
concentrations in the North Atlantic Ocean is used in studies of the role of the
ocean in global climate and the global CO2 cycle. It is used to validate models
of ocean circulation and to quantify the uptake and storage of anthropogenic CO2
in the ocean. Such information is critical for society to make sound decisions
on policies to deal with climate change.