* 1132369
* Meeting: New Frontiers from Marine Snakes to Marine Ecosystems, Charleston, SC January 4-7, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Harvey Lillywhite, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 14,580.00

A Symposium titled "New Frontiers from Marine Snakes to Marine Ecosystems" and
an associated Workshop titled "Building Conceptual Bridges between Marine Snake
Research and Challenging Frontiers in Biology" will be held during 3-7 January
2012 at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology, Charleston, SC. The Symposium will feature 11 speakers with additional
participants contributing to complementary oral and poster sessions and
discussions at the Workshop. This meeting will reflect a breadth of involvement
including diversity of age, gender, ethnicity, institutions, and international
participation.

The proposed Symposium, together with interactions during complementary sessions
and the associated Workshop, will provide an important service for students and
new research scientists by interpreting the significance of current research,
promoting the integration of marine research, and highlighting some intriguing
directions for future investigations. The breadth of the symposium, and the
diverse interests of people who will come to it, presents unparalleled
opportunities for integration of topics and promotion of future
interdisciplinary research involving a variety of disciplines.

Several interrelated goals of the Symposium are: (1) Bring together world?s
experts who currently investigate the biology of marine snakes and their
interactions with marine ecosystems in which they live (principally coral
reefs). (2) Establish and promote the use of marine systems as models for
investigating conceptual issues related to environment, changing climate, and
persistence of biological communities. (3) Identify leading-edge topics for
which studies of marine snakes might contribute uniquely to the advancement of
research. Examples are: (i) understanding overall patterns of biodiversity in
the Indo-Pacific; (ii) applying molecular approaches to advance understanding of
evolutionary processes including diverse and prolific radiations; and (iii)
better understanding the importance of bioindicators to health and conservation
of coral reef ecosystems. (4) Summarize and evaluate current states of knowledge
for various topics in a context of moving fields forward and promoting linkages
to ongoing research. (5) Build collaborations among the various persons who will
participate. Papers from the Symposium will be published in the peer-reviewed
journal Integrative & Comparative Biology, and will be followed with publication
of a book in the near future.