* 1132382
* Collaborative research for Underground Science: Barium Tagging Techniques for EXO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Giorgio Gratta, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 733,767.00

The observation of neutrinoless double beta decay will help determine the masses
of neutrinos, discover lepton number violation and reveal if two-component
Majorana fermions exist in Nature. EXO, a multi-tonne neutrinoless double beta
decay experiment employing xenon enriched to ~80% in the isotope Xenon-136, is
now taking data at the WIPP underground site in New Mexico. However, the next
generation of such experiments requires advanced background reduction methods to
reach Majorana neutrino mass sensitivities below 0.01
eV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EXO is developing a novel technique to tag the Barium
(Ba) produced in the final state of the neutrinoless double beta decay using
atomic spectroscopy. This technique has the promise of drastically reducing
radioactive backgrounds, providing a clean and un-ambiguous measurement with
unprecedented sensitivity. Recent breakthroughs have been obtained in the Ba-
tagging front. These groups have produced, for the first time, Ba transport and
tagging efficiencies above 1%. The R&amp;D work funded with this award builds on
such breakthroughs and aspires to provide the first demonstration of high
efficiency tagging of individual Ba atoms in liquid xenon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: While the primary scientific goal of this
proposal is in the field of neutrino physics, its broader impact is substantial.
The techniques being developed span a range of topics, from nuclear and particle
astrophysics, to AMO, surface physics and material science. This research, if
successful, is likely to be applicable to other problems in science and
technology, where the high efficiency transfer and identification of single
atoms would be of interest. Examples include trace analysis for homeland
security applications and the detection of rare phenomena. The team is also
planning to continue the summer program integrating high school teachers into
their labs.