* 1132725
* A Scalable Cavity Architecture for Quantum Optoelectronics in the Strong-Coupling Regime
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Hui Deng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 56,984.00

A Scalable Cavity Architecture for Quantum Optoelectronics&lt;br/&gt;in the
Strong-Coupling Regime&lt;br/&gt; Project Summary &lt;br/&gt;As technology
reaches the nano-scales, we rapidly approach the classical limits. Control of
the quantum world stands out as a grand scientific challenge. In this realm,
spectacular progress has been made on diverse, individual quantum systems.
Integration and coherent coupling of multiple quantum systems in a scalable
fashion, however, remains extremely challenging. In this program, we propose a
collaborative efforts to tackle this challenge using a new cavity system with
strong matter-light couplings. The proposed system utilizes a versatile,
designable photonic-crystal mirror to control the properties of hybrid photon-
exciton modes, the polaritons, in the strong-coupling regime. It builds on the
recent advancement of both photonic crystal research in the engineering
community and the quantum coherence research of polariton in the physics
community. The hybrid cavity architecture will enable flexible control of
polaritons and coupling of multiple polariton quantum systems on the same chip
and thereby lay the foundation for future technologies based on collective
quantum coherence, such as ultrafast and energy efficent lasers and switches,
quantum circuits and interometers, and quantum
simulators.&lt;br/&gt;Accomplishing the goal requires a concerted effort of
computer-aided design and modeling of the new cavity architecture,
nanofabrication of the devices, and laser and quantum optical spectroscopy of
the fabricated device. These tasks will be carried out through collaboration of
a US and a German team:&lt;br/&gt;The US team, led by the PI at the University
of Michigan, specializes in experimental quantum optics, coherence spectroscopy,
matter-light interaction, and design and modeling of cavity systems. The US team
will lead the efforts of design, modeling, and optical measurements of the new
cavity system. Students will visit the German site and will be trained by the
German team on nano-fabrication of the photonic crystal mirrors.&lt;br/&gt;The
German team is led by Dr. Alfred Forchel and Dr. Martin Kamp at the
Physikalisches Institut at the Universität Würzburg. The German team is a world
leader in semiconductor materials and devices with expertise in molecular-beam
epitaxy growth and nanofabrication of III-As microcavities. The German team will
perform MBE growth of the structures, and will provide facilities, training, and
technical support in nano-fabrication of the photonic crystals. Members of the
team will visit Michigan to participate in optical
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The program will develop a scalable
cavity architecture for controlling collective quantum coherence of
semiconductor polaritons. Polaritons are a special quantum system with robust
coherence, high operating tempeartures, and a built-in matter light interface.
However, control of polaritons is severely limited at present by rigid cavity
structure. We will develop in this program a new cavity architecture for
polaritons that uniquely allows flexible confinement, control, and coupling of
individual and multiple polariton systems, while preserving the desired quantum
coherence and nonlinear interactions. The new system will enable research of
coupled quantum gasses on a scalable solid-state platform, and will bridge
quantum phenomena and advanced optoelectronic technolgy ranging from ultrafast
and energy efficent lasers and switches to circuits and simulators for quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts The program provides US graduate students
the opportunity to be trained by the world?s leading experts on nano-science,
and to work in an international, multi-culture environment. The German students
will benefit similarly. These will provide invaluable experience and training
for the students and prepare them as future leaders in the international science
and engineering community. The shared knowledge and expertise will broadly
benefit the quantum science and nanotechnology communities in both countries.
The program also provides opportunities to engage undergraduate students in
cutting edge research and mentoring women and minorities interested in science.
Scientific advancement through the research program will be disseminated to a
broad audience via international summer schools, conferences, and education and
outreach activities at K-12 schools. &lt;br/&gt;