* 1132522
* GEOTRACES Atlantic Section: Measurement of Helium Isotopes and Tritium
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 05/31/2012
* USD 17,687.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will provide funding to a
research team at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution to continue their
collection of tritium and helium isotope samples on the interrupted GEOTRACES
North Atlantic Zonal Section originally funded through an NSF ARRA award. Due to
the mechanical failure of the research vessel KNORR's propulsion system, the
original cruise was cut short about one third of the way through, and most of
the scientific party was obliged to disembark in Cape Verde Islands. Extra
effort is required to refurbish sampling vessels and re-stage the sampling
effort for the second cruise set for October, 2011. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will make helium isotope and tritium measurements to provide
useful biogeochemical rate information for the more centrally important TEI
measurements made on the continuation of the first U.S. GEOTRACES global survey
section. The primary contributions that tritium and 3He measurements can make to
the program include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Quantifying transit timescales
and TEI dilution in the MOC: 3H and 3He are useful tracers for determining deep
western boundary current tracer transport rates and interior mixing dilution
scales, an important issue for many TEIs.&lt;br/&gt;(2) As a shallow water
chronometer: using the tritium-3He clock, we can determine the time elapsed
since fluid parcels have been subducted on timescales ranging from 6 months to
several decades. We can also combine 3H - 3He ages and evolving 3H and 3He
distributions with geostrophy, T,S, O2, nutrient, and TEI distributions to
estimate transformation rates. &lt;br/&gt;(3) A TEI thermocline reflux gauge:
3He e is a unique ?nutrient-like? transient tracer that can be used as a so-
called flux gauge to determine the rates at which thermocline-remineralized TEIs
are returned to the upper ocean. This is important for biogeochemical models.
&lt;br/&gt;(4) Gauging TEI hydrothermal dilution scales: Volcanic 3He injected
during hydrothermal activity is a powerful conservative tracer of dilution in
these plumes, allowing diagnosis of non-conservative behavior in some TEIs, and
permitting flux estimates associated with hydrothermal activity on basin and
global scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The P.I. will be responsible for the
acquisition, measurement, interpretation and modeling of the tritium and 3He to
achieve the above objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed work is in support of the GEOTRACES program, as such contributes to the
broader societal goals and intellectual objectives espoused by that program. The
primary issues related to this are pertinent to understanding the carbon cycle
and predicting/mitigating climate change, as well as the marine food web and
anthropogenic impacts on the oceans.