* 1132141
* CAREER: Investigating the Critical Junctures: Strategies that Broaden Minority Participation in STEM Fields
* EDU,DRL
* 11/11/2010,07/31/2015
* Terrell Strayhorn, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 07/31/2015
* USD 442,812.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a systematic and empirical (both
quantitative and qualitative) longitudinal study of the factors that influence
students' decisions at critical junctures in the educational pipeline. The goals
are too (a) broaden participation in science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) fields and (b) improve the recruitment, retention, and success of
minority undergraduate men in STEM and STEM-related fields across colleges and
universities in the United States. Specifically, the goals of this study are to
(a) estimate the impacts of Black and Latino males' backgrounds, K-12
educational and college experiences on their movement or transition through the
STEM pipeline (b) model such decisions by developing a latent model using
nationally representative data (c) test and refine the latent model using
locally collected data and (d) employ qualitative interviews to examine closely
cases of those who successfully navigate through critical junctures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan is designed to train a cadre of Black
and Latino doctoral students, each year (e.g., 12 in year one including 5
minority men, 4 women, 2 employed at community colleges), to conduct empirical
research, including large-scale secondary analyses, on issues related to STEM
education by integrating this research in graduate-level research
design/analysis courses. The goal is to produce doctoral graduates who possess
the skills to conduct rigorous research/evaluation and who understand their
social responsibility to use such capabilities in service to society. Students
are involved as student researchers and co-presenters. A mini-conference will be
held for 20-40 Black and Latino males as a form of outreach in broadening
participation in Year Five of the project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Knowledge
resulting from this study will enhance understanding about how to design
programs, formulate policies, and enact practices that improve the educational
pipeline for African American and Latino men in STEM fields. The study will
inform policy and practice through the following project outcomes: (1) Workshops
that leverage the knowledge produced by the project and make such information
accessible to teachers, administrators, parents, and more general audiences; (2)
A dedicated website that provides access to information and publications that
result from this research investigation including, but not limited to, progress
reports, preliminary findings, annual reports, empirical research summaries and
journal articles; (3) Publications that summarize and share findings from the
project including peer-reviewed journal articles, a book-length manuscript, and
student publications including theses and dissertations; (4) Meeting with PTA
and local school officials about the findings of the study; and (5) Toolkits for
parents, faculty members, and students that provide facts and "how to" advice
for broadening participation in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;