* 1132349
* NSF Support For Travel Expenses For Participants in ACS Symposium "Polyelectrolyte Complexes and Multilayers" To Be Held In Denver, CO August 28-31, 2011
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Jodie Lutkenhaus, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 06/30/2012
* USD 5,000.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this symposium is to bring
together experts in the field of polyelectrolyte complexes and those
specializing in the field of polyelectrolyte multilayers . These fields have
significant conceptual overlap but are not often considered together. Their
similarity is that they both center around noncovalent interactions between
charged polymers. The goal of the symposium on these overlapping fields is to
generate new ideas and to stimulate new dialogues about polyelectrolyte theory,
processing and applications. The multiple sessions of the symposium will cover a
broad range of topics which include: Solution behavior of polyelectrolyte
complexes, nanoparticles from these complexes, complexation of biological
molecules, assembly of polyelectrolyte multilayers , transport and conduction
through polyelectrolyte multilayers and complexes, swichable and responsive
polyelectrolyte and layer by layer complexes, drug delivery, and new
characterization techniques. Sessions will start with an invited speaker and
continue with talks selected from submitted abstracts. The request for funding
is towards the travel costs of participants. The symposium, "Polyelectrolyte
Complexes and Mutilayers", will be held as part of the ACS Division of Colloid
and Surface Chemistry program at the 242nd ACS meeting in Denver CO Aug.28th-
Sept.1, 2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON
TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes are polymers which contain
groups which dissociate in aqueous solutions making the polymers charged either
positively or negatively depending on the groups. Polyelectrolyte complexes are
formed by the association of oppositely charged polymers in solution, whereas
polyelectrolyte multilayers are formed by the alternating adsorption of
oppositely charged polymers from solution onto a substrate. The objective of
this symposium is to bring together experts in the field of polyelectrolyte
complexes and those specializing in the field of polyelectrolyte multilayers,
which share overlapping conceptual underpinnings, but are not often considered
together. The multiple sessions of the symposium will cover the fundamentals of
these materials and their wide ranging applications which include the fields of
energy generation (e.g. fuel cells), bio-inspired materials, and drug delivery.
The request for funding is towards the travel costs of participants. The
symposium, "Polyelectrolyte Complexes and Mutilayers", will be held as part of
the ACS Division of Colloid and Surface Chemistry program at the 242nd ACS
meeting in Denver CO Aug.28th- Sept.1, 2011.