* 1132840
* U.S.-Costa Rican Workshop: Interdisciplinary workgroup on water sustainability in the Tempisque Basin; Palo Verde NP, Costa Rica, April 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2013
* USD 34,335.00

In this international collaborative project researchers from the U.S. and Costa
Rica will assemble an international team to address issues regarding water use
in the Pacific Mesoamerican region, specifically in the Tempisque basin in
northwestern Costa Rica. Using a cross-disciplinary approach that integrates
hydrology with ecology and socio-economics, this project strives to help advance
knowledge of wetland management in a heavily regulated tropical catchment with
important conservation interest. The team will first define common goals and
vision and identify the key research questions to be addressed in order to
understand how this complex system works. A capstone international workshop will
then gather researchers and stakeholders to collectively build a conceptual
system model that will support the framing of compelling hypotheses for further
research proposal development. The researchers involved will come from the
University of Florida, Arizona State University, the Duke-based Organization of
Tropical Studies (OTS), Universidad de Costa Rica (UCR) and Universidad Nacional
de Costa Rica (UNA). Among the activities to be planned for are (1) an in-depth
quantitative analysis of the sustainability of water supply and demand in the
Rio Tempisque/Bebedero basin in NW Costa Rica; (2) an exploration of how climate
change may affect ecosystem services through changes in water availability, land
use and biodiversity through empirical data and stakeholder input integration
and model-based scenarios analysis, and (3) use of the basin as a representative
site of Pacific Mesoamerica to investigate what actions may be taken, from
policy to practice, to help maintain or improve water availability and ecosystem
services in future years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of this project
should help lay the foundation for a better understanding of dynamic water use
and availability and potential policy solutions for watershed sustainability.
Outcomes from the proposed activities and any larger subsequent activities can
contribute to both local and global societal benefits in terms of information
and understanding that are key to economic growth, agricultural productivity,
and biodiversity conservation. Results and outcomes will be disseminated to the
scientific community and to the wider public through knowledge exchange
activities. Easily prepared model scenarios have the potential to greatly
facilitate the involvement of stakeholders in the process of identifying
research gaps and planning issues. US and Costa Rican students and young
researchers will be included in this effort. Involvement of junior researchers
in collaborative international activities is a major goal of OISE.