* 1132779
* Photocatalytic Reduction of Nitrate in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Kiril Hristovski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 297,975.00

1132779&lt;br/&gt;Westerhoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrate
(NO3-) is one the most prevalent ground-water contaminants in North America and
world-wide. It poses a risk to human health and has a large impact on the
natural nitrogen cycle. Nitrate is regulated by the USEPA in drinking water
because it is a known cause of methemoglobinemia, or ?blue baby? syndrome, and
could possibly be a carcinogen or endocrine disruptor. Nitrate is a soluble ion
that is difficult to remove by traditional coagulation or adsorption processes.
Risks from oxidized pollutants are best mitigated through chemical or biological
reduction to innocuous forms (e.g., N2 from NO3-). Photocatalytic reduction has
been reported for decades, yet has not been investigated from an engineering
approach for nitrate reduction. Research initiated by the discovery of Honda-
Fujishima effect for photocatalytic water splitting (e.g., production of
hydrogen as a renewable fuel) and subsequent advances in metal loading of
semiconductors suggest that nitrate reduction in near neutral pH without
addition of sacrificial agents is possible. Furthermore, it now appears possible
that photocatalytic NO3- reduction in water could yield innocuous by-products
(N2) instead of undesirable by-products that require additional treatment (e.g.,
ammonia). Photolysis for disinfection is commonplace in the drinking water
industry over the past decade and use of light-based technologies for water
treatment will continue to evolve because of their effectiveness, small size
footprint, ability to operate without wastestreams, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;Translational research from the fields of chemistry, material science
and physics, where reductive photocatalysts are developed for splitting water,
is proposed to be applied towards engineered technologies for nitrate removal
from water. The PI?s preliminary data demonstrate the feasibility to
photocatalytically reduce nitrate and yield gaseous-N by-products. The goal of
this project is to explore and optimize the use of photocatalysts as a reductive
technology for treating nitrate in drinking water applications. The underlying
hypothesis is nitrate can be converted to innocuous aqueous species in drinking
water applications using metal-loaded photocatalysts. The primary research
objectives will be to: (1) Understand factors and mechanisms affecting NO3-
reduction to N2 for different types of photocatalysts; (2) Apply photocatalyst
for NO3- reduction in ion exchange brines and local groundwaters; (3)
Investigate practical aspects of photoreactor operation (slurry and fixed film
photocatalyst reactors) including role of catalyst ?aging? on catalyst
performance in reducing NO3- and catalyst recovery; (4) Screen novel
photocatalysts for nitrate and other oxo-anion reduction and develop a framework
for selecting emerging photocatalysts for reduction of oxidized pollutants. The
preferred outcome is to achieve nitrate treatment under ambient conditions
(e.g., pH) and without the need of adding an organic hole
scavenger.&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on nitrate, the most prevalent
groundwater contaminant in the USA and throughout many other parts the world.
Managing the nitrogen cycle is one of the National Academy of Engineering Grand
Challenges. Nitrate limits the use of the groundwater for potable purposes, and
is a major cause of eutrophication in surface waters. The project will provide
societal benefits as well as benefits to individual students. The primary intent
is to disseminate knowledge and credible data on issues related to nitrate in
drinking water and potential strategies to treat the water. Towards this end the
team plans to organize sessions at conferences and develop an open-access
website related to nitrate occurrence, health risks and treatment. The research
will educate PhD students in environmental engineering and serve as a thesis
topic for MS students at a non PhD-degree granting institution. The project will
serve as a theme for several capstone senior projects, as part of a project
oriented learning curriculum. This project also will support Obama Scholars at
ASU (first-time underrepresented undergraduate student), such as a female
Hispanic sophomore Civil Engineering student who has been instrumental in
obtaining preliminary data for this proposal. Student(s) working on this project
will participate in an experience in Washington, DC for 2 weeks where they will
learn how science becomes policy.