* 1132083
* Dynamic Simulation of Polymer Adsorption in Flowing Fluids for Design of Polymer Thin-film Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Satish Kumar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 308,984.00

1132083&lt;br/&gt;Kumar, Satish&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Technical Summary. Due to their distinct electronic properties, AB-stacked
bilayer and trilayer graphene have shown extraordinary potential for next-
generation optoelectronic and microprocessor applications. These promising
materials, nevertheless, require new synthesis methods to effectively control
the number of AB-stacked layers through graphite exfoliation and advanced
processing techniques. Solution graphene dispersions are promising raw materials
for printable electronics and nanocomposites, and most importantly, this
approach represents the only possible route at this time for the mass-production
of AB stacked bi- and tri-layer graphene. However, since the first graphene
solution was reported in 2008, there are still many unanswered questions and
technical bottlenecks that hinder the progress of this field. Although
experiments have shown that the distribution of graphene layer numbers highly
depends on the choice of solvents or surfactants used, very little is known
about the molecular origin of the interactions between graphene and
solvent/surfactant molecules, including correlating these interactions with the
colloidal stability of the graphene solution. In addition, regardless of the
methods used to produce solution-phase graphene, its size, shape, and number of
stacked layers are all poly-disperse. Engineering approaches that can directly
control the size and the stacking geometry (by narrowing their distributions) of
the exfoliated graphene flakes have to be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to understand the origin of the interactions between suspended
graphene with surrounding solvent/surfactant molecules via large-scale molecular
dynamics simulations. These interactions will be quantified by calculating the
potential of mean force between graphene sheets in solvents or aqueous
surfactant solutions to establish a library of thermodynamic properties for
dispersed graphene sheets. A theoretical framework that combines molecular
dynamics simulations and kinetic theories of colloid aggregation will be
developed to further design optimal solvent/surfactant molecules that can
stabilize graphene dispersions efficiently. Experimentally, layer-controlled
graphene dispersions will be produced using ionic graphite intercalation
compounds (GICs). By carefully controlling the intercalation kinetics, high-
quality Stage-2 and Stage-3 GICs will be synthesized, which are expected to be
excellent precursors for bilayer and trilayer graphene dispersions. Systematic
characterizations of graphene dispersions will be carried out to optimize the
exfoliation process such that the produced dispersions are sufficiently
concentrated, and that the graphene flakes are large enough, for conventional
photolithography in which they will be deposited on a target substrate. Advanced
separation techniques will also be developed to produce monodisperse bilayer and
trilayer graphene solutions. The novel fundamental and practical insights gained
from the proposed modeling and experiments will be used to guide the fabrication
of electronic devices. The combined expertise of the two PIs across colloid
science, engineering nanotechnology, computer simulations, and molecular
modeling will enable rapid progress towards engineering graphene solutions for
device manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact and
Outreach:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a novel advanced technique to
exfoliate graphene in liquid phases will greatly increase the capability to
produce AB-stacked bilayer and trilayer graphene for practical applications,
such as fabricating electronic devices. In addition, novel fundamental insights
into the interactions between graphene and other molecules will contribute to
the overall theoretical and practical understanding of the kinetic behavior of
graphene in the liquid phase. Ultimately, such knowledge can lead to the
rational design of better media for graphene
dispersions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling and experimental advances made
will be incorporated into courses (MIT course 10.55 - Colloid and Surfactant
Science by Professor Blankschtein and 10.585 - Engineering Nanotechnology by
Professor Strano) and workshops at MIT that will expose a larger scientific
audience to the fundamentals of graphene dispersion and stabilization in liquid
phases, as well as to modeling these phenomena at the molecular level. It is
noteworthy that the raw material used to produce the graphene dispersions is
graphite, which is readily available in large quantities. New materials/devices
based on graphite represent a viable and economical alternative to existing
technologies. The production of the highly-conductive, two-dimensional
dispersions proposed here will be potentially useful for the production of
conducting inks, printable electronics, and biological sensors. The
technological impact to society extends from the development of rollable
displays to the creation of novel glucose detectors for diabetics. The students
involved in the proposed research at both the graduate an undergraduate level
will gain intellectually and professionally from the integrated
experimental/modeling research proposed here. The PIs and students involved will
participate in the Saturday Engineering Enrichment and Discovery (SEED) Academy
at MIT, as well as in the Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science
(MITES) program, both of which target high school age students and influence
minority recruitment.