* 1132310
* Natural selection and genes determining higher arterial saturation in Peruvian Quechua
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tom Brutsaert, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 346,384.00

Worldwide, several human populations may have adapted to high altitude (HA)
based on long-term residence in mountainous areas above 3,000 meters. In the
Andean region of South America, Quechua natives have lived at altitudes
averaging 4,000 meters for at least the past 6,000 years. The specific aim of
this project will be to collect genetic and physiological trait data on Quechua
(n=600) and to test for association between previously identified genetic
markers and high arterial hemoglobin-oxygen saturation (SaO2). The results of
this project could provide an answer to the long-standing question of whether
Andean populations are genetically adapted to high altitude. The Quechua sample
will include sub-samples, born and raised at HA or at sea-level. This will allow
evaluation of developmental effects as these may also determine higher SaO2. A
sample of n=300 lowlanders will serve as a control group. &lt;br/&gt;Six
thousand years is a conservative time-depth estimate for Quechua residence at HA
and is long enough for Quechua to have experienced natural selection i.e.,
genetic adaptation. Selection could have favored traits enabling survival under
the challenge of chronically low oxygen levels, such as traits related to O2
transport capacity. Apart from genetics, growth and development at HA may
exhibit developmental adaptation. For example, lung-size is enhanced in persons
born and raised at HA. The current project will test both genetic and
developmental hypotheses to explain SaO2 of Peruvian Quechua. The SaO2 is a
major determinant of the amount of oxygen in the blood, and Quechua are
especially impressive in maintaining high SaO2 during exercise at HA. In
previous work, the current research team used a whole-genome approach to
identify genomic regions in Quechua that showed strong a priori evidence of
natural selection. This genome scan used a dense panel of single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) genetic markers, and provided evidence of natural selection
in several genes of the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) pathway. HIF is a central
regulator that controls downstream genes involved in maintaining cellular oxygen
levels.&lt;br/&gt;The project is an international collaboration with Peruvian
researchers and includes student involvement in both the USA and Peru.