* 1132987
* U.S.- South Africa Collaboration: Catalyzing a Deep Neutral Hydrogen Survey with MeerKAT
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Andrew Baker, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 45,360.00

Understanding how galaxies form and evolve across cosmic time is one of the
central challenges of modern astrophysics. In the last fifteen years,
astronomers have learned a great deal about distant galaxies in the early
universe by studying the properties of their stars; however, much less is known
about the properties of their gas, especially the relatively cool and diffuse
material in which hydrogen is atomic (rather than ionized or molecular) in
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take an important first step toward
understanding the universe's neutral atomic hydrogen by catalyzing a new
international collaboration that has been approved to conduct a 5000-hour survey
with an array of radio telescopes being built in South Africa. The new array is
known as MeerKAT, and the new survey has adopted the name "Looking At the
Distant Universe with the MeerKAT Array" or LADUMA. NSF funding will allow 12
U.S. scientists to attend the LADUMA survey's inaugural "all hands"
collaboration meeting in Cape Town, South Africa in late 2011 or early 2012. The
local host will be Dr. Sarah Blyth of the University of Cape Town, who shares
leadership duties for LADUMA with Dr. Benne Holwerda of the European Space
Agency and Dr. Andrew Baker of Rutgers, the State University of New
Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. delegation will feature student
participation and include representation from Rutgers, the National Radio
Astronomy Observatory, the University of Arizona, the University of California
at Berkeley, the University of Colorado, the University of New Mexico, the
University of North Carolina, the University of Wisconsin, and West Virginia
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project derives
principally from the immense scientific potential of a survey that will
ultimately be able to detect neutral atomic gas at an epoch when the universe
was less than half its present age. The collaboration's first "all hands"
meeting will bring together radio, optical, and theoretical astronomers from
across the 56-person team to determine the optimal strategy for the survey and
to lay the groundwork for focused preparatory efforts in key areas, such as the
acquisition of complementary data with other telescopes and the establishment of
joint supervision of students. Because Cape Town is the location of the MeerKAT
engineering office, the meeting will also allow face-to-face discussions between
LADUMA scientists and MeerKAT engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the LADUMA collaboration include an opportunity to engage U.S.
scientists and students in a new international research collaboration. All U.S.
members of the LADUMA team have strong records of supervising students, and all
have appointments that will facilitate recruitment of students to the survey in
the future. Half of the U.S. LADUMA team have affiliations with institutions
that are part of the optical Southern African Large Telescope (SALT)
partnership, strengthening the bonds that already exist between these
institutions and South Africa and catalyzing new relationships among the
collaborators. The partnership will also result in opportunities for education
and outreach in S. Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being funded by
NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering.