* 1132819
* Development of Highly Sensitive and High-Resolution Kelvin Probe Force Micorscopy for in situ Chacterization of Organic Photovoltaic Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Guangyong Li, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 314,485.00

PI: Guangyong Li&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1132819&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells based on polymeric materials offer ease
of fabrication and potentially low cost, but suffer from low solar energy
conversion efficiency relative to inorganic semiconductor based solar
photovoltaic devices. The most efficient organic photovoltaic (OPV) solar cells
to date are made from blending conjugated polymers (donors) with fullerene
molecules (acceptors) to form nanostructured bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active
layers. The nanoscale morphology of the blend determines the charge generation
and transport characteristics, and hence dictates the device performance.
However, it is difficult to accurately correlate morphology to device
performance, or to understand how processing conditions control the formation of
desirable morphologies, due to the lack of in situ characterization tools.
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) is a potentially versatile tool for the
characterization organic photovoltaic cells in the ambient state. However,
current SPM approaches are not able to differentiate between the donor and
acceptor domains at the nanoscale, and are also not able to observe in situ
morphological changes during bulk heterojunction formation, particularly during
annealing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposed research is to
develop relationships between nanoscale morphology, OPV device performance, and
processing conditions used to form the BJH through the use of Kelvin Probe Force
Microscopy (KPFM). Kelvin probe force microscopy has the potential to
differentiate between phase separated donor and acceptor domains, and can be
adapted to observe the in situ morphological evolution of bulk heterojunctions
in real time during material processing, with high sensitivity and nanometer
scale resolution. Specifically, a cross-section of the bulk heterojunction will
be exposed to the scanning probe and characterized by KPFM. The surface of the
cross-section is expected to offer in situ morphological details that are more
representative of the actual BJH fine structure. By using a scanning probe with
an ultra-sharp tip and a shape-tailored cantilever, KPFM can be enhanced to
achieve both high resolution and high sensitivity in the ambient state. The
proposed studies with KPFM are designed to gain a better understanding of the
fundamental physics of OPV devices, and to elucidate the processing conditions
that create organic bulk heterojunctions which give rise to enhanced solar
energy conversion efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed education and outreach activities
focus on bringing solar energy topics into graduate and undergraduate curricula,
as well as to local high schools. Course materials based on the research will be
developed for graduate students in the areas of scanning probe microscopy and
photovoltaics. Undergraduate students will participate in senior design projects
involving hands-on learning with solar cell device characterization and scanning
probe microscopy. The PI will work with the University of Pittsburgh Robotics
Club to develop a mobile robot driven by solar power for use at an annual robot
show for high school students, and will visit local high schools to give
demonstrations on flexible organic solar cells.