* 1132361
* SuperMAG Based Studies of External Substorm Triggering and Interhemispheric Currents
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Thomas Sotirelis, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This project will use data from the NSF-supported SuperMAG data center to
address a number of topics related to magnetospheric substorms and the electric
currents that are generated during substorms. The first task will be to develop
magnetic indices that are similar to the AL and AU magnetic indices but that are
based on approximately 100 stations rather than on the 12 stations used for the
official AL, AU and AE indices. The new indices will then be used to identify
the onset of substorms with greater accuracy than can be done using the
traditional indices. The project will use energetic particle precipitation data
from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) to further refine that
location and time of substorm onsets. A superposed epoch analysis will be used
to effectively image the upward magnetic-field-aligned currents separately in
each hemisphere. These data will then be used to examine how the
interhemispheric current is affected by a variety of factors including the
seasonal variations.

The project will produce new magnetic indices that will be made available to the
space physics community and will also generate an improved database of substorm
onsets that will also be made publicly available. A summer intern (undergraduate
student) will be involved in the research project.