* 1132295
* Yakutat Tlingit Sealing Camps: Investigating the Relationship among Language, Indigenous Knowledge, and Glacial Movement
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Aron Crowell, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 04/30/2012
* USD 19,075.00

The research will use an interdisciplinary approach to 1) establish a chronology
of origin for indigenous toponyms (place names) at Yakutat/Disenchantment Bay,
Alaska; 2) examine Tlingit linguistic encoding of environmental history; and 3)
integrate indigenous and scientific knowledge. Archaeological and geological
data will be used to construct a chronological framework for Tlingit toponyms
and related oral accounts that refer to seal hunting camps which were occupied
in succession during the 900-year retreat of Hubbard Glacier from its late
Holocene maximum at the mouth of Yakutat Bay. The camps were used in spring to
hunt harbor seals that congregate on glacial floes, and positions of the camps
were shifted over time to maintain proximity to the receding glacial front.
Toponym(s) referring to each seal camp would have originated at the time of its
establishment, a date that can be determined by relocating the camp and
conducting archaeological testing and radiocarbon dating. Knowing the ages of
these Tlingit toponyms will enhance understanding of their complex linguistic
dimensions, which include the incorporation of lexemes denoting environmental
processes and the generation of related names (assemblages) to designate
proximate geographic features. Seal camp names and other Tlingit toponyms have
multiple cultural dimensions, including incorporation into local clan histories.

During this exploratory phase of the research, investigators will conduct
interviews with knowledgeable Yakutat elders to elicit linguistic, cultural and
environmental information related to sealing camps of different ages. Based on
locational information from the interviews and preexisting historical and
archaeological records they will attempt to relocate all or most of the camps.
Few have ever been identified as archaeological sites due to seismic uplift in
1899 that substantially altered shorelines around the bay. Investigators will
conduct archaeological testing at rediscovered camps to collect artifact samples
and organic material for radiocarbon dating. Should this field reconnaissance
prove successful, a full-scale project will be proposed to locate additional
camps and to undertake more extensive excavations. Preliminary oral and
linguistic data will be assessed, and an expanded effort will be designed.