* 1132487
* Travel Support for NIST Micro-Robotics Challenge at IEEE ICRA 2011
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Dan Popa, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 03/31/2013
* USD 21,500.00

This project supports student travel to the NIST Micro-Robotics Challenge which
involves advances in the design and fabrication of microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS) enabling the development of mobile micro-robots that can
autonomously navigate and manipulate in controlled environments. It is expected
that this technology will be critical in applications as varied as intelligent
sensor networks, in vivo medical diagnosis and treatment, and adaptive
microelectronics. Students explore micro-robot locomotion, power storage,
embedded intelligence, and motion measurement. The NIST performance-based
competitions for mobile micro-robots: 1) motivates researchers to accelerate
micro-robot development, 2) reveals the most pressing technical challenges, and
3) evaluates the most successful methods for locomotion and manipulation at the
micro-scale (e.g., actuation techniques for crawling).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the competition research teams showcase working demonstrations that support the
challenge themes of micro-scale actuation, manipulation and locomotion. This
funding increases the competitiveness of US teams, as this event has
traditionally been dominated by teams from Europe. The multi-day competitions
are held during the IEEE ICRA conference providing an excellent opportunity to
engage a broad technical audience. These are also be open to the general public
to raise awareness of the state-of-the-art. The competitions provide an
opportunity for students and leaders to learn how micro-robotics can play an
important role in society.