* 1132510
* Collaborative Research: Texas-Oklahoma Representations and Automorphic forms (TORA)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Kimball Martin, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 8,000.00

This award provides support for two weekend conferences, one at the University
of North Texas in Fall 2011 and the other at Oklahoma State University in Spring
2012. Each conference will feature two or three prominent guest speakers from
outside the Texas-Oklahoma region, in addition to other participants including
students, post-doctoral researchers, and junior faculty. Regional graduate
students and researchers will also give talks describing their work. It is
expected that the conferences will facilitate collaborations and interactions
among the students and researchers in the region who work in the areas of
Automorphic Forms, Representation Theory, and Number Theory. These conferences
are planned as the first two of the Texas-Oklahoma Representations and
Automorphic (TORA) conference series, pending continued funding. The TORA
conference series is planned to consists of semi-annual meetings, hosted by
University of North Texas, Oklahoma State University, and University of
Oklahoma, on a rotating basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last century, the
theories of automorphic forms and representations have grown enormously.
Important applications impact various fields of research, ranging from coding
theory, algebraic geometry, and topology to Kac-Moody algebras and quantum field
theory. The interplay of automorphic forms and representation theory has been
especially fruitful, and many surprising and deep results have emerged. The TORA
series will emphasize the interplay between automorphic forms and
representations, both in the classical and adelic languages, and other related
topics.