* 1132192
* Hands-On Research: Complex Systems Advanced Study Institute (China)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Michael Schatz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 97,200.00

This award provides partial funding for an advanced study institute (ASI) on
complex systems in physics to be held in Shanghai, China, in June 2012. A team
of 12 senior researchers and 24 assistants from the U.S. will join colleagues at
Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU) to offer a two-week hands-on course
demonstrating table-top experiments in complex non-linear physical systems.
About 70 participants, primarily junior faculty members, will be selected from
underdeveloped regions of Central and Southeast Asia. The objective is to
demonstrate that interesting and productive experiments can be conducted with
relatively inexpensive and available materials. This ASI is a successor to
similar programs that have been held in Africa, India, and Brazil. The local
expenses will be supported by SJTU, and participant expenses as well as
administrative costs are sponsored by the International Center for Theoretical
Physics (ICTP) in Trieste, Italy.&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will engage leading
researchers and well qualified post-doctoral fellows and graduate students with
participants from underdeveloped regions in Asia to conduct the table-top
experiments as well as to introduce useful computer software to the
participants. As has already been demonstrated by the previous Hands-on ASIs,
these activities stimulate the curiosity of the participants and raise a variety
of interest research questions that they can pursue on their own and in
continuing collaborations. In addition to raising research issues in the study
of complex phenomena the institute demonstrates useful and effective methods of
scientific education. This experience is beneficial to the young U.S. assistants
as much as to the Asian participants.