* 1132948
* Cooperative US-Swedish Research on Chemical Looping Combustion with Oxygen Uncoupling: Planning Visit to Chalmers University
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Adel Sarofim, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 18,038.00

Through a research planning visit, Dr. Kevin Whitty of the University of Utah
will initiate a collaborative project with Swedish partners, Drs. Anders
Lyngfelt, Tobias Martison, and Henrik Leion, at the Chalmers University in
Gothenburg. Together, they intend to pursue questions related to chemical
looping combustion by drawing on the renowned expertise in chemical looping at
Chalmers and the well established strengths in chemical kinetics at the
University of Utah. The Swedish partners offer bench-scale pilot facilities for
chemical looping combustion with interconnected fluidized beds that can be used
to oxidize a variety of gaseous fuels and coals. This is complemented by the
Utah group's progress in developing kinetic parameters needed to model the
combustion of coal and petroleum coke with an oxygen carrier. The initial
collaboration is expected to help the U.S.-Swedish team extend their research
with the goal of accelerating progress in the field of chemical looping with
oxygen uncoupling (CLOU) . If successful, results may contribute to the
fundamental engineering required to understand and develop a CLOU process that
effectively reduces the residence time for solids in fuel reactors by a
significant percent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Likely broader impacts include
advances in knowledge of theoretical and practical CO2 capture. Envisioned long-
term applications could lead to designs for continuous reactors to demonstrate
CLOU at larger scales and at reduced costs. To build on preliminary findings,
the principal investigator plans to submit a follow-on application to the
National Science Foundation for cooperative research on related transport and
thermal fluids phenomena. Furthermore, one U.S. graduate student from the
University of Utah will travel with Dr. Whitty to Gothenburg and participate in
joint activities at Chalmers, thereby gaining beneficial international research
experience. This early career access to expert Swedish engineers and specialized
reactor scaling should lead to a beneficial professional network in the
increasingly important fields related to energy and combustion.