* 1132353
* NSF-CISE: SPECIAL PROJECT: Human-Centered Robotics HCR2011
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Seta Bogosyan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 03/31/2012
* USD 11,325.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-32353&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Bogosyan, Seta
O.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Alaska-Fairbanks &lt;br/&gt;Title:
SPECIAL PROJECT: IEEE ICM 2011- Workshop on Human-Centered
Robotics&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, planning an
international workshop for human-centric robotics in Turkey, examines the
nature, needs, importance, challenges, and funding mechanisms for ongoing and
anticipated research in different CISE areas and even more broad areas. The
workshop will brings together recognized CISE research leaders and their peers
from Turkey, Japan, and Korea, to conduct such an assessment and produce a
material that can be shared with the CISE community, international colleagues,
academic administrators, government funding agencies, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;The activity brings together recognized leaders in
telerobotics, medical robotics, and collaborative robotics to plan international
collaborations in research and education in this rapidly evolving field. The
planned interactions in this workshop will also benefit students and early
career faculty from US, by providing opportunities to internationally exchange
experiences and ideas. Participants from USA, Japan, Turkey, and Korea (KAIST)
have actively committed their involvement in the workshop organization. The
planned workshop presents a great opportunity for all interested participants to
meet in person, and start a new, larger-scale international collaborative effort
to serve the challenging field of human-centric robotics. With truly
interdisciplinary foundations, the proposed workshop requires, not only a
profound creativity and knowledge in robotics, but also deep insights into
social sciences. While the expected domain disciplines to be addressed include
telerobotics, medical robotics, and collaborative robotics, the associated
challenges to be discussed involve adaptation of robots to human nature and
behaviors, as well as human?s communication and interaction with
robots&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;Robotics is becoming indispensible
in assisted living, hospitals, schools, and even homes. The proposed workshop
addresses the influence and interaction of technical, physical, psychological,
and societal factors as they relate to robotic technologies, and as they are
addressed in various parts of the world, by leading researchers. Thus, the
findings from this event touch society overall.