* 1132409
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the 2011 ACM Conference on Computers and Accessibility
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Clayton Lewis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2012
* USD 27,507.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) of approximately 10
promising graduate students from the United States and abroad, along with 5
distinguished research faculty. The event will take place on Sunday, October 23,
immediately preceding and in conjunction with the 13th International ACM
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS 2011), to be held
Monday-Wednesday, October 24-26, in Dundee, Scotland. The ASSETS conferences are
the premier forum for presenting innovative research on the design and use of
both mainstream and specialized assistive technologies. This includes the use of
technology by and in support of: individuals with hearing, sight and other
sensory impairments; individuals with motor impairments; individuals with
memory, learning and cognitive impairments; individuals with multiple
impairments; older adults; and professionals who work with these populations.
Researchers and developers from around the world in both academia and industry
will meet to exchange ideas and present their latest work . More information
about the conference may be found at http://www.sigaccess.org/assets11.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component of building this community is through its
youth. The ASSETS 2011 doctoral consortium will provide an opportunity for
graduate students from diverse backgrounds (computing, engineering, psychology,
architecture, etc.) to come together and explore their research interests in an
interdisciplinary workshop, under the guidance of the PI and a panel of other
distinguished experts in the field, so that they can appreciate the broader
spectrum of research and development approaches to assistive technologies and
universal usability, and also experience the community in which they can pursue
their endeavors. Student participants will make formal presentations of their
work during the consortium, and will receive constructive feedback from the
faculty panel. The feedback is designed to help students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to related research, whether
their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Thus, the consortium will help shape
ongoing and future research projects aimed at assistive technologies and
universal access, will promote scholarship and networking among new researchers
in this emerging interdisciplinary area, and will also expose these promising
young researchers to a larger community. In an effort to further integrate
doctoral consortium participants into the conference itself, a poster session
has been set aside in the technical program to allow all doctoral consortium
participants to present their research to the full conference. In addition, one
student from the doctoral consortium will be selected to deliver the closing
plenary presentation. An evaluation of the consortium will be conducted and the
results made available to the organizers of future such events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The doctoral consortium will help expand
the participation of young researchers pursuing graduate studies in this field,
by providing them an opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for
their innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of
the research community. It will further help foster a sense of community among
these young researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across
a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific
discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field. The organizers will also take special steps to promote participation from
institutions with relatively large numbers of students from under-represented
groups.