* 1132954
* Reliable quantification of emerging contaminant mass flows in wastewater systems - combining predictive modeling & novel field approaches
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Jennifer Field, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 23,256.00

This project will catalyze a collaboration between US researchers and
collaborators at the Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology
(Eawag). Although wastewater treatment plants are built to minimize the negative
environmental impacts of wastewater, they were not designed to remove emerging
contaminants. Given the hazardous, dynamic, and logistically -challenging nature
of sewers, few studies are conducted and only limited data for emerging
contaminants in sewers are available. An understanding of contaminant transport
and biodegradation is needed to obtain accurate estimates of contaminant (e.g.,
illicit drug) mass flows. Such estimates then can be used to obtain the ?hidden
information? in wastewater that is needed for understanding the societal problem
of illegal drug use. In addition, more accurate estimates of population are
needed to advance the interpretation of data on illicit drugs obtained from raw
wastewater. The objective of the catalytic activities described herein is to
plan and execute preliminary in-situ sewer tracer tests in collaboration with
environmental engineers at Eawag. Tracer tests to be conducted in the Zürich,
Switzerland sewer system will consist of the injection of stable isotope-labeled
illicit drugs so that their in-situ transformation can be quantified under
realistic wastewater conditions. Prior to conducting the in-situ tracer tests,
the initial phase of the collaboration will focus on modeling studies that are
needed to further refine the hypotheses that will be tested in the preliminary
tracer tests. The Zurich sewer system was selected because it is a well-
instrumented system for which access is granted. With the combination of
modeling and preliminary tracer tests, the biological and physical factors that
impact the transformation of contaminant loads that arrive at wastewater
treatment plants will be identified for further study. Endogenous and exogenous
substances that occur in wastewater also will be identified for use in full-
scale tracer tests as alternative indicators of population when quantifying
temporal and spatial trends in contaminant loads.

An international, interdisciplinary team including environmental chemists, a
sociologist (drug epidemiologist), and an environmental engineer specializing in
wastewater sampling will bring together the expertise necessary to address the
technical challenges that must be overcome to reliably use data on illicit drugs
obtained from wastewater to address the difficult societal problem of drug
abuse. Novel data obtained from the in-situ tests will advance the science of
modeling and wastewater sampling and our understanding of the accuracy and
uncertainty in contaminant mass flows. Identifying sources of uncertainty will
fundamentally change the level of decisions that can be made using data obtained
from municipal wastewater. The proposed research will advance the concept of
using human urinary biomarkers for quantifying changes in population and this
has significant implications for making decisions in the area of drug
epidemiology (a social science). The benefits of the proposed research activity
will provide assessment methods to verify the projected increase in
pharmaceutical loading to wastewater treatment plants and the environment. The
research program will complement the PI?s current outreach activities that are
centered around creating and disseminating outreach modules to teachers and
their minority school children in the SMILE (Science and Math Investigative
Learning Experiences) program that demonstrate the principles of separating and
identifying molecules in complex environmental systems. A Ph.D. student in
toxicology, who is a member of the Northern Paiute Tribe, will be trained in
modeling and in tracer test design and execution. An undergraduate student will
receive training in wastewater sampling and chemical analysis.