* 1132709
* RET Site: Computing Research Experiences for STEM Teachers (CREST)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Harry Cheng, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 516,000.00

This award provides funding for a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
Site focused on robotics at the University of California-Davis. Forty five in-
service and pre-service computer science and STEM teachers will be paired with
faculty mentors to conduct cutting-edge research related to computing and
robotics during a six week summer program. The RET teachers will also develop
curricular materials for the integration of computing concepts into STEM
disciplines and implement related research-based activities in their classrooms
during the academic year. The program includes two sequences of workshops and a
summer symposium to explore the impact on the teachers' knowledge, experiences,
and instructional practice and to reach out to other teachers in the local
community. The RET Fellows will become master teachers and assist in providing
other secondary school teachers with professional development in computing,
thereby broadening the impact and sustainability of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit of this
project lies with the strong research mentor team and excellent infrastructure
at the university for the project. The project builds on prior research and
pilot studies. The projects are compelling and of current interest and are
exciting for teachers and their students. The new research-based curriculum
implemented In schools during the academic year should provide important
research-based methods for developing computational thinking competencies at the
K-12 level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The program plans to target
in-service teachers from the Yolo county school district as well as pre-service
education students at the university. The target schools have a large population
of underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students who will be
impacted. National and international dissemination of the results and the
curricular materials will open the pathways for replication and broader impact
that is pervasive and fundamental to moving the underlying concepts into the
K-12 arena.