* 1132451
* EAGER:  An Effect of Disorder on Stablity and Performance of Promising Perovskite materials for Energy Conversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Alexander Roytburd, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 200,977.00

The goals of this NSF grant are to achieve first principles understanding of the
structural disorder and basic physical and chemical properties of novel,
advanced perovskite crystalline materials based on the Ba-Sr-Co-Fe-O (BSCF)
system, advance the understanding of the role of point defects in such
materials, including Frenkel and Shottky disorders and substitutions in cation
sublattice, and determine the effect of the introduced disorder on the stability
and performance of the material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research are expected to reveal the fundamental understanding of the structure-
property-function relationship in BSCF perovskite materials for many immediate
energy applications and to open up vastly new venues in energy storage and
conversion. The obtained conclusions are expected to provide specific
recommendations for both scientists and engineers on the modification of
existing materials and the design of new materials for SOFC and gas separation
membranes; the outcomes are expected to result in new perspectives on advanced
materials design and to significantly enhance the theory of chemical reactions
and the theory of crystalline defects. Participating researchers will gain an
extensive training in energy issues, modeling of defects, and development of
computational methods, learning both fundamental physical principles of energy
storage and conversion, gaining familiarity with the architecture of modern fuel
cells, and mastering the use of quantum chemical methods for modeling of complex
single point defects, their combinations, and their effect on chemical and
physical properties of a series of multi-component perovskite materials.