* 1132259
* RAPID: Representation of Atlantic Multidecadal Variability and its Hydroclimate and Surface Temperature Links in Climate Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Sumant Nigam, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 06/30/2013
* USD 30,000.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) models with a focus on the
representation of Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) variability and its
hydroclimate impacts. The AMO varies in phase on a timescale of 5-8 decades, and
exerts considerable influence on North American hydroclimate, e.g. precipitation
and droughts, surface air-temperature, and Atlantic hurricanes. Depending on its
phase, the AMO impact can either offset or exacerbate the greenhouse gas forced
warming signal over the continents in the Northern Hemisphere over a
multidecadal period. Thus climate models undertaking decadal predictions and
multidecadal projections cannot afford to misrepresent AMO variability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project lies in its support of
the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide information on climate change and its
consequences to decision makers worldwide. This project seeks in particular to
evaluate the representation of the AMO in coupled climate models. Thus the
research will lead to improved understanding of the role of multidecadal natural
variability and secular change in the evolving climate of the 20th and 21st
centuries. By providing a baseline on latest versions of the climate models,
this study will directly address issues of model deficiencies on model
credibility.