* 1132414
* Multifunctional Piezoelectric Carbon Fibers for Enhanced Structural Safety and Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Henry Sodano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2011
* USD 65,281.00

The research goals are to a) develop theoretical and finite element models to
predict the coupling and strength of active piezoceramic carbon fiber, b)
determine the geometry to maximize the fiber strength and coupling for various
applications, c) identify the fabrication techniques for the active carbon fiber
and d) construct a series of active fibers and active fiber lamina for
experimental analysis. This will be a new composite material with several
multifunctional properties whose properties will be explored in this research.
The use of piezoceramic materials for structural actuation is a fairly well
developed practice that has found use in a wide variety of applications.
However, just as advanced composites offer many benefits over traditional
engineering materials for structural design, actuators that utilize the active
properties of piezoelectric fibers can improve upon many of the limitations
encountered when using monolithic piezoceramic devices. Many new piezoelectric
fiber composites have been developed, however almost all studies have
implemented these devices such that they are surface bonded patches used for
sensing or actuation. The research program will develop a novel active
piezoelectric carbon fiber that can be laid up in a composite structural
material to perform sensing and actuation, in addition to providing critical
load bearing functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful development of
the multifunctional fiber will make broad impacts across engineering disciplines
making the research of great value to society. The sensing and actuation aspects
of the multifunctional material will allow composites to be designed with
embedded structural health monitoring, power generation, vibration sensing and
control, damping and shape control through anisotropic actuation. Additionally,
the multifunctional fiber could allow the structure to be used for energy
storage, which is a major issue with the advancement of wireless electronics and
sensors. Each of these potential applications resulting from the fundamental
development of the active carbon fiber will have broad impacts on the
performance and safety of modern structures. Furthermore, the advances made
through the development of multifunctional material systems will advance the way
in which adaptive structures are designed and the modeling of composite
materials with an active interphase layer. The project will recruit
underrepresented participants through the use of undergraduate research
internships. Additionally, researchers will participate in the Michigan Tech
summer youth program by developing and teaching week long summer courses to
under represented groups of pre-college students. These lessons will incorporate
results of this research and will encourage individuals to pursue a college
education in engineering through an introduction to its multidisciplinary
nature. Enhancement of infrastructure will occur, as new desktop experiments are
designed, and this will spill over into class room education. The effort also
contains a collaboration of research and technical ideas with a leading research
groups at Los Alamos National Labs and the NASA Jet Propulsion Lab. Furthermore,
the collaboration with Los Alamos will lead to research projects in their
Dynamic Summer School program to encourage undergraduate students to pursue a
graduate degree in the field of dynamics.