* 1132090
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Development of Ceramic Technology in the Eastern Eurasian Steppe Zone
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Paula Doumani, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Under the supervision of Prof. Michael Frachetti, Paula Doumani will conduct
archaeological excavations and pottery analyses at the Bronze Age settlement of
Tasbas. Tasbas, located in the Dzhungar Mountains of southeastern Kazakhstan,
was occupied by mobile pastoral populations around 4000 years ago. The site
includes resident structures, rock art, and a small cemetery. Based on Tasbas'
time of occupation, cultural material, and its subsistence economy, the site is
among the early examples for specialized mobile pastoralism in central Eurasia.

Research focusing on pottery technology among Bronze Age populations in central
Eurasia is important for a number of reasons. First, technology gives us insight
into community bonds and society. Technology and production among non-
hierarchical societies, specifically, can speak to the larger issue of how group
identity and society is reproduced outside of centralized systems of authority.
Second, the study of technology provides insight into group interaction, socio-
economic change and community learning. Ms. Doumani's research offers one of the
few studies worldwide that unite small-scale production technology among
pastoralists with the study of interaction, socio-economic change, and identity.

The Bronze Age was a time of vast communication across the Eurasian continent.
In the central Eurasian steppe zone, this period marks the beginning of
geographically widespread mobile pastoralism, intensified regional interaction,
and technological innovations across a range of material media, such as pottery.
The diffusion of material technologies was a principal socio-economic integrator
among these early pastoralists. The archaeology shows extraordinary stylistic
and technological consistencies in the pottery across large geographic
territories. But, how the region's societies came to share these traditions is a
topic that is still poorly understood.

Ms. Doumani will recover and analyze data to interpret which pottery
technologies demonstrate long-term community bonds and production, and which
pottery technologies demonstrate bonds with populations elsewhere in Eurasia.
Specifically, she proposes - and will test for evidence - that technology will
show: socio-economic interaction, how artisans transfer community practices, and
productive systems at the local and extra-local scale.

In addition to its academic merit, this project will assist in both American and
Kazakh graduate student training. Training opportunities will span a number of
archaeological subfields, including material, plant, animal, and human remain
analyses. The project will provide employment to Kazakh individuals living in a
remote rural area of Kazakhstan, and opportunities for the community members to
learn about archaeology in general. Furthermore, these activities will increase
local awareness of scientific archaeological field and analytical techniques.
Results of the research will be widely disseminated to the academic and public
community through presentation at professional conferences and through published
papers in peer-edited journals. The public will also be able to access the data,
maps, and photographs generated in the course of the research via open source
databases operated through Washington University.