* 1132777
* Designing Efficient Platinum-Free Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2015
* USD 326,000.00

1132777&lt;br/&gt;Linic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal represents a serious
attempt at developing an approach to surmounting the most serious problem with
low temperature H2 fuel cells. The slow kinetics of the oxygen reduction
reaction at the cathode significantly reduces the efficiency obtained. To
alleviate this, platinum electrocatalysts have been used. Although the negatives
of high over-potential and Pt expense are inherent, platinum is one of the few
metals stable in the high acid environment conventionally used. The acid-
compatible polymer membranes needed for the fuel cell device were developed, so
PEM fuel cells represent state-of-art devices, but with significant
drawbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Suljo Linic from the Chemical Engineering
Department at the University of Michigan offers a possible way around these
issues. There have been adequate improvements in hydroxide membrane technology
which opens the basic as opposed to acidic operating environment to
consideration. Many more metals are stable in basic media, so the cost factor or
even presence of Pt may be open to review. As a basis, Linic has done some
preliminary experiments and computations on various metal surfaces in basic
operating media, and postulates some differences in rate limiting steps which
govern over-potentials on the various metal surfaces. He hypothesizes that
specific Ag surfaces or Ag overlayer surfaces may help alleviate the over-
potential issue in addition to replacing expensive Pt. He proposes some specific
surface experiments and computational complements to investigate the validity of
the hypotheses. Positive results may lead to a revitalization of H2 fuel cells
and the use of H2 in certain fuel situations, which represents large technical
impact potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader educational and outreach
components were a mixture of traditional and new approaches as proposed by
Linic. The PI proposes to use social delivery media vehicles, such as YouTube,
as a means of outreach to the high school and college audience. This approach
builds on similar successful scientific outreach programs. One may argue with
the likelihood, but it is basically another experiment that will be a part of
the project. The students at the University who become involved in this project
will definitely benefit from constructive integration of nanoscience and
electro-catalysis.