* 1132151
* Support for the Open Source Systems  2011 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Charles Schweik, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 03/31/2013
* USD 21,356.00

This is funding to support travel for a diverse group of US PhD students and
faculty mentors to participate in an international doctoral consortium on
research on Free and Open Source Software that will be co-located with the 7th
International Conference on Open Source Systems (OSS 2011), October 5-8, 2011 in
Salvador, BA, Brazil. The last decade has witnessed a tremendous growth in the
interest and diffusion of Free/libre and Open Source Software (FLOSS)
technologies, and has changed the way organizations and individuals create,
acquire, and distribute software and software-based services. The OSS conference
is a leading international forum where a diverse community of academics,
industry professionals and FLOSS practitioners can come together to share
research findings and experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OSS 2011 Doctoral
Consortium will provide a group of approximately 13-15 PhD students studying
FLOSS with an environment in which they can share and discuss their goals,
methods and results at an early stage of their research. It will take place on
October 4, the day before the OSS conference begins. By participating in the
doctoral consortium, students will gain feedback on their work from other
students and faculty members, allowing them to enhance their own research
proposal. Students will also develop a better understanding of the different
research communities engaged in the study of open source software. In addition,
the consortium will provide students with opportunities to make new professional
connections beyond their own disciplines. Because the consortium will be held in
Brazil this year, it will also provide opportunities to develop new
international connections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be recruited for
the doctoral consortium through advertisement on the conference website,
postings to relevant mailing lists and direct solicitation to faculty working on
FLOSS related research. Particular attention will be placed on identifying
participants from under-represented groups. To apply for the consortium,
students will submit a paper outlining their research goals and work to date.
Applications will be screened by the consortium chairs for fit to the topic
area, state of development and quality of the research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The OSS doctoral consortia
traditionally bring together the best of the next generation of researchers in
open source software research, allowing them to create a social network both
among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development. Applications are encouraged from all doctoral students
whose research is OSS-related, regardless of the fields in which they are
earning their degrees. Participation is encouraged from a broad range of
relevant disciplines and approaches, including (but not limited to) computer
science, sociology, psychology, anthropology, information science, cognitive
science, communication, and economics. While NSF funds will be used chiefly to
support participation by students enrolled in graduate programs in the United
States, some international participants may be supported as well in recognition
of the fact that the OSS field embraces educational and cultural traditions that
vary in different parts of the world. The organizers will try explicitly to
identify and include the broadest possible group of highly qualified
participants. As a consequence of these steps, the student and faculty
participants will constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions,
which will help broaden the students' horizons to the future benefit of the
field.