* 1132625
* US-China Collaboration: Using Digital Imaging to Evaluate Fracture of Asphalt Concrete
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Andrew Braham, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* James Z. Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 6,669.00

The project will support the PI, Dr. Andrew Braham of the University of
Arkansas, to visit Nanjing, China, to collaborate with Dr. Fujian Ni of
Southeast University and Mr. Alex Tao of MeadWestVaco. Technical collaboration
will center on the use of Digital Image Correlation to capture both bulk and
separation properties of asphalt concrete during fracture testing. Fracture
testing is becoming a popular technique for quantifying cracking characteristics
of asphalt concrete in the laboratory. However, current data collection in the
area of asphalt concrete often relies on stationary gauges to collect the data.
While the data collected can be quite accurate, a large disadvantage is that
data can only be collected at the point the gauge is attached to the sample.
With Digital Image Correlation, pictures are taken of the sample during the
whole test, so displacement and strains can be calculated across the entire
specimen face, instead of just a single point on the sample. This will most
likely be the future of materials testing, and this collaboration will provide
the opportunity to establish the path forward in implementing the new data
collection technique. In addition, the three groups will explore the research
needs of a multinational company, MeadWestVaco, and how Southeast University and
the University of Arkansas can address these needs. This initial collaboration
between Dr. Ni of Southeast University, Mr. Tao of MeadWestVaco, and Dr. Braham
of the University of Arkansas will set the stage for what we hope is years of
future collaborations between the three entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: It is estimated that 94 percent of the pavement surfaces in the United
States are asphalt concrete. The driving public is well aware of the
construction and associated delays necessary in order to maintain the roadways
we all enjoy. In order to reduce the amount of distresses in pavement surfaces,
this international collaboration will study cracking characteristics of asphalt
concrete. This group will use both traditional and more innovative equipment to
capture cracking data in the laboratory, which will translate into longer
lasting and less expensive roadways. Traditional measurements take readings at
one time from specific points on the sample, much like measuring a distance with
a ruler. More innovative equipment uses a camera that takes pictures, allowing
for measurements to be taken across the entire sample face both during the
testing and after the test has been completed. This project will strengthen
international research collaboration network on this topic.