* 1132763
* Electricity Conference on Emerging Behavior in the Changing Electric Energy Industry
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Marija Ilic, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 05/31/2012
* USD 3,000.00

This award provides travel support to enable graduate student participation in a
conference held at Carnegie Mellon University on March 8-9, 2011, on the subject
of "Emerging Behavior in the Changing Electric Energy
Industry."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As new and unconventional technologies become
connected to the electric power grid, and the system is driven by qualitatively
new economic and environmental objectives, new phenomena will emerge. Some of
these may lower cost and improve reliability, but some will challenge the
stability and reliability of the electricity system. For example, if a large
proportion of residential and commercial customers have solar panels that feed
electricity into the grid when the sun is shining, but abruptly require power
when a cloud passes over the sun, the dynamic stresses on the grid will
increase, perhaps to unmanageable levels. A system based on minimizing costs
with current rules for preserving stability and reliability could lead to
unacceptable service. Before making these changes in technology and management
practices, it would be prudent to understand the challenges that the current
system faces, the reasons for its relatively good record of reliability, and how
the system will be challenged by the changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
the meeting is on unintended consequences of changes in the electricity system.
Topics include causes, modeling, and dynamics of hard-to-predict emerging
technical and economic phenomena. The meeting focuses on issues affecting the
smart grid, dynamic pricing, and decentralized generation (including net
metering for an area with a high penetration of solar self-generation). The
objective is to identify fundamental approaches for transforming today's
operating and planning industry practices, and to identify supporting policies
that can manage short-and long-term uncertainty and ensure sustainable
electricity services.