* 1132986
* Symposium Support: Combining experiments with modeling and computational methods to study animal locomotion (Charleston, January 3-7, 2012)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Laura Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2012
* USD 14,980.00

The goal of the symposium and associated workshop at the 2012 Meeting of the
Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology is to encourage investigators in
organismal biology to use recent computational advances in fluid-structure
interaction problems, stochastic modeling, and complex fluids and materials to
answer fundamental questions in ecomechanics, functional morphology, and
comparative physiology. A goal of this meeting is to attract junior
investigators to these types of problems, and this is particularly timely given
the new NSF postdoctoral fellowship on the ?Intersections of Biology and
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in
computational methods have made realistic large-scale simulations of animal
locomotion possible. This has resulted in numerous mathematical and
computational studies of locomotion with the purpose of improving the design of
micro-air and underwater vehicles, motivating the development of improved
numerical methods, and enhancing our understanding of stability and
maneuverability. How such mathematical studies can improve our understanding of
organisms in the context of their environment and physiology remains relatively
unexplored. For example, nature has evolved a wide variety of fascinating
mechanisms of locomotion that exploit the properties of complex materials and
fluids. Only recently have researchers been able to use mathematical and
computational tools to rigorously compare the relative advantages and
disadvantages of these forms of locomotion in different environments. Similarly,
advances in computational physiology now allow investigators to explore how
changes at the molecular and cellular levels could lead to significant changes
in performance at the level of the organism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intent of
the symposium will be to highlight recent examples of how computational,
mathematical, and experimental tools can be combined to ultimately answer some
of questions posed in one of the five grand challenges in organismal biology:
?Integrating living and physical systems.? One emphasis of the symposium will be
to illustrate the synergy between modeling, experiments, and simulation in
studies of animal locomotion. Another emphasis of the symposium will be to
highlight mathematical models that combine multiple levels of biological
organization to understand how small changes in tissue physics can result in
large changes in performance at the organismal level. The purpose of the
workshop is to facilitate discussions about effective training of students and
the professional development of junior faculty who are working in an explicitly
interdisciplinary context of biology, mathematics, theory, and simulation.