* 1132807
* U.S.-Canada Colloborative Research:  Dissecting behavioral isolation in nature: mate choice and the among-population divergence of signal traits and mate preferences
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Kelly Dyer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,562.00

In this international collaborative project researchers from U.S. and Canada
will perform experiments to study the role of cuticular hydrocarbons (CHC) in
species recognition and the maintenance of boundaries between two closely
related species of mushroom-feeding flies, Drosophila subquinaria and Drosophila
recens. Male contact pheromones consist of a suite of CHCs, and preliminary data
suggests that these differ between the two species. Three specific aims will be
pursued to test the hypothesis that male CHCs are the key signal traits that are
used by females during mate choice and that underlie species discrimination, and
that these traits and the female preferences for them have diverged among
populations in response to reinforcing selection generated by the presence of
the other species. The results of these studies will lay the groundwork for a
long-term collaborative research program that will shed light on how behaviors
diverge to generate reproductive isolation and ultimately
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the male signals and female
preferences will inform hypotheses about whether the genetic basis of within vs.
between species female discrimination is the same, and how simple vs. complex we
expect these traits to be at the genetic level. The genetic basis of female
discrimination and evolutionary genomics of species differentiation in these fly
species might be more generally applicable to an understanding of the behavior,
ecology, and genetics of reproductive isolation. The data resources will be made
available to the community. This project will provide the opportunity to develop
a long-term collaboration between early career researchers in the U.S. and
Canada and will involve training of students in both laboratories, including
women and ethnic minorities. Involvement of junior researchers, especially from
groups underrepresented in science, in collaborative international activities is
a major goal of OISE.