* 1132415
* Biologically Inspired Autonomic Structural Materials with Controlled Toughening and Healing
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Henry Sodano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2011
* USD 23,637.00

Structural health monitoring (SHM) has seen significant growth over the past few
years due to the safety and performance enhancing benefits as well as the
potential life saving capabilities offered by the technology. Current advances
in SHM systems have lead to a variety of techniques capable of identifying
damage; however, few strategies exist for using this information to quickly
react to the environmental or material conditions to repair or protect the
system. Unlike these modern SHM systems, biological systems can not only detect
the presence of damage but react to heal it through stimulus responsive
behavior. This research plan focuses on the use of advanced composite materials
to mimic the response of biological systems to damage. This effort will provide
a bridge between structural health monitoring and autonomic structural materials
such that the SHM system can detect and respond to damage in a controlled
fashion. Existing healing techniques are problematic because they cannot be
controlled and provide no sensing response to report the presence of damage, the
initiation of healing, or the strength recovered. A unique combination of
materials and sensors will be used to mimic the one of the toughening responses
exhibited by bone when subjected to cracking. The autonomous system developed
here will use optical fibers to sense the presence of damage and autonomously
initiate healing. Responsive behavior will occur by using the energy released
from the optical fiber in the presence of damage as stimulus and the recent
advances in thermally activated shape memory polymers
(SMPs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the research will be a material
system that can sense the presence of damage, arrest its propagation and
initiate controlled healing through stimulus. The work will 1) model and
characterize recently developed reactive polymers, 2) characterize the crack
blunting from a localized modulus change at the crack tip, and 3) use
cyberengineering to fabricate a composite material with integrated sensor
networks, computing and logic to allow the system to respond to damage without
human intervention. The research program will advance SHM from damage detection
to an integrated material system which can identify and react to damage in an
autonomous manner as biological systems do.