* 1132496
* GARDE: EQuaLS: Enhancing Quality of Life of Students through senior designs
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Nathalia Peixoto, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2017
* USD 125,000.00

PI: Peixoto, Nathalia L. and Ikonomidou, Vasiliki&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1132496&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GARDE:EQuaLS proposes two senior design
projects per year to be developed at George Mason University by Electrical
Engineering or Bioengineering students over the course of five years. The
objective of this proposal is to introduce engineering students to, and develop
best practices for, user-centered design in a multidisciplinary environment. The
objectives of the senior design projects revolve around enhancing the quality of
life of students with physical disabilities (SwD) who are enrolled in George
Mason University and are registered with the Office of Disabilities Services.
Two benefits we reap from this project are to engage our engineering students
and to raise their awareness of the needs their fellow students have. On the
other hand, SwD may become interested in engineering, as they will take part in
all phases of the design process. Examples of projects we propose include a
talking color reader for clothes, a second generation voice controlled
wheelchair, and a self-aware positioning cane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;"Friends and equals: enhancing the quality of life of your
peer": this is the inspiration for our senior engineering projects. The year-
long senior design experience provides the opportunity for a group of students
to focus on one need of one SwD (the user), to address that need along with the
user, to propose engineering solutions, to design one or two of those solutions
in detail, and to manufacture them. Students face user-centered design, a
challenge in engineering education, and at the same time approach SwDs as a
friend and peer, not as someone remote to them. Stakeholders (supervisors,
administrative representatives and interested family members) will be briefed on
the major steps of the design and assessments will be gathered from all parties
to provide feedback and support the students in their project. Formative
assessment will be used to develop best practices in approaching teaching
usercentered design to engineering student teams. During the second semester the
prototypes are tested and adjustments made. The final product is delivered
before the end of the semester so user data can be acquired. Some of the
projects will lead to patent disclosures, but all of them will lead to life-long
contributions to the two sides: to the designers and to the
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;"Fascinating" is the first
word we hear when describing how engineering helps society. The appeal of
designing cool gadgets that transform one's life captivates children and adults.
We will continue our engagement with the community and expand already successful
dissemination initiatives: (1) a fun-gineering badge designed to entice girl
scouts; (2) TV and radio interviews; (3) presentations during "engineering week"
(February), during "career day" (throughout the school year) to high schools and
elementary schools, and during the Assistive Technology Initiative Fair held
yearly at GMU. These initiatives have already been initiated by the PIs. Here we
propose to engage the senior design students in presentations to the community
through one or more of those programs. The feeling of accomplishment when
showing a child what it means to do engineering is unmatched: we strongly
believe this training will enhance students' learning, their perspective on
society, and their participation in community outreach.