* 1132849
* The University of Arizona - AGRHYMET Planning Visit
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Juan Valdes, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 03/31/2015
* USD 24,041.00

The University of Arizona AGRHYMET Planning Visit proposal is aimed at
establishing a new research collaboration between The University of Arizona and
AGRHYMET in Niger (Niamey). The funds will support the visit of a University of
Arizona team, under the direction of Juan B Valdes and Aleix Serrat-Capdevila,
to Niamey (Niger) for a research planning visit to AGRHYMET. A specialized
institute of the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel
(CILSS) composed of nine member states, AGRHYMET is a Centre of Excellence in
the science and techniques for regional agro-meteorological and hydrological
monitoring, among other domains of expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the visit is to elaborate a joint research agenda to improve the spatio-temporal
characterization of precipitation in the African Monsoon Region using both
ground and satellite estimates, and to improve the use of satellite
precipitation estimates in hydrologic applications and early warning systems. To
achieve these goals, we will compare rain gauges and satellite precipitation
measurements from different sources and different spatial scales and
resolutions, across different latitudes in the African Monsoon Region (i.e. the
Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone). We will also evaluate local calibrations and
bias corrections of satellite measurements, and perform an analysis of the
uncertainty contained in the estimates. Finally we will also compare the use of
different precipitation products in lumped and distributed hydrologic models for
basins in different monsoon regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning visit
and later communication between teams will lead to a well organized and focused
scientific research agenda aimed at improving real-time precipitation estimates
with important broader implications in terms of precipitation monitoring,
streamflow forecasting and water resources management (allocation, reservoir
operations) in poorly gauged basins across the world. For this reason, this
proposal has the support of ICIWaRM-UNESCO (International Center for Integrated
Water Resources Management) and the Secretariat of the Sub-Saharan G-WADI
network program of UNESCO, chaired by AGRHYMET.