* 1132168
* A National EPSCoR Cyberinfrastructure Student Engagement Program
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* James Bottum, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal Number: EPS-1132168 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: A National EPSCoR
Cyberinfrastructure Student Engagement Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Clemson University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to engage and
prepare more undergraduate and graduate students from EPSCoR institutions in the
use of computing to advance science, engineering, and scholarly studies. In
addition, the project seeks to establish and build on relationships between
students and mentors to assist in the retention of students in CI activities and
studies. The proposal notes the need of ?a comprehensive plan for education and
outreach in computational science to support learning and workforce development?
presented in the NSF?s Cyberinfrastructure Framework for 21st Century Science
and Engineering seeks and thus, seeks to develop student oriented education,
outreach, and training programs that support, utilize and advance the CI
ecosystem. A key component of the proposal is the goal to establish a strong CI
presence of a more diverse undergraduate and graduate cadre of students within
EPSCoR jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit centers on the creation of a student CI engagement program
across EPSCoR jurisdictions designed around workforce development to meet 21st
century CI needs. This includes proposed efforts to expand the awareness of,
ability to deploy, and access to CI resources and services locally, regionally,
and nationally. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Enabling a diverse cohort of
students from EPSCoR jurisdictions to join the national CI ecosystem as users,
champions, and mentors through CI outreach, education, and training addresses a
national priority of developing the CI savvy workforce needed to address 21st
century challenges. By modeling the education and training successes of Campus
CI Champion programs in several EPSCoR jurisdictions, the proposers seek to
build a national framework to increase the number and diversity of undergraduate
and graduate students within EPSCoR jurisdictions who are prepared CI
practitioners and mentors.