* 1132008
* NCRN-SN: SSCRN: Spatial Sciences Census Research Node
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* David Folch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,620,395.00

The Spatial Sciences Census Research Node (SSCRN) will foster a connection
between the spatial and the survey sciences. This bridge will yield both
immediate and long-term benefits for the estimation, dissemination, and
usability of the small area statistics produced by the Census Bureau. Small area
statistics describe the character of the population within small geographic
zones, such as census tracts. Small area estimates from the American Community
Survey (ACS) are imprecise. Historically, very little attention has been paid to
the geographic distribution of populations within these small areas. The basic
research of SSCRN will increase knowledge about the organization of the American
population within small geographic areas for the purpose of improving small area
estimates. Apart from the impractical solution of increasing the sample size,
the only way to reduce the uncertainty of survey estimates is to utilize
ancillary information about the population. SSCRN will exploit new forms of
geographic information and recent advances in spatial statistics to make small
area estimates more accurate. In addition to improving small area population
estimates, an improved understanding of the geographic micro-structure of the
American population is of broad scientific interest and may expand knowledge
about socio-spatial processes like segregation and neighborhood
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SSCRN will bridge the spatial and the survey
sciences through basic research that addresses the current needs of the Census
Bureau and yields tangible products for researchers. SSCRN will develop and
disseminate training materials, software, and research for a broad community of
Census data users and producers. SSCRN will convene a series of
interdisciplinary meetings designed to identify research frontiers at the
intersection of the spatial and the survey sciences. The meetings will be used
to design and refine a novel curriculum and workshop series aimed at developing
a cohort of scientists that are capable of establishing and elucidating links
between the spatial and survey sciences. SSCRN will develop software tools that
will enhance the usability of ACS small area estimates by allowing users to
intelligently combine tracts to reduce uncertainty in variables of interest.
SSCRN will educate and train a large group of students, post docs, and
scientists through meetings, structured mentoring, and workshops. The impact of
these activities will be multiplied through design and dissemination of a
broadly accessible model curriculum and training workshop. Finally, SSCRN will
have a broad impact by releasing a novel form of spatial microdata that will
improve small area estimation and enable researchers to explore the spatial
structure of the American population. This activity is supported by the NSF-
Census Research Network funding opportunity.