* 1132610
* US-South America Workshop to Foster Space Weather Investigation using the LISN Observatory
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Cesar Valladares, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2012
* USD 45,897.00

This U.S.- South America award will support a workshop to promote international
scientific collaborations between researchers from South America and the United
States in the Low Latitude Ionospheric Sensor Network (LISN) community. The
workshop will be held in November 2011 at the National Institute for Space
Research (INPE) in Sao Jose dos Campos in Brazil. The LISN community has
installed over 40 GPS receivers and 5 magnetometers across the South American
continent during the last few years. The success of the continuous operations of
this network depends on the collaborations of the South American partners. The
primary goal of the workshop is to motivate new members to learn about the LISN
instrumentation and to engage them in scientific projects and campaigns.
Research topics addressed at the workshop will include: (1) new instrumentation,
their observable quantities, and analysis techniques; (2) physics of the day-to-
day variability of the low-latitude ionosphere and a method for predicting
equatorial spread F (ESF) initiation; and (3) space weather applications and the
role of LISN on the development of an augmentation system in South America. The
workshop will be organized by Dr. Cesar Valladares from Boston College with Drs.
Eurico de Paula and Hisao Takahashi from INPE in Brazil, Dr. Jorge Chau from
Jicarmarca Observatory in Peru, and Dr. Caludio Brunini from the University of
La Plata in Argentina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together
leading researchers from the United States, Brazil, Peru, Argentina, Columbia,
Ecuador and Bolivia and provide unique opportunities for this community to
initiate long-term collaborations. For the US, this project will create
opportunities for students and early career scientists to participate in
different phases of the instrument installation, development of data analysis
software, and the usage of the resources offered by the new instruments that are
operating in South America. Furthermore, it will provide an international
research experience to U.S and South American graduate students and early-career
researchers. This workshop is supported by the Americas Program in the Office of
International Science and the Aeronomy Program in the Directorate of Geosciences
at NSF, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, and the São Paulo Research
Foundation (FAPESP) and the Coordination of Improvement of Higher Education
Personnel (CAPES) in Brazil.