* 1133655
* Metings: Support of Student Participation in the 2011 North American Membrane Society Meeting and the 2011 International Congress on Membranes and Membrane Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* G. Glenn Lipscomb, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

CBET 1133655 University of Toledo Lipscomb

This proposal seeks support for student participation in both the 21st Annual
North American Membrane Society Meeting (NAMS 2011), held June 4- 8, 2011 in Las
Vegas, Nevada and the 2011 International Congress on Membranes and Membrane
Processes (ICOM 2011), held July 23-29, 2011 in Amsterdam, The Netherlands. We
anticipate providing financial assistance to ~50 students attending the
meetings. The requested funding will be used to support graduate students from
US universities. The availability of funding will be announced through the NAMS
and annual meeting web sites. Awards will be coordinated with other student
awards offered by NAMS to have the greatest impact on student support. The NAMS
annual meeting and ICOM triennial meeting are two of the preeminent global
membrane meetings. The latest developments in the membrane field from leading
academic, governmental, and industrial research labs are presented for the first
time for evaluation by the membrane community. Membranes have become a critical
technology to address pressing national needs. Membrane technology offers the
ability to dramatically reduce energy consumption in industrial separation
processes. The reductions in energy consumption can be accompanied by
significant reduction in manufacturing costs as found in seawater desalination.
Such a combination offers the unique ability to reduce our reliance on energy
imports and greenhouse gas emissions without adverse economic impacts. Membrane
processes also are important to the emerging alternative energy industry.
Membranes enable low cost, low energy consumption separations in biorefineries,
hydrogen production, and electrochemical systems--the subject of sessions at the
NAMS and ICOM meetings. In addition to reducing energy consumption, membranes
can reduce requirements for land and raw materials through process
intensification and thereby enhance the sustainability of human activity--
another area of national interest.

The requested funding will provide partial support for student participation in
a professional meeting of the membrane industry. Attendance at a NAMS or ICOM
meeting provides a unique opportunity for students to share their
accomplishments with peers and more senior members of the community. The
feedback they receive can help direct their work and provide encouragement. The
involvement of students is vital to the membrane industry. Nearly double digit
growth is expected in markets for membrane bioreactors and for gas and liquid
separations through 2013. Such growth will require a pool of skilled workers.
The support provided through this proposal will help attract the best students
to the field and fill this pool by allowing them to participate in a meeting
that offers an exciting environment for networking, education, and ultimate job
placement. In addition to the development of human resources for the industry,
the support provided by this proposal will allow presentation of the latest
research results from the most innovative academic laboratories around the
country. This showcase of new materials and technologies attracts significant
industrial participation as it provides a unique environment to evaluate the
commercialization potential of the research. The economic growth associated with
such commercialization benefits the entire country.