* 1133351
* Towards a Fundamental Understanding of the Mechanisms of Mechanotransduction Through Focal Adhesion Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Tess Moon, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2018
* USD 342,000.00

1133351&lt;br/&gt;Moon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applied loads - even those in the
sub-unfolding regime?transmitted through proteins can significantly alter the
proteins - conformations and chemical behavior, yet essential details of how and
where mechanical load manifests itself inside proteins remain unclear. Given the
intrinsic duality between a protein's free energy landscape and its chemical
reactive potential, knowledge of strain energy storage is key to understanding
of the coupled mechano-chemo behavior of proteins; ultimately holding the key to
unveiling the fundamental mechanisms of mechanotransduction in proteins. Towards
these ends, load transmissions within the three major domains of Focal Adhesion
Kinase (FAK) are studied via steered molecular dynamics simulations.
Progressively higher constant loads are applied to: (i) constituent secondary
motifs, and (ii) entire domains, to provide insight into the changes in
structural and vibrational characteristics, as well as the altered chemical
behavior, of the major domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a key regulator of
cellular processes central to tumorigenesis, metastasis and survival signaling,
FAK has been identified as a potential target for anti-cancer drugs. Knowledge
of how focal adhesion (FA) proteins perform their presumed roles in signal
transmission is key to advancing the understanding of various
signaling/regulatory pathways and, particularly in case of disease, to
identifying potential molecular "targets" for therapeutic agents/treatments.
Insights harnessed will help identify viable - perhaps even mechanically induced
- targets for chemotherapy that are specifically designed to avoid systemic
issues associated with complete "knock-out" of vital FA proteins like FAK.
Beyond FAK, some of the basic operating principles underlying cellular
signaling/regulatory pathways reliant on mechanical load are explained.