* 1133951
* Photosynthetic conversion of CO2 and low grade heat from biorefineries into linalool
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2016
* Ruanbao Zhou, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 10/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Ruanbao Zhou&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1133951&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biorefineries typically release about one third of
the carbohydrate carbon as carbon dioxide (CO2) during fermentation. Ideally, a
photosynthetic microorganism could be engineered to convert CO2 directly into
liquid transportation fuels. Unfortunately, current approaches for using
photosynthetic microorganisms to make fuel from CO2 suffer from many technical
challenges, including the need to harvest cells, extract the energy-dense oils,
and then convert the oil into the final product. To address these challenges,
the proposed research will genetically engineer two cyanobacteria (Anabaena sp.
PCC7120 and Nostoc punctiforme) to directly produce and secrete linalool, a ten-
carbon terpene alcohol, through the non melavonate (MEP) pathway using sunlight
as the energy source and CO2 as the carbon feedstock. To intensify linalool
production, efforts will also be made to genetically engineer the cyanobacteria
to increase the rate of photosynthetic CO2 fixation, and to re-direct the carbon
flow to linalool synthesis by shutting unnecessary pathways that compete for
fixed carbon. Towards this end, the proposed research plan has three components:
1) stable insertion of optimal LinS gene into chromosome of cyanobacteria; 2)
correct metabolic flux to maximize linalool productivity; 3) assess linalool
production under both photosynthetic and&lt;br/&gt;heterotrophic conditions. The
performance of the engineered strains will be assessed in a recirculating
photobioreactor system that uses phase separation for linalool recovery.
Linalool yield and productivity will be compared to input
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed education and outreach activities will focus on providing opportunities
for Native American students through the 2+2+2 Program at the South Dakota State
University (SDSU). First, week-long activities in metabolic engineering will be
developed as part of the summer institute program. Through these activities,
Native American high school students and their teachers will be recruited to
participate in 6-8 week long, summer research internships. Teachers will use the
research experience to develop classroom/lab activities to share with their
students. Students will participate in on-going projects, and then will be given
the opportunity to present their efforts at scientific meetings organized
through the South Dakota Academy of Science and SDSU?s Undergraduate Research
Day. Native American undergraduate students who attend tribal colleges and then
transfer to SDSU will also be offered summer research experiences.