* 1133528
* Collaborative Research:  A Multiscale Framework to Investigate the Influence of Attached Phase Soil Organic Matter on the Fate, Transport, and Removal of Carbon-based Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2015
* USD 177,000.00

Collaborative LeBoeuf and Li&lt;br/&gt;1133280 and
1133528&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Environmental Health and
Safety of Nanotechnology program supports work by Professor Eugene J. LeBoeuf at
Vanderbilt University, and Professors Yusong Li and Yongfeng Lu at the
University of Nebraska , Lincoln to investigate the influence of attached phase
organic matter on the fate, transport and removal of carbon-based nanomaterials
in porous media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Escalating production and subsequent
incorporation of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) in consumer products increases
the likelihood of release to the environment. Typically, hydrophobic particulate
compounds released over time will accumulate in organic systems, including
attached phase soil and sediment organic matter (AP-SOM). Especially in
sediments, there is the potential for contaminants to persist for significant
periods of time; therefore ENMs may impact environments long into the future.
Although some effort has been devoted to investigate the behavior of ENMs in the
environment, a very limited number of studies have focused on the interactions
of AP-SOM and ENM.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to build systematic,
mechanistic understanding of the interactions between ENM and AP-SOM and their
influence on ENM transport. We focus on carbon-based ENMs by selecting multi-
walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), fullerene (C60), and carbon nano-onions (CNOs)
to represent cylindrical, spherical, and onion-shaped systems. Meanwhile, humic
acid and kerogen are selected to represent soft/young and rigid/old AP-SOM. The
central hypothesis is that the interactions between ENM aggregates and AP-SOM
are affected by the fundamental nanostructure (e.g., different shapes) of ENMs
and physicochemical characteristics (e.g., macromolecular rubbery/glassy states)
of AP- SOM. An integrated experimental and modeling research framework is
structured around four objectives: (1) Characterize SOM and ENMs to link
physicochemical and macromolecular characteristics of AP-SOM and the fundamental
nanostructure of ENM with their macroscopic interactions; (2) Quantify the
interactions of nanomaterials and AP-SOM by conducting Quartz Crystal
Microbalance (QCM) attachment/detachment experiments; (3) Quantify the influence
of AP-SOM on the transport of nanomaterials in porous media by conducting column
experiments; and (4) Develop and experimentally validate a mathematical model
that is capable of simulating nanomaterial transport in porous media in the
presence of AP-SOM. The proposed research can be transformative because it aims
to link fundamental nanostructure and properties to the behaviors of ENM
aggregate transport, with a particular focus on the presence of AP-
SOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the pace of research and production of
nanomaterials continues to increase, comprehensive studies on the environmental
impact of these materials are urgently needed. Understanding the fate and
transport of nanomaterials in porous media will provide critical information on
the influence of engineered nanomaterials on ecosystems and human health. The
numerical simulator developed from this proposal can be used to predict the
mobility distance of engineered nanomaterials under a range of environmental
conditions, which can assist regulatory agencies in developing improved, risk-
based guidelines that address these emerging contaminants. The advancement in
our fundamental knowledge of nanoparticle retention in porous media can also be
used to model the performance of filtration technologies for treatment of
drinking water or wastewater containing nanoparticles. The project will initiate
significant advancements in motivating undergraduates and graduates in the STEM
areas by involving underrepresented groups in the project and transferring
research results into the classroom. The fundamental knowledge, experimental
techniques, and modeling tools produced from this work will be rapidly
disseminated to the scientific community in the form of journal publications and
presentations at regional, national, and international professional meetings.