* 1133877
* Nano-Porous Thermoelectric Based Knudsen Gas Pumps
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Shamus McNamara, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 289,249.00

Shamus McNamara, University of Louisville Proposal #1133877

The Knudsen pump is a thermally driven gas pump which features no moving parts,
potentially providing very high reliability. For MEMS devices, the lack of seals
is especially attractive. The Knudsen pump uses the principle of thermal
transpiration as the basis of its operation, and thus must operate in either the
free molecular flow regime or near the free molecular flow regime in the
transitional flow regime. For operation at atmospheric pressure, sub-micron
channel cross-sections are required for operation, with channel diameters on the
order of 100 nm commonly utilized. The objectives of this research project are
to (1) improve the efficiency of the Knudsen gas pump, (2) develop a method to
integrate the Knudsen pump with microfluidic applications in a simple, efficient
manner, (3) better model and understand gas pumps based upon the thermal
transpiration effect through unobstructed channels, (4) explore efficient
methods of using the Knudsen Pump to generate pneumatic energy from heat
sources, such as body heat and solar thermal energy. New thermoelectric
materials will be investigated for use in the Knudsen pump, and prototype pumps
using these materials will be tested. Studies on the effects of surface
roughness of the channels making up the Knudsen pump will be performed, as there
is experimental evidence to suggest that the tangential momentum accommodation
coefficient (TMAC) can have a significant impact on the performance of the
Knudsen pump. The expected outcomes include a smaller, more efficient Knudsen
pump with better pump performance, a better understanding of the limitations of
the Knudsen pump, a better theoretical model describing how the Knudsen pump
operates, a better understanding of how microfluidic devices can incorporate the
Knudsen pump, and a demonstration of the Knudsen pump used to generate pneumatic
energy from heat sources.

Because the Knudsen pump features no moving parts, an efficient Knudsen pump has
many applications where pump size, noise, or reliability is a concern. It can
also be integrated with microfluidic devices, providing a key component for many
lab-on-a-chip devices that are under development for medical diagnostics and
fast, efficient drug and materials research.

As a passive device, the Knudsen pump has the potential to generate pneumatic
energy from waste heat, such as the catalytic converter of an automobile or
manufacturing plant. It can be powered from the sun, generating pneumatic power
than can be used to run a generator. And it can be powered from human heat,
opening up applications for biomedical devices.

