* 1133751
* Characterization of Surface Wind Energy Resources and Wake Interferences among Wind Turbines over Complex Terrains for Optimal Site Design and Turbine Durability
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

1133751 PI Hu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While a number of studies have been conducted
to investigate wake interference among multiple wind turbines for the optimal
layout design of wind turbines in a wind farm, most previous models involved
homogenous straight-line winds over simplified flat surfaces. Most onshore wind
turbines are sited in wind farms with complex terrains, which are not flat. A
more realistic model would account for multiple wind turbines sited in an
onshore wind farm with complex terrains such as hills, valleys, ridges and
escarpments. In addition, the effects of the significant variations in flow
characteristics (spatial and temporal) of the surface winds over complex
terrains on the power productivity, fatigue loads, and wake interference among
wind turbines need to be taken into account. In this project, the PIs will
perform a fundamental study to quantify the mean and turbulence characteristics
of the surface winds over typical complex terrains seen in onshore wind farms
and to investigate the wake interference among multiple wind turbines sited over
the complex terrains. In this project the large-scale Aerodynamic/Atmospheric
Boundary Layer (AABL) Wind and Wind Tunnel at Iowa State University will be used
to quantify the performance of an array of wind turbines sited over a flat
surface (baseline case) and complex terrains with non-homogenous surface winds.
In addition to measuring dynamic wind loads and the power outputs of the wind
turbines, advanced flow diagnostic techniques such as Particle Image Velocimetry
(PIV) and Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) will be used to determine
detailed flow field characteristics such as the mean and turbulence
characteristics of the surface winds and wake interference in complex terrains.
The detailed flow field measurements will be correlated with the dynamic wind
loads and power output measurements. The results of this project will lead to a
better understanding of underlying physics and the characteristics of surface
wind energy resources over complex terrains. In terms of the broader impacts,
the research program will be incorporated into the Iowa State?s curricula, both
undergraduate and graduate, by adding wind turbine aerodynamics experiment
modules to the existing aerodynamics laboratory courses. The findings derived
from the project will be disseminated broadly to contribute to the knowledge
base of wind energy and wind turbine technology. Existing programs at Iowa State
will be leveraged to recruit more female and minority students. "Renewable
Energy and Wind Turbine Technology" seminars and demonstration experiments will
be developed for K-12 teachers and students. The research, education, and
outreach activities are expected to make a significant contribution to the land-
grant mission of Iowa State University. The findings derived from this project
will be used to develop more realistic models to predict multiple wake
interactions over complex terrains and to optimize paradigms for the optimal
site design of wind turbine arrays with higher power yield, better integrity,
and longer durability of the turbines.