* 1133099
* Nanocrystal Tandems as Improved Solar Water Splitting Photocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Frank Osterloh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Osterloh Proposal Number: 1133099

Intellectual Merit The solar energy?]driven splitting of water into hydrogen and
oxygen is promising route for the production of clean, carbon-free renewable
fuel in the form of hydrogen gas (H2). Although many semiconductor materials
catalyze this reaction, the solar energy conversion efficiency is still too low
(<1%) for commercial applications. The overall goal of this proposed research is
to synthesize nanocrystal tandem photocatalysts for solar energy driven water
splitting. These catalysts combine the high theoretical efficiency limit of
tandem cells (24%) with the advantages of inorganic nanocrystals, including high
crystallinity, short charge transport pathways, and adjustable electronic
structure. Suspended in water or as deposited as a thin film, the tandem
photocatalysts will be designed to achieve the difficult technical goal of
splitting water at greater than 1% efficiency.

The proposed research has two fundamental objectives. The first objective is to
synthesize well-defined nanocrystal model systems that will allow detailed
studies on light absorption, photochemical charge generation and charge transfer
in tandem photocatalyst systems. These properties are central to applications of
inorganic nanocrystals for solar energy conversion and photocatalysis. The
second objective is to gain fundamental understanding on the photochemical and
charge transfer properties of metal oxide and chalcogenide nanocrystals, and
relate these properties to their electronic structure. The mechanistic insight
gained here will serve as the basis for designing new water splitting
photocatalysts.

Broader Impacts

The proposed activities are designed to educate students and the public on
issues related to solar energy and climate change, with examples derived from
the proposed research. Towards this end, a module on the photocatalytic
properties of inorganic nanoparticles will be incorporated into a graduate level
class on catalysis in the Chemistry Department at the University of California
at Davis (UC-Davis), and an experimental module on synthesis and testing of
metal oxide gels for photocatalytic H2 production will be incorporated into the
undergraduate chemistry laboratory at UC-Davis. A photocatalytic H2 demo will
also be developed and incorporated into chemistry shows for the public that will
be performed through the UC-Davis Chemistry Club.