* 1133380
* Characteristics of Bolus formation from Breaking Internal Waves on Shelf Slopes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Koseff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 280,000.00

1133380&lt;br/&gt;Koseff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upslope, shoreward transport
of colder, nutrient-rich waters from below the ocean thermocline is thought to
be critical to coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs. Internal bores, or
boluses, generated by the breaking of shoaling internal waves on the slope
provide a mechanism for this cross-shelf transport of dense water. Indeed,
observations confirm that as internal waves propagate into shallow water, the
waves steepen, which can lead to breaking and, at times, the generation of
turbulent boluses of dense fluid which continue to travel inshore, mixing with
ambient surface water. This mechanism is thought to be a significant mechanism
for the transfer of nutrients, sediment, and larvae between deep waters and the
shelf environment. Furthermore, bolus-driven transport has the potential to
transport contaminants from offshore sewage outfalls at depth into the near-
shore environment, posing risks for human health through fishing and direct
exposure at beaches. However, questions still remain regarding internal bore
propagation and transport, including what conditions cause the formation of
internal bores. Thus, this project will investigate the internal bore formation
and mass transport processes using laboratory
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the knowledge of internal bore
formation, propagation, and associated mass transport is fairly limited. The
overall goals of the research, therefore, are to (1) quantitatively determine
the physical conditions which control the development of internal bores from
shoaling internal waves, and develop models and parameterizations for this, and
(2) relate initial flow parameters to the mass transport and fluid entrainment
of internal bores. A series of laboratory experiments in the internal wave
facility of the Stanford Environmental Fluid Mechanics Laboratory will study the
shoaling of internal waves on uniform slope/shelf topography in a two-layered
system. Quantitative flow visualization techniques, including Planar Laser-
Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) and Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) will allow a
detailed study of the effect of variations in the initial flow conditions, such
as incoming wave amplitude and frequency, on bolus formation and propagation.
Additional velocity and density field data will quantify the mass transport of
internal bore propagation, as well as quantify the bolus entrainment of ambient
fluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the project will strongly complement
ongoing field studies examining mass transfer issues in coastal ecosystems.
Additionally, the expected results will not only provide insight to the physical
mechanisms of shoaling internal waves, but will also have implications for
biological processes affected by hydrodynamics and mass transfer in shallow
coastal systems. Finally, studies such as these can be invaluable to
interpreting the "snapshots" that ocean data often gives, and in perhaps
directing further ocean measurements. Results from this work will be of use to
researchers studying near-coastal transport and mixing processes in coral reefs,
kelp forests, seagrass communities, as well as those concerned with human health
impacts from ocean outfalls and other antrhopogenic discharges. Finally, the
methodologies and techniques for PLIF and PIV in stratified flows that are
further developed and refined here will be of use to the experimental fluid
mechanics community.