* 1133746
* Development of aptamer nanosensors for detection of Staphylococcus aureus
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Peter Vikesland, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 396,134.00

PI:Vikesland&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:1133746&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle based
assays are of growing interest for the in vitro and in vivo detection of
pathogens because of their potential utility in highly sensitive and rapid field
monitoring. Recently aptamers oligonucleotide strands that bind to biological
targets with high affinity and selectivity, have been proposed as alternative
recognition elements for biomolecules, pharmaceuticals, and whole cells.
Although aptamer functionalized nanomaterials have shown great utility for
detection of these and other analytes there are few reports of the use of
aptamer-functionalized nanoparticles for intact pathogen detection. This project
will produce aptamer functionalized gold nanoparticles Apt AuNPs for
quantification of Staphylococcus aureus as a model emerging environmental
pathogen of concern. It is the PI's hypothesis that coupling of the specificity
imparted by an aptamer with the sensitivity achieved via surface plasmon
facilitated signal transduction will produce sensor platforms that will be
robust and readily translatable to field applications. To this end, they have
proposed a design for Apt-AuNP constructs such that their sensitivity and
specificity is maximized. It is noted that past studies illustrating the
underlying fundamental applicability of aptamer functionalized nanoparticles for
sensor applications have not necessarily produced nanoparticles that fully
retain the specificity of the aptamer. In particular the PI contends that
aptamer binding density is often not considered, even though it is well
established that aptamer conformation must change in response to a recognition
event. They propose a systematic approach to evaluate the role of surface
density on aptamer specificity. Four research tasks have been identified: Task
1: Apt-AuNP of varying aptamer identity and surface density will be produced and
characterized. Task 2: Apt-AuNP specificity will be assessed using a
colorimetric screening assay. Task 3: Apt-AuNP sensitivity will be determined
using a surface enhanced Raman spectroscopic assay. Task 4: The field
capabilities of Apt-AuNP will be evaluated using a portable Raman
spectrophotometer.&lt;br/&gt; This project is novel in that it will be the first
to develop an aptamer functionalized &lt;br/&gt;nanoparticle for pathogen
detection. Prior to this effort, nanomaterial enabled biosensors for pathogens
have relied almost exclusively on antibodies to provide assay specificity. The
PI's strategy for the design of the Apt-AuNP particles utilizes a fundamental
approach that will systematically consider how the different components of the
Apt-AuNP construct affect aptamer sensitivity. The researchers believe this
systematic engineering-science based approach will be emulated by others when
they undertake the design of aptamer functionalized nanoparticles and as such
has significant transformative potential.&lt;br/&gt;Methicillin resistant S.
aureus MRSA is the causative agent for a growing number of deadly disease
outbreaks both within the United States as well as worldwide. Although this
organism is historically associated with hospitals, recently, environmental
outbreaks of MRSA as well as its detection in wastewater effluent have
inaugurated MRSA as an emerging environmental pathogen of concern. Unfortunately
existing protocols for detection of MRSA and other S. aureus strains are slow
and not easily translatable to field applications. The proposed biosensor will
address the global need for improved S. aureus detection specifically while
providing a framework for the development of other aptamer based probes in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;Beyond a contribution to pressing research needs in
nanotechnology environmental health and&lt;br/&gt;safety, the project will build
upon an existing educational outreach component, the Nanotechnology Educational
and Environmental Outreach NEEO Program, that has been designed to train the
next generation of environmental professionals in understanding and quantifying
the effects of emerging technologies on human and environmental health. In this
program, members of the Virginia Tech Environmental BioNanotechnology Laboratory
research team are working in partnership with the Western Virginia Public
Education Consortium to develop a series of extramurally funded internships that
enable middle school educators and students to shadow the research team and
learn about new methods for observing nanoscale phenomena occurring at
biological and environmental interfaces. These internships are intended to
provide opportunities for the development of new technology inspired curricula
for educators as well as training and professional preparation for students.