* 1133027
* EAGER: Advanced Erasure Coding Technology for Storage Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Jing Li, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 05/31/2015
* USD 268,406.00

Today's explosive data surge puts data storage at the center of the information
universe, but data centers are becoming increasingly massive and expensive to
operate. Existing systems rely heavily on multiple disk replication to guard
against data loss due to device failure, but consuming multiple times more
storage space drastically increases the cost for hardware, and especially the
cost to operate (building space, power, cooling, and maintenance). The goal of
this research project is to develop new erasure coding technology, in lieu of
simple replication, to realize a space-efficient, energy-efficient,
quantifiably-reliable, and massively-scalable storage systems.

The intellectual merit lies in the development of a feasible approach that
relies on the strength of efficient erasure codes distributed across the storage
disks and nodes that can be used to build next-generation green data centers,
and to transform existing ones. While the benefits of erasure coding in saving
storage space is well understood in theory, good and practical erasure codes are
hard to design. The PI will build new and optimal erasure codes by exploiting
graph theory, finite geometry and combinatorics. Some of these codes have the
potential to simultaneously achieve the optimal space efficiency and the minimum
complexity promised by the theory. To make erasure-coding efficient and
scalable, the PI will also extend the design of single erasure coding to
nested/layered coding through hierarchical multiple protection.

In view of the critical importance of energy efficiency, developing green data
center technologies will have profound impacts scientifically and to the larger
society. The potential application line is broad, including databases, financial
information systems, health and medical information systems, research
depositories, and digital libraries.

The proposed research also integrates a meaningful education component,
including industrial and international collaboration, curriculum enhancement,
and promoting undergraduate and graduate research.