* 1133071
* Polymer Nanostructures as Thermal Interface Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kyriaki Kalaitzidou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 233,279.00

Proposal CBET-1133071&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Baratunda Cola, Georgia Institute
of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to conduct
fundamental investigations towards the determination of the processing-
structure-property relationship in high-performance, multifunctional thermal
interface materials (TIMs) made of ð-conjugated polymer nanotube and nanowire
arrays. Small contact area between surfaces and low thermal conductivity are two
leading factors that limit the performance of TIMs. Recently, ð-conjugated
polymer nanotube arrays were demonstrated to achieve dry contact over nearly 80%
of the surface in an interface. While this enhancement to mechanical contact
area is promising, thermal transport through such interfaces has not been
studied. Individual polymer chains can have thermal conductivities that are
higher than the thermal conductivities of more than half of the pure metals;
however, such high values have not been realized in polymer-based TIMs because
phonon scattering between randomly oriented chains limits thermal transport in
bulk polymers. Significant improvements to thermal conductivity can be achieved
by aligning constituent chains in the direction of heat flow, which occurs
naturally during the fabrication of polymer nanotubes and nanowires. Synthesis
and characterization will be used to seek understanding of thermal transport in
ð-conjugated polymer nanotube and nanowire arrays used as TIMs. The long-term
goal of this project is to enable thermal management of next-generation
electronic devices and packages while concurrently exciting broad research
interests at the interface of thermal transport, polymer science, and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal transport through arrays of
ð-conjugated polymer nanotubes and nanowires configured as a new type of thermal
interface material that produces large surface contact areas and adhesive
forces, and low thermal resistances will be studied fundamentally. The thermal
conductivity enhancement mechanism observed in highly aligned and crystalline
ð-conjugated polymer nanostructures will be revealed. A comprehensive framework
of experimental techniques will be developed to gain unprecedented insight into
thermal transport in ð-conjugated polymer nanotubes and nanowires. Necessary
scaling relationships that link process parameters to polymer structure and
ultimately the thermal, mechanical and electrical properties of polymer
nanowires and nanotubes will be established. The relationship between array
morphology and thermal and adhesive interface properties of ð-conjugated polymer
nanotubes and nanowires will be quantified and configurations that minimize
thermal interface resistance will be revealed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies on
thermal transport in ð-conjugated polymer nanotubes and nanowires may reveal new
possibilities for engineering both thermal and electrical transport to create
tailored, multifunctional interface materials. The success of this project could
enable cost-effective materials for thermal management of advanced electronic
systems and devices leading to new technologies and applications in the
computing, communications, electronics, aerospace and defense industries. New
discoveries will be disseminated through patents, technical publications and
potential technology transfer to a start-up company through Georgia Tech?s
Advanced Technology Development Center (ATDC). ADTC is located in close
proximity to the PIs labs and provides seed funding and technology incubation
space to member companies. Integration of research, teaching, and outreach
programs across multiple disciplines, including polymer science and
nanotechnology, will impact the education and training of a diverse student body
covering the undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate level at Georgia Tech.
Finally, the PIs will engage high school teachers and students from Dekalb
County in outreach activities involving hands-on exposure to advanced materials
and thermal technologies.