* 1133795
* Mechanistic Analysis of Polyelectrolyte-Based Colloidal Drug Carriers
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Yakov Lapitsky, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 297,821.00

1133795&lt;br/&gt;Lapitsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: A
fundamental study is proposed to relate the properties of multivalent
counterioncrosslinked polyelectrolyte micro- and nanoparticles to their
molecular interactions and formationkinetics. Currently, both their preparation
and application in drug delivery largely rely on trial and error, and the
literature on this subject remains limited to empirical data. While the
complexation of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes has been studied for many
years, detailed understanding of the particle formation process has been
confounded by extremely strong binding, fast kinetics and long timescales of
chain rearrangements. The formation mechanism of multivalent counterion-
crosslinked polyelectrolyte particles on the other hand, (whose investigation is
more tractable due to their weaker intermolecular interactions) remains
virtually unexplored. Similar gaps exist in the understanding of their drug
release properties, which have been (and continue to be) grossly
mischaracterized by experimental methods that are unsuitable for colloidal
polyelectrolyte particles. This lack of design guidelines severely limits their
performance and, in cases where the drug is expensive, leads to high research
and development costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this, the research aims
to gain a quantitative and mechanistic understanding of the parameters that
govern their (1) structure, (2) stability and (3) drug encapsulation/release
properties, by exploring how their colloidal properties evolve with changes in
their molecular interactions. This will be achieved by probing the process of
particle formation and drug encapsulation/release with an array of molecular and
colloidal characterization techniques (e.g., isothermal titration calorimetry,
light scattering and stopped-flow spectrofluorimetry), and analyzing the results
using existing models for the formation of monodisperse colloids, adsorption and
diffusion. Leveraging on the PI?s prior work on polyelectrolyte self-assembly
and drug delivery, this project will yield three transformative outcomes: (1) it
will provide mechanistic and quantitative guidelines for the design and
application of polyelectrolyte-based colloidal drug carriers (2) it will bridge
existing methods (and mechanistic models) for the preparation of monodisperse
colloids from low molecular weight constituents to polyelectrolyte-based
colloids and (3) it will yield important mechanistic insight into the process of
micro- and nanoparticle formation from pairs of oppositely-charged
polyelectrolytes, which cannot be experimentally probed in great detail
directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will enable
development of safer, more effective and less expensive pharmaceutical products
for oral, nasal and ophthalmic drug delivery. Specifically, it will establish
essential guidelines for ensuring that emerging (polyelectrolyte-based) drug
carriers will deliver drugs to their intended targets, and not lead to
overdosing. Furthermore, the fundamental insights gained from this research
could advance the design of medical and environmental diagnostics, personal care
products and foods. This will be facilitated by the strong environmental
engineering expertise at the University of Toledo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will train undergraduate, graduate and high school students in the use
of materials characterization techniques, and the fundamentals of polymer,
colloid and pharmaceutical science. This training will poise them for successful
careers in a wide range of industries or academia. Findings from this work will
be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at professional meetings.
Importantly, this work will also be integrated with the university?s outreach
activities. The PI will introduce high school students to stimulus-responsive
polyelectrolytes in the Engineer for a Day program that the university offers to
Toledo Public Schools, and will continue his involvement in the Engineering for
Teachers of Migrant Students (ETMS; CIVE 4950/5940) distance learning course.
ETMS provides graduate training for teachers in rural communities who teach
children of migrant farm workers, and aims to develop a set of experiments that
demonstrate the importance of mathematics, science and engineering to everyday
life. The PI has recently become involved with ETMS, and has already developed
several demonstrations that use stimulus-responsive polymers found in household
products (e.g., alginate, poly(acrylic acid), and methylcellulose) to reinforce
concepts that are learned in high school chemistry.