* 1133267
* Particle/Protein Interaction and Migration via Anisotropic Membrane Deformation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Ravi Radhakrishnan, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2015
* USD 200,000.00

1133267 Stebe

Intellectual Merit: Proteins associated with lipid membranes interact, migrate
and assemble. One mode of interaction is mediated by deformations created by
proteins in the membrane. Proteins create these distortions or inclusions by
insertion in lipid bilayers or by association with the membrane by adhesion. The
proteins are then free to move laterally in the lipid bilayers, propelled by
energy stored in the membrane deformation. Similarly, nanoparticles can attach
to or insert in membranes, creating inclusions that decay with distance from the
particle. The PIs will study interactions between anisotropic inclusions on
membranes with complex topography. On this level, proteins/ particles are
treated equivalently as entities that change the local shape of the membrane.
The inclusions create excess energy by bending and straining the membrane. When
neighboring deformation fields overlap, the energy of the membrane depends on
article/protein orientation and distance. In addition, when isolated inclusions
occur on membranes with complex topography, the inclusions migrate to preferred
locations. These interactions occur over a characteristic length related to the
membrane tension and bending rigidity that is typically between 10-100nm.
Particle/protein shape and energy anisotropy should play a key role in these
interactions that has not been addressed beyond the level of point disturbances.
Thus, preferred orientations, repulsions, and attractions have not been explored
as a function of inclusion shape. Harnessing the interplay of inclusion
geometry, interaction, and orientation would provide a powerful assembly tool.

The motivating idea in the current literature is that proteins of different
shapes are curvature inducers, creating inclusions with characteristic principle
radii. These inclusions act as curvature sensors, and will migrate to the
equilibrium position at which their intrinsic radii of curvature match optimally
those of the host membrane. Thus, proteins with plate like structures prefer
relatively planar locations,rod-like structures prefer tethers, bent plates
prefer locations of like curvature, and saddle-like shapes prefer membrane
necks. While this general concept is gaining traction, analyses have thus far
addressed only weakly non-circular inclusions in the limit of weak deformations
assuming linear superposition. The researchers propose to study anisotropic
inclusions to understand their migration and orientation to sites of preferred
curvature, and their pair interactions, as a function of membrane tension and
rigidity. They will use analysis and simulation based on a mesoscale description
of the membrane free energy in terms of a Helfrich model to predict
protein/membrane interactions for canonically shaped inclusions with associated
excess curvatures and areas. Deterministic interactions will be studied using
analysis and simulation in terms of the Helfrich model including membrane
bending and tension. Non-deterministic interactions will be simulated by
accounting for entropic interactions in a Helfrich Monte Carlo (MC) model
developed by the co-PI Radhakrishnan. While they focus on mesoscale
interactions, they will relate the work to the ongoing molecular-scale
simulations of protein-membrane interactions in the Radhakrishan group. Their
aim is to establish rules for particles/proteins on curved and stretched
membranes. How does an inclusion with a given aspect ratio and bending interact
within the membrane. How do pairs interact Canonical, highly anisotropic
inclusion shapes will be studied using simulation and analysis. Their
collaborator, Prof. Tobias Baumgart, will check predictions in experiment.

Broader Impacts Scientific/ Technological: This work will provide predictions to
direct assembly of proteins/particles in membranes. Anisotropic assembly within
biomembranes or biomimetic systems of particles or proteins hold untapped
promise to engineer new oriented assemblies, to influence vesiculation and
budding events, to promote uptake of therapeutic or nanoparticle contrast
agents, and to gain insight into viral docking to host cells during an
infection. Mentoring of Female and Under-represented Students: Students from
outreach initiatives will be welcome to work on small research projects
associated with this research. (PI's personal contacts, Project SEED, REU
programs). Stebe regularly speaks in forums concerning women and minorities in
engineering and has extensive experience in directing research experiences for
highschool and undergraduate students, often femake or from under-represented
groups. (AWE at Penn, and external venues). Radhakrishnan Student Participation:
Postdoctoral mentoring: Postdoctoral career development is a priority in the
Stebe and Radhakrishnan groups.