* 1133319
* Biological Utilization of Thermolytic Substrates by Bacteria and Microalgae:  Addressing Toxicity of Substrate Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Robert Brown, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 315,000.00

PI: Jarboe&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1133319&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Converting biomass into biofuels through hybrid
processes that integrate thermochemical and biochemical steps has the potential
to reduce processing costs, but is understudied. This proposed research seeks to
improve the capacity of microorganisms to produce biofuels using substrates
derived from the fast pyrolysis of cellulosic biomass. The fast pyrolysis of
biomass, which involves rapidly heating the material in the absence of oxygen
and in presence of catalysts, yields a complex mixture called bio-oil.
Fermentation of bio-oil is complicated by the fact that in addition to useful
substrates, it also contains many inhibitory (contaminant) compounds, including
furans and phenols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of this proposed
research are to increase the tolerance of two model microorganisms, Escherichia
coli (ethanol) and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (lipids for biodiesel), to the
inhibitory contaminants found in bio-oil, and to improve the capacity of these
organisms to ferment bio-oil fractions into biofuel. Metabolic evolution will be
used to increase the robustness of these model microorganisms to the
contaminants, largely because the bio-oil is complex and the mechanisms of
inhibition are not known. The research plan has three objectives. The first
objective is to use metabolic evolution to increase the tolerance of ethanol-
producing E. coli to the inhibitory contaminants in the sugar-rich bio-oil
fraction. The anhydrosugar levoglucosan is the most abundant substrate in the
sugar-rich bio-oil fraction, but it is metabolized by most microorganisms.
Therefore, an ethanol producing strain of E. coli will be engineered to utilize
levoglucosan as a carbon and energy source. The second objective is use
metabolic evolution to utilize the acetate-rich fraction of bio-oil by a
heterotrophic, lipid-producing strain of C. reinhardti, and then increase the
tolerance of C. reinhardtii to the inhibitory contaminants as well as acetate
itself with the acetate-rich bio-oil fraction. The third objective is to reverse
engineer the contaminant-tolerant E. coli strain developed under objective 1
through analysis of genome sequence and transcriptome data in order to identify
the important mutations that enable contaminant
tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed education activities will train two graduate students from the
disciplines of chemical engineering and food science, and engage three
undergraduates to assist with the proposed research. Core concepts from the
research topic will be introduced into three courses at Iowa State University
(ISU): a sophomore-level Material and Energy Balances course, a graduate-level
Metabolic Engineering, course, and a graduate-level course on the Thermochemical
Processing of Biomass. With respect to K-12 outreach, the PI will develop a
half-day module on bio-renewable chemicals for the ISU Science Bound program, a
Saturday program that targets underrepresented middle school students. Students
will have the opportunity to see an operating bioreactor and discuss how bio-
renewable chemicals relate to their everyday life. Students will then play a
web-based game that introduces the concept of metabolic evolution using the
Biology in Motion Lab.