* 1133551
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Nitrogen Uptake in Bioretention Designed for Semiarid Climates
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Nancy Johnson, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2015
* USD 56,115.00

Collaborative: 1133524 PI Pomeroy/1133551 PI
Hultine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioretention is a low impact development management
strategy that employs engineered plant communities to reduce the impact of
urbanization on stormwater runoff volumes and pollution. The proposed research
expands the evaluation of bioretention and is guided by the theory that urban
ecosystems can be engineered following basic ecological principals to
sustainably perform a necessary service to society. The overarching goal of this
research is to improve the understanding of how engineered ecosystems function
in urban settings in order to optimize bioretention design by maximizing the
service of watershed protection and minimizing the resources necessary to
sustain the engineered ecosystem. This overarching research goal will be
achieved by conducting two sets of experiments: (1) a two-year study to quantify
nitrogen (N) treatment in bioretention over time and (2) an isotopic labeling
experiment to describe plant contributions to the treatment processes for
organic and inorganic N. Three plant community types will be tested using nine
bioretention cells: a semi-arid upland shrub community, a wetland community, and
a control with no plants. These experiments will test the following hypotheses:
(1) the addition of vegetation cover will result in a greater overall retention
of N, even under conditions where multiple stormwater events increase the
residual level of N within each bioretention cell, (2) in cells without
vegetation, the concentration of inorganic N in the effluent will be greater
than the concentration of inorganic N in the influent, (3) in bioretention cells
with vegetation, the concentration of inorganic N in the effluent will be less
that the concentration of inorganic N in the influent. The PIs will monitor the
nitrogen treatment performance and plant productivity of the three plant
communities to model how each community responds to repeated inundations of
urban stormwater in a semi-arid climate. The results of these studies will be
combined to predict long-term performance of bioretention in arid and semi-arid
climates. The isotopic labeling studies will identify treatment rates and
pathways of organic and inorganic N by recovering the labeled N in the plant
tissue, soil materials or garden effluent. This will determine if plants can
take up inorganic nitrogen from stormwater sources rapidly without
transformation during wetting events, and that through complex interactions with
soil microbes, organic nitrogen will be biologically mineralized then slowly
taken up by plants between wetting events. In terms of the broader impacts, the
findings of this research will provide technical support to improve design and
expand the implementation of bioretention in the arid and semi-arid west. Better
knowledge of how different plant communities process N on the scale of
individual storm events and over time is critical to providing design
recommendations that ensure bioretention performance when implemented broadly.
Implementation of bioretention in the arid and semi-arid west will allow
urbanization to occur while protecting fragile ecosystems adjacent to expanding
developments. Planned outreach efforts under this research project include (1)
two workshops provided for local- and state-level officials within Utah,
demonstrating the functionality, economics, and environmental protection
potential of bioretention to policy makers, (2) three University of Utah
student-organized workshops targeted to stormwater professionals to address
design, plant selection, and environmental benefits of bioretention in semi-arid
climates, (3) national dissemination of bioretention workshop materials via a
website, and (4) integration of the research findings into the curriculum of
existing urban ecology, water policy, and water resources engineering graduate
and undergraduate courses.