* 1133025
* Two-phase flow instabilities in large arrays of microchannels in low temperature fuel cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Shawn Litster, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 328,902.00

1133025 PI Litster&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposed research
are to elucidate the two-phase flow instabilities in the massive arrays of
parallel micro-channels (&gt;10,000) in low temperature fuel cells using
nonlinear analysis and to apply those approaches in devising new advanced
diagnostics and control routines. Water management remains a significant
technical challenge for low temperature fuel cells, such as polymer electrolyte
fuel cells (PEFCs). Engineering measures to prevent severe liquid water
accumulation, known as flooding, have resulted in several performance and cost
compromises that include high air delivery parasitic loads and limitations on
minimum plate thickness. Two-phase flow instabilities in the large arrays of
parallel micro-channels are a key contributor to cell inefficiencies; however,
these instabilities are not well understood or predictable. Furthermore, the
influence of channel plurality (number of channels covering the electrode) on
the stability has not been previously studied. The research will be performed in
four phases. Phase 1: Investigate the dynamics of the two-phase instabilities
using three ex situ experimental platforms: i) A single channel apparatus for
flow visualization and pressure drop measurements serves as a control case. ii)
A single channel with a parallel shunt channel that simulates parallel channels
without inter-channel communication of two-phase flow disturbances. iii) A flow
field with varying numbers of parallel channels. This three-tier approach
distinguishes single-channel dynamics from those due to channel-to-channel
communication of two-phase disturbances. Nonlinear time-series analysis
techniques will be used to analyze the information-rich structure of the time-
series. Phase 2: Establish a stability modeling framework for two-phase flow in
large arrays of parallel micro-channels using a discretized, one-dimensional
flow approach and advanced two-phase flow correlations. A broad parameter space
will be simulated to elucidate relationships between the dynamics and the design
and operating conditions. Spatio-temporal perturbations will identify marginal
stability boundaries, allowing the construction of generalized flow stability
maps. Phase 3: Investigate the effect of channel plurality on the in situ
dynamics of operating PEFCs. Nonlinear analysis of voltage and pressure drop
time-series will elucidate transitions in flow regime and onset of instability.
From these data, a family of empirical stability maps will be constructed. Phase
4: Establish a diagnostic and control framework based on nonlinear techniques
for chaotic systems. One component is devising an early warning detection
technique, a key interest of industry. The work will establish chaos control
methods to more efficiently prevent flooding. The proposed work has several
avenues of new research. This work will be the first use of nonlinear analysis
techniques in fuel-cell research, introducing these powerful techniques to the
field. The PI will experimentally and theoretically investigate the influence of
channel plurality on two-phase flow dynamics in large arrays of microchannels
and its impact on fuel-cell performance. Fuel-cell developers have long known
that channel plurality is an important factor in PEFC design, but it has not
been fundamentally studied or quantified. To provide fundamental insight, a
theoretical stability analysis will be used to construct a stability map from
marginal stability boundaries. The PI will also investigate the novel approach
of using nonlinear statistics for early warning detection and chaos control
methods to mitigate flooding. In terms of the broader impacts, the PI aims to
improve PEFC performance and robustness of operation. PEFCs are widely viewed as
a key energy conversion device for a sustainable energy infrastructure. The work
leverages relationships with industry for timely, practical impact. The research
is also broadly applicable to other systems with two-phase flow in microchannels
(e.g., electrolyzers). A targeted education, outreach, and mentoring plan is
proposed. The PI will incorporate the research into his courses on fluid
dynamics and energy systems. For outreach, the PI will maximize impact by
leveraging a large number of established events to present engaging, hands-on
activities on fuel cells and fluid dynamics. Furthermore, the Gelfand Center at
Carnegie Mellon will support the efforts by helping to disseminate materials and
information to Pittsburgh region schools, particularly underserved schools with
at-risk student populations. In addition, the PI will integrate this research
with his workshops on energy systems for teachers as part of the What is
Engineering? workshop series at Carnegie Mellon.