* 1133640
* Conference Support for "Fourth International Conference on Electrophoretic Deposition: Fundamentals and Applications.(EPD-2011) Oct 2-7, 2011 in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* James Dickerson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

1133640&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dickerson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fourth International
Conference on Electrophoretic Deposition: Fundamentals and Applications
(EPD-2011) will be held October 2-7, 2011 in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico. This
international meeting will involve participants from various sectors of the
research community including academia, industry, and federal government
agencies. EPD 2011 offers a rich atmosphere for the presentation and exchange of
ideas centered on the advancement of electrophoretic deposition (EPD) and its
associated science and technology. This grant will help support the travel of
young, emerging scientists and established eminent researchers from the United
States to EPD-2011, during which explorations and discussions of materials
fabrication, advanced techniques, and innovations using electrophoretic
deposition will be conducted. &lt;br/&gt;The increased participation of
scientists from the United States in this rapidly developing area of science and
engineering is crucial to the dissemination of information about the field and
the subsequent, eventual training of an internationally competitive workforce in
the US. EPD 2011 follows from the success of the previous conferences of the
series held in 2002, 2005 and 2008. These tri-annual Electrophoretic Deposition
(EPD) conferences are a leading venue for experts from academia and industry
working on EPD and its application as a processing technique for fabrication of
both traditional and new (nano-) materials. EPD-2011 will tackle topics at the
forefront of the field such as nanostructured materials, biomaterials, and solid
oxide fuel cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPD-2011 will result in the following
broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;I. The advancement of knowledge at the intersection
of the fields of physics, electrokinetics,&lt;br/&gt;materials science,
chemistry, and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;II. Providing a forum for young scholars
to interact with seasoned research professionals.&lt;br/&gt;III. Developing
international research partnerships that address technical challenges of
EPD.&lt;br/&gt;IV. Introduce and develop new partnerships among groups of junior
faculty, early career scientists, and more established, eminent scholars,
particularly those from underrepresented groups, in this rapidly emerging area
of science and engineering.