* 1133066
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Nano-Engineered MOF-Graphene Materials:  New Perspectives for Reactive Adsorption and Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Keith Gubbins, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 09/30/2016
* USD 225,875.00

1133112/1133066 Bandosz/Gibbins

Activated carbons possess high surface area (typically 1,000-2,000 m2g-1) and
are powerful physical adsorbents, but have little catalytic activity except at
high temperatures. Metal-organic framework (MOF) materials are generally
effective catalysts, but are less effective as adsorbents. Recently, in a proof
of concept, we have succeeded in synthesizing a GO/MOF nanocomposite material,
and shown that it is very effective in removing toxic gases (ammonia, hydrogen
sulfide) from gas streams through a combination of surface reaction and
adsorption. The capacity of the nanocomposites to remove toxic gases
significantly exceeds that of either the MOF or graphite oxide alone, and
preliminary results for ammonia suggest that these nanocomposites can achieve a
300% or more increase in adsorption capacity over conventional activated
carbons.

This project will be a joint experimental-theoretical study of such graphene/MOF
and GO/MOF (collectively, G/MOF) nanocomposites, with the aim of determining
their formation mechanism, atomic structure, pore structure and catalytic and
adsorption properties, with the practical goal of designing materials with
optimal adsorption and catalytic properties for the removal of toxic gases. As
grapheme-based components graphite, graphite oxide and exfoliated graphite will
be used. Syntheses will be followed by characterization. The interactions of NH3
and H2S, separately and mixed with methane, with the nanocomposites will then be
investigated. These systems are chosen based on the properties and differences
in the chemical nature of the adsorbates, the need for reactive adsorption under
ambient conditions, and the potential detection capabilities of graphene-based
nanocomposites. For the latter the changes in electrical conductivity can be
employed. MOFs chosen for the study will include water stable materials with
potentially active Cu, Cr and Fe sites, such as Cu-BT or MIL-100.

In parallel with the experimental program, dual scale theoretical studies using
molecular simulation (Monte Carlo, Hybrid Reverse Monte Carlo and Molecular
Dynamics) and (ab initio) density functional theory will be carried out to
determine details of the atomic structure of the materials, the reaction
mechanism, reactive adsorption capacity and heats of adsorption. These
theoretical results will help direct the experimental program towards promising
materials and conditions.

This research project will provide fundamental understanding of the relation
between synthesis conditions, atomic structure and pore morphology, and
separations performance for a new class of G/MOF nanocomposites that are
designed for toxic gas removal. These novel materials may find application in
other separations and in sensing devices. The broad spectrum of surface
characterization and theoretical methods applied will lead to a better
understanding of the surface chemistry of adsorbents and catalysts in general.

The research is directly relevant to developing new strategies to design
effective materials for removal of toxic gases from air at ambient conditions
through reactive adsorption. Another important technical aspect is the
possibility of applications of these materials as gas sensors. If small molecule
gases are intercalated within the graphite interlayer space the electrical
conductivity is expected to change, and this phenomenon can be used to detect
toxic gases at low concentration range. A preliminary exploratory study of
ammonia on a GO/MOF nanocomposite showed an approximately threefold increase in
adsorption capacity over conventional activated carbons. Thus, the proposed
research is potentially transformative. The project will involve two graduate
students, two undergraduate researchers and one high school student from an
inner city science-oriented high school. CCNY is a minority serving institution,
and the project would provide the possibility for a member of an under-
represented group to perform research and to earn the Ph.D. NCSU?s AGEP/Opt-Ed
and ORNL?s Research Alliance in Math and Science (RAMS) summer program will also
provide opportunities to recruit students from under-represented populations.
The whole education experience of the students will be based on the integration
of research and education.