* 1133040
* An Integrated Approach for Computationally Designing and Experimentally Characterizing Fully-Human Antibodies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Costas Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2016
* USD 606,000.00

1133040/1132511 Maranas/Wood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibodies are Y-shaped,
versatile protein structures able to recognize with high affinity and
specificity the full range of antigens (from small molecules to proteins) that
an organism may encounter. This property has been leveraged in experimental
binding assays such as ELISA and ELISPOT and in many life-saving medications
(i.e. Avastin, Rituximab, Herceptin, etc.). Traditional antibody design methods
rely on successive steps of library construction, mutagenesis and screening with
limited computationally derived input. However, antibodies are an excellent
target for computational design due to their function that is typically limited
to binding, not catalysis, and the availability of well-established rules
linking their primary sequence to structure. The team has already developed,
published, and made freely available the OptCDR method for the de novo design of
antibody binding pockets composed by the Complementarity Determining Regions
(CDRs) against any specified antigen. Using OptCDR as a starting point, a
workflow for the de novo design of the entire variable regions of fully-human
antibodies to bind the desired epitope of any specified antigen will be pursued.
The developed methods will be experimentally validated by designing antibody
libraries to bind CD20, a peptide antigen that is a therapeutically relevant
target in B-cell lymphomas and leukemias. The experimental component of this
project will enable the fine-tuning of the proposed computational workflow and
the quantitative assessment of the efficacy of the design predictions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Under Aim 1, a combinatorial database of all germline
antibody variable domain structures encoded in the human genome will be
constructed. Using this combinatorial database of germline structures, the
development and dissemination of the computational tools necessary for the de
novo design of fully human antibodies against any specified antigen will be
pursued under Aim 2. The envisioned computational design method OptMAVEn,
(Optimal Method for Antibody Variable region Engineering) will expand the
concepts pioneered in OptCDR to the design of the entire variable domains
instead of only the CDRs. This will be followed by the design, construction and
screening of five anti-CD20 antibody libraries to test the effectiveness of
computations to drive antibody design (Aim 3). The five libraries, with the same
approximate size of 5*108 antibodies, will progressively explore bolder
computational-derived modifications. They will span random mutagenesis,
saturation mutagenesis of six rationally chosen positions, targeted
computational redesign of twelve positions, selection of entirely new CDRs with
OptCDR, and de novo design of the entire variable domains with OptMAVEn.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the methodological advances, the comprehensive
experimental characterization will provide a standard for fairly evaluating the
performance of computations in antibody design, potentially revealing key
benefits and inadequacies in modeling and simulation. The lessons learned in
this study would be broadly applicable in other protein design endeavors. On the
educational front, undergraduate students will be introduced to scientific
research. All research results and methods will be broadly disseminated through
journal publications, conference presentations, course-work and by making
available through the web all developed software programs, databases,
experimental results and protocols.