* 1133175
* Friction Control by Adsorption of Polyelectrolyte-Grafted Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Robert Tilton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,999.00

CBET-1133175&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Tilton, Robert
D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work provides a new boundary lubricating system together with new understanding
of how molecular structure and intermolecular forces combine to minimize
friction in nanostructured organic/inorganic composite systems. It therefore
embodies both technological and scientific novelty. Prior fundamental research
has shown that polyelectrolyte brushes grafted on solid surfaces greatly
diminish adhesion and friction between those surfaces. Brushes are descriptively
named layers of densely packed polymer chain molecules attached by one end to a
surface. The chains stretch tens of nanometers away from the surface to form a
protective coating that resists impact by other surfaces. Polyelectrolytes are
polymers that have electrical charge, and this charge strengthens chain
stretching and surface protection characteristics. A critical challenge is that
existing methods for creating brushes have shortcomings that limit their uses in
engineering applications. In order to realize the potential of boundary
lubrication by polyelectrolyte brushes, this work will provide a fundamentally
new way to deploy such brushes in practical systems. Poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl
methacrylate) polyelectrolyte brushes will be grafted from silica nanoparticles
at high, controlled grafting densities and controlled degrees of polymerization.
These grafted nanoparticles will serve as pre-formed brush elements. By
suspending them in the liquid phase bathing the surfaces to be lubricated, they
will adsorb onto those surfaces and create stable brush coatings, piece by
piece, to minimize friction. Unlike other methods for creating dense
polyelectrolyte brushes, this approach can be applied to many different material
types and geometries and also offers the novelty of self-healing after surface
damage. Optimizing this new lubrication system motivates specific research aims
that represent novel engineering science. Since there is no precedent for this
approach, experiments are designed to reveal its mechanisms for friction
control. The research plan will provide a multi-scale, quantitative structure
versus activity relationship spanning from the conformation and ionization of
nanoparticle-grafted polyelectrolyte chains to the multiparticle organization of
surface layers and finally to the friction coefficient between coated surfaces.
The work uses state of the art methods atom transfer radical polymerization to
create grafted polyelectrolyte brushes and colloidal probe force microscopy to
measure friction as a function of load.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One Ph.D., one M.S. and several undergraduate
students will receive research education through this project. The Ph.D. student
will benefit from an international collaboration experience with researchers in
Stockholm. Discovery-based science lessons on friction and lubrication will be
developed with an elementary science teacher and disseminated through teacher
training networks. The research project will produce effective water-based
lubrication agents that exploit the low friction properties of polyelectrolyte
brushes in a practical manner that cannot be achieved with current methods of
brush formation. This will lead to new water-based lubricants to be used as
machining fluids, for example. Machining fluids tend to be atomized into the
workplace air. Because they would replace hydrocarbons with water, new water-
based machining fluids would have lower occupational health risks and
environmental impacts. Because of its inherently flexible mode of application,
this lubrication strategy may also enable new microelectromechanical system
(MEMS) technologies that currently are limited by friction and adhesion between
ultraminiaturized moving parts. With further work, the basic principles
developed here can be translated in the future to new oil-based lubricants to
improve engine wear and fuel efficiency.