* 1133363
* Sediment-Bed-Turbulence Coupling in Oscillatory Flows: Fully Resolved Numerical Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Sourabh Apte, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 280,305.00

1133363 Apte

Sediment transport, in rivers and coastal regions, affects large-scale
geomorphic processes of dune formation, beach erosion and landform evolution
that can displace human settlements, as well as destroy vegetation and
agricultural infrastructure with strong socio-economic impact. Large-scale
predictive computations of large-scale sediment-laden flows typically employ
simplistic models for (i) incipient motion and resultant the bedload transport,
and (ii) suspended sediment transport. These models are based on quasi-steady
models based on averaged bed-shear stress for erosion onset and advective-
diffusive transport based continuum models, neglecting particle inertia and are
limited in their ability to accurately predict sediment erosion, entrainment and
transport. Lack of accurate criteria for onset of incipient motion and sediment
pickup function remain two of the biggest hurdles in developing better
predictive models for sediment transport.

A numerical investigation of sediment-bed-turbulence interactions is proposed in
oscillatory turbulent boundary layers representative of coastal environments.
The primary research objective is to quantify the effect of these interactions
on the onset of erosion, entrainment, suspension, and deposition of sediments.
The broad range of spatio-temporal scales associated with particle-particle and
particle-fluid interactions makes modeling of sediment transport at practical
scales extremely challenging. The proposed research builds upon the following
main hypotheses: (i) the dynamics of near-wall turbulence structure and
resultant variations in the magnitudes and time-scales of the destabilizing drag
and lift forces on sediment grains are critical in formulating predictive
criteria for onset of erosion, and (ii) particle inertia and variations in
suspended sediment concentration due to fluidization and settling of sediments
substantially affects the spatio-temporal evolution of the wall-events in the
outer as well as inner regions of a turbulent boundary layer. Use of high-
fidelity numerical simulations and modeling are proposed to test these
hypotheses.

Intellectual Merit: The novelty of this research is in the development and use
of a fully resolved simulation (FRS) approach based on first principles, without
requiring models for drag and lift forces, for the study of sediment incipient
motion. This work will, for the first time, provide data on the temporal
variations in the magnitude of drag and lift forces on sediment grains, the
time-scales associated with these variations, and their correlation to the
sweep-burst events in turbulent boundary layers. Effect of temporal variations
in drag and lift forces, due to the sweep-burst turbulence events, on incipient
motion will be revealed, identifying the roles of bed shear stress (Shield's
criterion) and local accelerations (Sleath's parameter), and impulse (Diplas'
concept) on onset of erosion. The FRS studies varying the grain size, flow
Reynolds number, and volume loading, will also yield flow parameterizations for
development of better analytical and engineering predictions of erosion, scour,
transport, and deposits based on continuum approaches. These flow
parameterizations obtained from fully resolved numerical experiments have the
potential to transform current practices in modeling sediment transport on
practical scales.

Broader Impact: The research methodologies and models are applicable to several
other fluid-particle systems, such as fluid-structure interactions in biological
applications and flapping wings in micro-air vehicles, inertial flow through
porous media, oxy-coal combustion, among others. This research will yield a
Numerical Water/Wind Tunnel (NWT), a virtual educational tool for fluid-particle
systems. Several aspects of the NWT will be integrated into graduate courses and
University Honors College (UHC) curriculum. Training workshops for local school
teachers and demonstrations to students will be held on the role of simulation-
based engineering and science in predictions of river and coastal sediments
during the ongoing K-12 outreach activities.