* 1133353
* Heat Transfer Characteristics of a Fluid with Nano-Encapsulated Phase Change Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Alexander Yarin, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 10/31/2012
* USD 269,695.00

CBET-1133353&lt;br/&gt;PI:Yagoobi &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
always a need to enhance heat transfer in large and small scales. Enhancements
in general are achieved by improving the corresponding surfaces. In recent
years, researchers have been exploring the enhancement of heat transfer by
improving the characteristics of the working fluids via, for example, adding
phase change materials (PCMs) to the working fluid. This proposed project will
investigate the fundamental tasks pertinent to the development of nano-scale
PCMs. It will also provide in-depth knowledge on the transport characteristics
of nano-scale PCM slurries (single and multi components) via theoretical,
numerical and experimental studies; thus, the physics associated with PCM slurry
flows will be understood. The project will be conducted in two inter-related
directions. In the first one, novel PCM nano-particle-based fluids will be
produced using a method that guarantees a high degree of control of their
characteristics, namely long-term stability and longevity. In the second
direction, hydrodynamics and heat transfer enhancement capability of these novel
PCM fluids will be evaluated under realistic and practically relevant conditions
in meso- and micro-channel flows, and free convection flows within macro-scale
enclosures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; From a scientific perspective, this proposal
will improve our understanding of the nano-scale PCM suspensions for heat
transfer enhancement. It will introduce novel PCMs (single- and multi-component)
with a wider temperature efficiency interval, a decreased response time, high
heat capacity, improved stability, and longevity and fully characterized
rheological behavior at high concentrations. The hydrodynamic characteristics
and heat transfer capabilities of these novel PCM fluids will be elucidated
using direct experiments with flows in meso- and micro-scale channels and macro-
scale enclosures. The corresponding flow and temperature fields along with heat
transfer coefficients will be measured and predicted using numerical simulations
accounting for the realistic rheological behavior and viscous dissipation. This
study will also reveal the extent of contribution of thermal expansion of PCMs
toward enhancement of heat transfer in free convection flows within enclosures,
which is expected to be significant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Examples of
potential applications of such novel PCM-based fluids, where they can have
enormous impact, include such fields as efficient solar energy utilization,
power electronics, space, HVAC&amp;R, manufacturing, transportation,
construction as well as chemical, petroleum, refining, plastic, and rubber
industry. The project will involve undergraduate and graduate students including
students of diversity. The research will be integrated into a proposed textbook,
and in a graduate course taught at both universities. Outreach to K12 students
of diversity in the Chicago area will be conducted, leveraging existing programs
at both universities.