* 1133849
* IDR:  Collaborative Research:  A Partnership for Multiscale Experimental Study of CO2 Leakage and Vertical Flow in Geologic  Carbon Sequestration
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Catherine Peters, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 546,488.00

1134397 Clarens/1133849 Peters &lt;br/&gt;Geologic carbon sequestration (GCS) is
likely to play an important role in near-term efforts to provide carbon-neutral
energy even though it has not yet been definitively demonstrated that CO2
injected into deep geologic formations will stay in place. This project
assembles an interdisciplinary partnership to study the conditions that drive or
inhibit leakage of CO2 through formation caprocks and the buoyancy-driven
transport of CO2 through both caprocks and porous media. This integrated and
multidisciplinary effort will generate experimental data to bridge the gap
between bench-scale work on geochemical reactions and kilometer-scale
simulations of GCS in the real world. Central to the proposed multiscale study
are two novel high-pressure experimental test beds: a core-scale (cm-scale)
vessel to study reaction and flow in caprock specimens (at Princeton), and a
large-scale (6 m) pressurized column in which vertical flow of CO2 will be
observed in sedimentary media (at the University of Virginia (UVA)). This
approach will integrate experimental observation with two key tools for
observation and inference: (1) a suite of lab- and synchrotron-based imaging
methods to elucidate and quantify mineral reactions and alterations in
pores/fractures (at Brookhaven National Lab (BNL)), and (2) reactive transport
modeling to infer reaction rates, build predictive capacity, and conduct
numerical experiments. The work is targeted to provide new insight critical to
understanding the processes that will ultimately determine the viability of GCS.
These processes are poorly understood because it is challenging to study
reactions and two-phase flow in an integrated way, under high-pressure
conditions, over realistic length scales. Reactions in heterogeneous media are
best observed at small spatial scales (nm to &amp;#956;m), while flow is best
observed over large scales (m to km). This project will elucidate the
interrelation of these processes and provide answers to many of the persistent
questions in the field such as: What are the conditions that lead to erosion or
self-sealing of caprock flow paths? How do geochemical alterations of mineral
surfaces alter CO2 flow? Will long-range buoyant CO2 flow be accelerated or
decelerated by complexities in capillarity, viscosity, solubility, and Joule-
Thomson cooling? These questions cannot be answered effectively by any single
discipline. The project interdisciplinary team combines the expertise of an
environmental engineer and expert in high-pressure fluid phase behavior (AFC), a
geoenvironmental engineer with over a decade of experience in GCS research (CAP)
and a geochemist with over 15 years of experience in advanced x-ray imaging
techniques (JPF). This research will achieve broader impacts by identifying
critical factors that determine the safe and effective sequestration of CO2 in
deep geological reservoirs. The work will provide critical inputs to the effort
of the United States to achieve the 2010 Presidential directive of overcoming
the barriers to the widespread deployment of CCS within ten years. Furthermore,
the experimental test beds constitute an investment in long-term study of CO2
flow and reaction in porous and fractured media. Lessons learned from these
experiments can be applied to the design of larger facilities currently under
development. The research also represents an effort to introduce global
environmental change and carbon-neutral energy into the curricula at UVa and
Princeton, and to use Brookhaven?s InSync outreach program to enable high school
students to have remote access to experimental time at a synchrotron-based x-ray
imaging facility.