* 1133984
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding and Optimizing A Supercritical Fluid Process for Recycling of Printed Circuit Boards
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Hong-Chao Zhang, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,731.00

1133984 (Zhang). Widespread use of electronic equipment and shortening of
product life cycles have created the challenging task of dealing with the ever-
increasing quantity of obsolete electronic equipment. The huge amount of
electronic waste (E-waste) generated each year and the lack of established
methodologies capable of handling the increasing volumes of E-waste pose a
severe environmental threat. Among the challenges to successful electronic
equipment recycling, printed circuit board (PCB, primary components in every
type of electronic product) recycling is recognized as one of the most difficult
problems because of the complex construction and complicated materials
composition of PCBs. The current PCB recycling industry uses traditional
metallurgical technologies in which the fiber reinforced polymer matrix
materials are incinerated. Although great effort has been made in the
traditional metallurgical technologies for increasing the recycling efficiency
for the end-of-life electronic products, the PCB recycling industry still faces
the problems of poor environmental performance and limited economic returns.
Recently, under an EAGER grant, the PIs of this award demonstrated proof-of-
concept preliminary work for developing a novel supercritical fluid (SCF)
CO2-based PCB recycling process at relatively low/medium temperatures and
pressures. The exploratory experiments demonstrated that PCBs are delaminated
with metals and glass fiber maintain their original form, making it possible to
increase recovery rates not only for precious metals but also for non-metal
materials. Such a process opens a new dimension for recycling of PCB and
provides the possibility of satisfying economical and environmental demands. In
the current project, the research team will systematically investigate the
delamination mechanism of the bonding materials in PCBs under supercritical
fluid processes and seek to understand structure/process relationships. Although
literature documents the application of supercritical fluids in polymer
synthesis and processing, there is limited existing work on revealing the
performance of polymeric materials in supercritical fluids. In addition, the
research team will optimize the SCF process by implementing process conditions
based on the mechanism study and systematically evaluate process performance.
Finally, the team will model and validate the recycling process for scale-up in
terms of cost, energy, and environmental impact. The team will collaborate with
industrial collaborators to promote transferring fundamental research to
practical application. In addition, research and education will be integrated
throughout the entire project duration.