* 1133211
* Computational and Experimental Study of Oxygenated Hydrocarbon Fuel Chemistry in Non-premixed Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Lisa Pfefferle, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 325,000.00

1133211&lt;br/&gt;Pfefferle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Plants are
about 50 % oxygen by weight. Thus as society inevitably moves from fossil fuels
towards renewable fuels, the oxygen content of combustion fuels will increase.
The presence of oxygenated hydrocarbons in the fuel introduces important
combustion science and public health issues that are addressed by the proposed
research. First, oxygenates may reduce emissions of soot particles. Second, they
can also increase emissions of other toxic combustion byproducts such as
aldehydes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to rationally optimize soot reductions
while minimizing air toxics emissions, we need to understand the chemical
mechanisms of fuel decomposition and aromatic hydrocarbon formation for
oxygenates. The number of oxygenates that can be made from vegetation is large,
and the sooting tendencies and fuel decomposition products vary greatly as a
function of oxygenate structure; thus strictly empirical approaches for choosing
among them are not reliable. A strategy that analyzes a large number of
oxygenated fuels and leads to methods that can predict mechanisms and reactivity
from fuel structure is needed. Although the combustion chemistry of hydrocarbons
and some small oxygenates has been widely studied, little is known for most
oxygenated hydrocarbons. We propose a novel approach that is based on rapid, on-
line species measurements and computational simulations in co-flow flames where
a small amount of the oxygenated fuel is added to a base fuel of methane. The
base methane flame is has been well characterized and computations provide good
agreement with experimental species measurements. Our strategy involving
perturbation of a well-characterized system enables high-quality measurements
and also facilitates simulations because the solutions from previously computed
base methane flames can be used as a starting estimate for all of the doped
flames. Importantly, our methods compare the fate of oxygenated fuel species
under identical flame conditions emphasizing differences in chemical mechanisms
over other factors.&lt;br/&gt;In earlier work we validated this methodology for
regular hydrocarbons including heptanes, hexenes, hexadienes, cycloalkanes and
aromatics. Here we will extend it to 100+ oxygenated hydrocarbons with up to 20
carbon atoms. Our results will provide an important comparison to other studies
of oxygenates combustion chemistry, most of which use premixed flames and a
limited number of oxygenated fuel structures. The analysis of a wide range of
structures is required for development of structure/reactivity relationships
allowing robust mechanism testing and a rational basis for oxygenated fuel
selection to optimize emissions benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Our work sets the stage for cleaner engine design and renewable fuels
utilization by expanding the database to oxygenated hydrocarbons, and by
providing rational correlation and extrapolation data for the effect of fuel
structure on soot production and possible toxic oxygenated emissions. We will
collaborate with local industry to facilitate this. We have provided detailed
results from our previous studies to numerous groups around the world who have
used them to test computational models. The databases generated here will be
archived for direct access to researchers around the world. Undergraduate
students have participated in our previous research and will perform laboratory
modules related to this project. We will also involve students from local non-
PhD granting colleges and high schools in our work and helping them develop
research projects at their home institutions and to interest them in continuing
study in the sciences.