* 1133687
* Lanthanide-lipids as MR Biosensors and Probes for Focused Ultrasound Surgery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mark Borden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Lanthanide-lipids as MR Biosensors and Probes for Focused Ultrasound
Surgery&lt;br/&gt;Mark Borden, University of Colorado, Boulder. CBET -
1133687&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Lipid-coated
microbubbles are being developed as cavitation nuclei to target micro-scale
structures in focused ultrasound surgery (FUS). While magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is useful for monitoring macroscopic temperature changes during FUS tissue
ablation, it currently is incapable of detecting cavitation. An MRI cavitation
probe is, therefore, needed to increase the precision and control of FUS. A
possible candidate was discovered during a recent study to elucidate the
mechanism of microbubble-mediated FUS opening of the blood brain barrier for
targeted drug delivery. In that study, microbubbles were labeled with the
paramagnetic lanthanide ion Gd(III) in order to image them with MRI.
Surprisingly, it was found that intact Gd-microbubbles failed to enhance proton
relaxation, whereas fragmented Gd-microbubbles strongly increased relaxivity in
a dose dependent manner. Thus, the effect of Gd(III) ions on proton relaxation
increased as the lipid membranes to which they were bound transitioned from
monolayer shells of intact microbubbles to bilayer cavitation fragments. This
fortuitous discovery revealed a possible biosensor of lipid membrane phase
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to test
the hypothesis that the proton relaxation enhancement of lipid-bound Gd(III)
ions increases as the underlying lipid membrane expands and consequently
increases the transfer of water molecules between the bulk and the inner shell
of the paramagnetic ion. This hypothesis will be tested by measuring the
longitudinal and transverse proton relaxation rates for Gd-liposomes and Gd-
microbubbles as a function of (1) temperature, (2) lipid composition and (3)
spacer length between the Gd(III) ion and the underlying lipid. Results will
reveal the effects of lipid thermal fluctuations by probing bilayers vs.
monolayers, lipid phase transitions and polymer tethers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lipid-coated
microbubbles are being developed as cavitation nuclei to target micro-scale
structures in focused ultrasound surgery (FUS). A discovery in the PI's
laboratory reveals a possible biosensor of lipid membrane phase transitions. A
MR biosensor of lipid membrane thermodynamic transitions could be useful for a
wide range of biological studies including the design of biocolloids for medical
applications. These applications may include focused ultrasound
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An education plan is proposed to develop a
biocolloid engineering track in the department of Mechanical Engineering at the
University of Colorado, Boulder. Research and coursework within the track will
emphasize the importance of materials and surface engineering for the design of
biocolloids for medical applications. The track will serve underrepresented
minorities in the Denver metro area through outreach programs in collaboration
with the Broadening Opportunities for Leadership and Diversity (BOLD) center in
the college of engineering and applied science. Students will construct artistic
renderings to demonstrate the physics underlying the phenomena observed in the
course of this research. The demos will be used to promote science education
through participation in BOLD K-12 outreach initiatives.