* 1133737
* Biodegradable Nanomaterials by Thiol-Ene Miniemulsion Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 315,470.00

Proposal Number: 1133737 PI: Cheng, Chong

Intellectual Merit

Polymeric nanoparticles (NPs) and nanocapsules (NCs) have attracted significant
interest for potential applications in biomedical and other areas. Controlled
cross-linking within nanoscopic templates has allowed the synthesis of these
nanomaterials with three-dimensional covalent architectures. Correspondingly,
synthetic efficiency depends not only on the reaction or polymerization
techniques but also on the template conditions. Relative to other templating
approaches, miniemulsion-based methods typically are facile and eco-friendly,
but may suffer deficiency in precise control over the resulting nanostructures.
Particularly, although NCs can be readily obtained by miniemulsion interfacial
cross-linking, dramatic interfacial destabilization may occur to yield ill-
defined products. This project is to develop a state-of-art miniemulsion
technology for the highly efficient and environmentally friendly preparation of
well-defined NPs and NCs. The synthetic strategy incorporates three major design
considerations: 1) UV-induced thiol-ene click chemistry is combined with
transparent miniemulsions to achieve high synthetic efficiency; 2) interfacial
destabilization is minimized by selective cross-linking of polymer blocks in the
dispersed phase to exert accurate structural control of NPs and NCs; and 3)
biodegradable nanomaterials are produced using environmentally benign reagents
and reaction conditions. In the initial proof-of-concept studies, biodegradable
NPs and NCs were obtained by thiol-ene cross-linking of precursor polymers, i.e.
allyl-functionalized PLA and PEO-b-PLA, using short (30 min) UV irradiation of
transparent miniemulsion reaction systems. Nearly complete extent of reaction
was confirmed by FTIR analysis for each trial. Well-defined nanostructures of
the NPs and NCs were verified by DLS, TEM, and AFM characterizations. Their
biodegradability was also proven through enzymatic degradation study. Systematic
studies on the synthesis of these nanomaterials are planned towards the goal of
exerting accurate control over their nanoscopic dimensions, internal crosslinked
structures, and functionalities. A broad variety of functional NPs and NCs,
including these with cationic groups, will be prepared via thiol-ene
functionalization strategy. The processing method and conditions will be
optimized to further improve synthetic efficiency. Colloidal stability,
degradation and encapsulation/release behaviors of these nanomaterials will be
studied. To further evaluate the viability of these nanomaterials as carriers
for biomedical delivery, in vitro cellular uptake and cytotoxicity studies will
be conducted, and transfection efficiency of complexes of siRNA with cationic
NPs and NCs will be examined. In principle, besides alkene-functionalized
polymers, multifunctional small molecule alkenes may also be readily converted
into nanomaterials by thiol-ene reactions in transparent miniemulsions. The
results from this research could further provide an important guide for
thermally-induced thiol-ene miniemulsion reactions, as well as thiol-ene
reactions in other emulsion systems. Transparent miniemulsion templates
developed in this work potentially may be applied for other types of
photoinduced reactions to achieve high synthetic efficiency.

Broader Impacts: The research program may bring transformative impacts in the
research area of material synthesis and processing. The resulting biodegradable
nanomaterials may be utilized to make significant benefits to society by helping
to improve national health and maintain environment. Particularly, the PEO/PLA-
based NCs with acid-labile cross-linkages may be very useful as scaffolds to
create anti-cancer nanomedicines; the cationic NPs and NCs may be employed for
the co-delivery of drug and gene. The research findings of this project will
promote the interdisciplinary collaboration of the PIs? groups on biomedical
applications of polymers, and potentially lead to the commercialization of the
thiolene miniemulsion technology based on collaborative efforts with industrial
partners. In order to broadly disseminate polymer synthetic technologies, videos
on polymer preparation will be created and on-line broadcast. A new graduate
course on polymeric nanomaterials will be developed to enhance material
education and research at SUNY-Buffalo. Outreach will be conducted to promote
the education and preparation of local middle and high school students in
science and engineering fields.