* 1133418
* RAPID:  A New Technique for Vertical Profiling of Volatile Organic Compounds Within and Above the Convective Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Daniel Knopf, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 03/31/2012
* USD 65,500.00

The dominating role of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) on the chemistry and
oxidation potential within a forest canopy is well known. However, without
knowing the concentration vertical profiles of VOCs, one cannot calculate their
flux with much precision. Vertical profiles extending above the canopy height
are usually determined by sampling from balloons but because of limitations
inherent to balloon platforms, samples can only be taken at one or two different
altitudes, it takes many minutes to collect a sample at each altitude, and
balloon profiles rarely are able to get near the top of the convective boundary
layer (CBL), thus only a partial profile is usually observable. This RAPID
project will develop in time for initial deployment during the BEACHON
(Biosphere-atmosphere Exchange of Energy, Aerosols, Carbon, H2O, Organics &amp;
Nitrogen) intensive sampling campaign in summer 2011 a technique to collect
vertical profiles of VOCs within the CBL and overlying lower free troposphere
from a small research aircraft. The technique, called "frozen sampling", is
simple in principle; a relatively long tube of air is installed within a light
aircraft. During a rapid climb, sample air flows through the tubing. Upon
reaching the upper point of the vertical profile, the sample is trapped or
"frozen" within the tubing by closing off both ends, using valves. Within a very
short period of time (on the order of one minute) a vertical profile is trapped
within the sample tubing, and stored until the sample can be analyzed on the
ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "frozen sampling" technique will be useful to
many ground-based field campaigns, where low level, high resolution vertical
profiles are desirable. In addition, two undergraduate students will be involved
in determining the characteristics of the sampling system, using their knowledge
of fluid dynamics, chemistry, and physics in a real world application. The
students will also travel to Manitou Forest in Colorado and assist with the
field component of the BEACHON campaign. At least one of the students will be
recruited from the WISE (Women in Science and Engineering) Program at Stony
Brook University.