* 1133425
* Quantifying environmental risks and opportunities for nano-scale LiFePO4 and LiMnO2 cathode battery technologies at end-of-life
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Brian Landi, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 292,999.00

1133425&lt;br/&gt;Gaustad&lt;br/&gt;Little work in nanotechnology environment,
health and safety implications is directed toward complex nanomaterials and
their life cycles. Fundamental studies currently have mainly examined simple,
homogeneous materials comprised of a single metal, metal oxide, or a simple
organic moiety. Nanomaterials in commerce have moved well beyond these simple,
?first generation? materials. This research is directed toward examining impacts
of high volume nanomaterials in commerce, specifically LiFePO4 and LiMnO4 in
lithium-ion batteries throughout their life cycle with a particular focus on end
of life and the potential for exposure. The investigators will optimize
recycling and reuse procedures for nano lithium batteries while simultaneously
assessing environmental discharges of particles (during recycling processing)
and leachates from modeled landfills using a standard Toxicity Characteristic
Leaching Procedure (TCLP) procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date there has been
no work that explicitly addresses the environmental implications of nano-scale
materials in batteries, despite recognition of considerable environmental
uncertainties and concern at end-of life. This research will provide results and
methodological guidance for quantifying environmental risks at end-of-life for
two commonly used nano-scale cathode chemistry batteries. The investigation will
advance the Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) body of knowledge related to the use of
lithium ion batteries by creating new Life Cycle Impact data, quantifying
potential end of life battery risks, developing knowledge on novel recycling
techniques, and identifying best practices for ensuring environmental health and
safety goals for nano-scale cathode materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team is well-suited to address the problem from both a life cycle approach and a
materials science/analytical approach. They include a materials engineer, an
environmental engineer and a chemist, with expertise in the chemistry of lithium
ion batteries, life cycle assessment, nanomaterials, and
recycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has an inherent broader impact on
society as a whole, as it should lead directly to improved recycling and
synthesis methods for nanoparticles in lithium ion batteries. It is clear that
the existing industry partners of the research team will benefit from the
research and this will lead to improved, "greener" production and disposal
methods. Also, the investigators are associated with a sustainability institute
at RIT, and this institute seems to have very strong programs in outreach and
education. There are clear plans and procedures to increase participation by
underrepresented groups.