* 1133264
* DRRC:  Dynamics between Local and Foreign Actors: Influences on Capabilities in Post-Earthquake Rural Haiti and Hurricane Impacted Rural Gulf Coast
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Thomas Birkland, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 399,650.00

The research is a comparative study of disaster-affected rural communities (the
U.S. Gulf Coast and Haiti) that explores the interactions between international
actors and rural communities during recovery efforts and their influences on the
capabilities of disaster-affected individuals. The study inquires into the
social production of disaster recovery, theorized to be a function of social
discourses, social policies, the norms of the humanitarian and development
industries, and local cultures. The research involves a content analysis of
public policies, media discourses, and organizational documents. The research
team is interviewing local and external organizational actors connected to each
of the target communities (three in Haiti and three on the Gulf Coast) with a
specific focus on community actor participation in disaster recovery projects.
As well, a random community survey in each of the six communities gauges
individual disaster recovery, participation, social capital, and capabilities-
based recovery. By employing a capabilities approach (a human development
framework utilized in global poverty studies and more modestly in disaster
recovery), this research advances capabilities scholarship, further clarifying
what capabilities are most important to facilitate sustainable disaster recovery
in rural settings.

The research team prepares a case study for each community, in addition to
comparing communities on intervention practices, especially participation, and
recovery capabilities sets. The findings contribute to the production of a guide
and training for international actors working in disaster recovery settings,
focusing on practical applications of local-external partnership building,
providing professionals with an opportunity to advance skills in sustainable
disaster recovery practices. Important benefits can accrue to rural communities
impacted by disasters as a result of this research, providing them with greater
opportunities to participate in their own recovery efforts and gain benefits
from technical assistance and other direct supports from international partners.