* 1133871
* Mechanisms of Damage to Pharmaceutical Proteins at Oil-Water Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 338,991.00

1133871&lt;br/&gt;Randolph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introduction: During their
production, processing, storage and delivery to patients, therapeutic proteins
are exposed to various interfaces, such as the interface between the silicone
oils that are used to lubricate glass syringes and aqueous solutions in which
the proteins are formulated. Proteins may adsorb to these interfaces, which in
turn can result in aggregation of the protein. Protein aggregation in
pharmaceutical formulations is associated with changes in potency, risks of
increased immunogenicity, and shortened shelf life, and hence is a major
contributor to the estimated $1.2 billion required for development of a new
protein-based therapeutic. Interfacial damage of proteins is a particular
problem at fluid-fluid interfaces, where the dynamic nature of the interface
(e.g., in response to shear forces experienced during shipping and handling of a
protein formulation) may offer increased exposure of interfaces to proteins.
This project examines the behavior of therapeutic proteins as they interact with
silicone oil/water interfaces. The mechanisms of such interactions are probed
with advanced spectroscopic and physical techniques, with a goal of developing
rational design strategies to prevent interfacial protein damage and reduce
associated costs and health risks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Protein adsorption and aggregation at interfaces is ubiquitous, but the
fundamental mechanisms leading to protein adsorption at interfaces and
consequent generation of aggregates remain poorly understood. This project, a
collaboration between two research groups with expertise in protein interfacial
science, protein conformational thermodynamics and aggregation kinetics will
address both the microscale mechanisms that lead to protein adsorption and
unfolding at interfaces, and the kinetic processes that result in
macroscopically observable protein aggregation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
characterize the kinetics of adsorption and interfacial aggregation at oil-water
interfaces, a combination of several state-of-the-art experimental techniques
will be developed and applied. These include single-molecule tracking micro-
rheology (using fluorescence microscopy), emulsion adsorption, fluorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS) and front-face fluorescence quenching of adsorbed
protein. Molecular conformation of proteins at silicone oil-water interfaces
will be measured using Forster resonant energy transfer (FRET) in order such as
to establish direct connections between protein conformation and dynamic
processes such adsorption, desorption, interfacial mobility, aggregation.
Likewise, protein adsorption at the air-water interface will be measured using
dynamic pendant bubble tensiometry, emulsion depletion experiments and FACS, and
the resulting protein aggregation monitored by flow microscopy, chromatography
and FACS. The links between interfacially-induced protein damage and formulation
conditions will be explored by determining the effects of interfacial area
change, protein concentration, thermodynamic conditions, and excipients. By
manipulating the thermodynamic stability of the protein's native state structure
(e.g., with stabilizing excipients), microscopic protein unfolding processes
will be linked to interfacial phenomena and macroscopic measurements of
agitation-induced-aggregation kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The project will have several broad impacts. First, a detailed understanding of
protein adsorption at oil-water interfaces will aid the design of formulations
that provide protection against interfacially-induced protein aggregation,
reduce development costs and offer increased patient safety. Second, the many
new techniques that will be tested and developed will be of use to a wide
variety of academic and industrial scientists. Furthermore, protein adsorption
and aggregation at interfaces is of critical importance to several other
scientific endeavors, such as vaccinology, applications of microfluidics and
nanotechnology in the diagnostics arena and the development of implantable
medical devices. By linking two research groups with diverse expertise in
interfacial science and protein formulation, the graduate and undergraduate
students who participate in this research will receive a broad, cross-
disciplinary training. In addition, because of the groups close ties with the
biopharmaceutical industry, the results of this research will be rapidly
disseminated so as to afford maximum impact in practical applications of the
proposed new, fundamental scientific studies.