* 1133793
* Low-temperature Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactors for Sustainable Domestic Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Lutgarde Maria Raskin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 348,338.00

PI: Lutgarde Raskin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1133793&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable
water management is increasingly important for utilities and is driving efforts
to reduce energy consumption and residuals production in domestic wastewater
(DWW) treatment without compromising effluent quality. Anaerobic membrane
bioreactors (AnMBRs) combine anaerobic biological treatment and membrane
separation in a single process allowing for methane generation (a renewable
energy source), and, relative to conventional DWW treatment, generate a fraction
of the residuals and substantial energy savings. Additionally, AnMBRs provide
the flexibility of use in centralized or decentralized wastewater treatment due
to easy scalability, may be operated at ambient temperatures despite
conventional views on anaerobic treatment, and have the potential to meet U.S.
EPA?s treatment standards. In short, DWW treatment using AnMBR technology
potentially represents a more sustainable DWW treatment paradigm. The proposed
research will evaluate AnMBR technology for DWW treatment in labscale systems
through completion of three developed objectives with associated tasks: (1)
operation of a bench-scale AnMBR for optimization, demonstration of stability,
and increased process understanding; (2) development of membrane fouling and
treatment models to formulate a unified AnMBR model; and (3) utilization of life
cycle assessment, life cycle costing, and multi-criteria decision analysis to
make design recommendations regarding AnMBR implementation, such that economic
and environmental impacts are minimized, while meeting U.S. EPA?s treatment
standards. These objectives will answer the following questions: What are the
lower limits for the operational temperature and hydraulic retention time in the
AnMBR while maintaining adequate treatment performance? How does the microbial
community structure respond to operational changes and what is the associated
system stability? Can a model unifying membrane fouling and biological treatment
be generated that accurately predicts AnMBR performance across operational
changes? Finally, where, when, why, and how can AnMBR technology be implemented
using an economically and environmentally responsible approach? This AnMBR
technology for DWW treatment will be studied in a way that incorporates both
fundamental and broad level research. The PIs of this project are Drs. Raskin,
Skerlos, and Love from the University of Michigan, who will combine their
extensive experience and complementary strengths from the fields of
environmental biotechnology, microbial ecology, mechanical engineering, membrane
science, industrial ecology, and water quality process engineering. We will work
closely with the Dundee Wastewater&lt;br/&gt;Treatment Plant (Dundee, MI) and
interact with a range of other utilities and consulting
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents a novel strategy with the
potential to greatly increase the sustainability of current DWW treatment
practices using AnMBR technology. The proposed research represents a
comprehensive approach utilizing tools such as microbial analyses, system
modeling, and life cycle assessment that will increase our scientific
understanding of AnMBR processes while stimulating further research in the
field. Collaborations with consultants and utilities will strengthen the
likelihood of pilot- and full-scale AnMBR implementation. Additional broader
impacts from this work include: (1) integration of research and education
through involvement of undergraduate students in research, (2) incorporation of
research findings in courses taught by the PIs, (3) technology transfer
including the organization of workshops on AnMBR application to DWW treatment at
various conferences, and (4) dissemination of research results through
conference presentations, peer-reviewed journal articles, and seminar and
symposium presentations.