* 1133320
* Understanding In-Situ Chemical Transformations of Polymer Brush-Modified Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2016
* S Michael Kilbey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2016
* USD 301,997.00

ABSTRACT #1133320 Kilbey, S. Michael

UNDERSTANDING IN-SITU CHEMICAL TRANSFORMATIONS OF POLYMER BRUSH-MODIFIED
SURFACES

The overarching goal of this advanced materials research is to understand how
the ability to transform surface-attached polymeric layers so-called polymer
brushes by chemical reaction is impacted by properties such as surface density,
extent of the chains tethered at the interface, size of the functionalizing
agent present in free solution, and reaction time and conditions. While reactive
polymer brushes are of widespread interest, design rules that guide selection of
appropriate conditions for integrating functional groups remain undeveloped and
largely unexplored. To address this gap in knowledge, reactive polymer brushes
will be created and modified in situ, and the ability of the chemically-modified
interfacial layers to nucleate the growth of mineral phases will also be
investigated. All of these studies will enhance the design of functional
polymeric interfacial coatings, leading to new long term opportunities for the
design of biomaterial scaffolds for cell growth, active layers in sensors,
microarrays or membranes, and lubricious, wear-resistant, or anti-fouling
coatings.

Intellectual Merit: Understanding the location and distribution of functional
groups installed in interfacial layers is a complex and challenging proposition
because the nanoscale structure and its ability to be chemically transformed are
intimately coupled: changes in the distribution of chemicaln tags in the layer
and the degree-of-functionalization impact the structure and properties of the
interfacial layer. To address this challenge, reactive polymer brushes based on
poly(tert-butyl methacrylate) and poly(vinyl dimethylazlactone) will be studied.
Both uncatalyzed and catalyzed reactions using sets of molecules ranging in size
from oligomeric to polymeric will be investigated. The nanoscale structure of
the modified brushes will be determined using neutron reflectivity, and a
creative application of isotopic labeling in concert with contrast matching
strategies will be used to determine the local density of functional groups
installed in the brushes. To investigate how the display of chemical motifs
affects the capacity of a layer to function, the nucleation and growth of
calcite phases in modified polymer layers will be examined, providing a much-
needed view of how calcium mineral phases form in synthetic polymer matrices.
These activities will benefit from a new international collaboration that brings
expertise in calcium mineralization in polymer matrices.

Broader Impacts: Design rules that express how the nanoscale structure of
polymer brushes is coupled to the arrangement, size and density of functional
groups displayed in the layer will promote the efficient and optimal design of
useful devices and constructs based interfacial polymer layers. For example,
understanding the links between the display of functional motifs in polymer
scaffolds and the growth of calcium mineral phases may advance the development
of biomimetic constructs that help close the gap between synthetic and natural
composite materials such as bone. The fundamental research can be classified as
advanced interfacial materials research at and for interfaces, bio-medical
advanced materials, and materials for possible long term sensor applications.

In addition to promoting the training of graduate and undergraduate students and
a postdoctoral scholar through engagement in research, collaborations with
scientists at national laboratories and from Ecolé Polytechinque Fédérale de
Lausanne (Switzerland) will enhance the professional growth and development of
researchers involved, aided in part by planned exchange visits. Research
activities undertaken in this program will be supplemented with outreach and
mentoring activities that will bolster the recruitment, retention, and success
of students from under-represented groups. Finally, results from the research
activities will be communicated through publications and presentations by all
participants involved in the program, and a symposium on reactive polymer
interfaces will be organized for an upcoming national meeting.