* 1133285
* GOALI:  Fundamental Studies of Nanoparticle-Protein Binding
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Kenneth Farmer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 329,629.00

1133285&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hogan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a fundamental level,
nanomedicine, in which in which tailor-made nanoparticles are used to treat or
diagnose disease, and nanotoxicology, in which the health effects of
nanoparticles are of concern, examine the interaction between nanoparticles and
biomolecular structures within the human body, in particular with proteins. Of
considerable interest in both fields is the process of opsonization, in which
blood proteins bind to nanoparticles, eventually resulting in an immunological
response within the body. A major roadblock to development in nanomedicine and
nanotoxicology at the fundamental level is the dearth of analysis techniques
available for nanoparticles from which nanoparticle properties relevant to their
interactions with biological systems can be inferred. The research team at the
University of Minnesota in collaboration with a team at TSI Incorporate will
develop two new measurement systems specifically designed to examine the binding
of chosen proteins to inorganic nanoparticles. Both systems will make use of
aerosol measurement instrumentation, specifically, an electrospray aerosol
generator to aerosolize nanoparticle-protein complexes from an in-vitro model
system, allowing for measurement of their size distribution with a differential
mobility analyzer (DMA) and condensation particle counter. In the first proposed
system, an inductively coupled mass spectrometer will be developed and used to
determine the size of the inorganic nanoparticle core within the protein
nanoparticle complexes, allowing for inference of the number of proteins bound
to nanoparticles as a function of nanoparticle size and chemical composition. In
the second system, DMA size classified nanoparticle-protein complexes will be
analyzed by hydrogen-deuterium exchange, using a newly developed micro-Particle-
into-Liquid Sampler and electrospray mass spectrometry. This system will allow
for determination of the site on a protein where binding to nanoparticles
occurs, which is not possible with available instrumentation. When used in
tandem, these two new systems will allow for a new method of nanoparticle
characterization specific for nanomedicine and nanotoxicology, allowing for
transformative research in these fields as well as in nanoparticle science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key issue in developing next generation
medical technologies is improving our understanding of how nanomaterials
interact with the basic building blocks of life, namely, proteins. To address
this issue, new measurement technologies and collaborative efforts between
researchers in academia and in industry will be necessary. Professors Hogan and
Bischof of the University of Minnesota, in collaboration with Dr. Farmer of TSI
Incorporated plan to develop two transformative measurement systems designed
specifically to monitor the interactions between proteins and nanomaterials.
These two measurement systems will enable scientists, engineers, and physicians
to determine, for the first time, the precise properties of specific
nanomaterials which facilitate their interactions with biological molecules, and
similarly, which molecules within the body interact with nanomaterials. The
collaborative research activities will involve students and faculty at the
University of Minnesota as well as staff scientists at TSI Incorporated. The
proposed activities will result not only in the development of two measurement
systems available for wide distribution, but also new measurements of the
interactions between nanoparticles and biological systems at the molecular
level.