* 1133480
* Investigation of fragmentation during soot oxidation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* JoAnn Lighty, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2015
* USD 284,205.00

1133480&lt;br/&gt;Lighty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soot formation and oxidation are
important because of soot's adverse health effects, role in climate forcing, and
importance to ambient air quality and visibility. The adverse health effects of
soot have been reported by numerous researchers. Soot has been implicated in
climate forcing; however, its actual contribution is still somewhat uncertain.
Manufacturers of air pollution control equipment, i.e. diesel particulate
filters, are also interested in understanding the rates and mechanisms of soot
oxidation at lower temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has
identified the fragmentation of soot particles under various combustion
conditions, including high soot burnout (70% carbon burned) and low burnout,
close to the burner (about 10% carbon burned) in a high temperature, flame
environment. In addition, recent modeling has identified the importance of
fragmentation in predicting the particle size distribution and other soot
properties. However, little experimental data exist for fully understanding the
conditions under which fragmentation potentially occurs and the mechanisms.
Others have suggested that oxygen diffuses into the particles which allows for
internal burning, breaking apart the soot agglomerate. The proposed work has the
following three objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1. Identify the
conditions, i.e. temperatures, equivalence ratios, radical pool, etc. where
fragmentation occurs for ethylene flames at both low burnout and high
burnout;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2. Determine the mechanisms of fragmentation, such
as oxygen diffusion in breaking of bridges and soot particle break down;
&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3. Perform tests on surrogate liquid fuels to determine the
applicability of the mechanisms identified in Objective 2 to these fuels and the
role of aromatic versus aliphatic components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experiments will be conducted in a two-stage, premixed burner system which can
be used for both gaseous and liquid fuels. In this system the first burner
generates soot, while the second burner is used to oxidize the soot under
various temperatures and equivalence ratios. A Scanning Mobility Particle Sizer
(SMPS), with a size range of 3-100 nm, will be used to determine particle size
distributions as a function of height above burner. When needed, long-
differential mobility analyzer measurements can extend the range to 660 nm. Gas-
phase concentrations of key components (i.e. O2, H2, CO, CO2) and temperature
profiles will be taken. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 1 will use ethylene to gather the
data and develop mechanisms, while Objective 3 will explore liquid fuels.
Utilizing TEM and HR-TEM and particle size distribution data, we will explore in
Objective 2 the oxidation of "bridge" material between particles via oxygen
diffusion and also increases in particle porosity which can lead to particle
fragmentation. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the study is in
understanding the mechanisms of soot fragmentation during oxidation and the
conditions under which it is likely to occur. The novelty of the work is
exploring the phenomenon under the two scenarios: high and low soot burnout.
Furthermore, soot oxidation has not been studied in depth, and recent advances
in particle measurements can add to the existing knowledge. The data can be used
to modify oxidation mechanisms which, when used in simulations, will more
accurately predict the structure, size distribution and mean properties of soot
as it oxidizes. In addition, this project will begin to address the role of
different fuel constituents in fragmentation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts are realized when industry can apply these fundamentals to their systems
to reduce soot emissions, important to protect human health and to better
understand/mitigate climate forcing. On the other hand, for industries producing
carbon black, these data will add to the existing knowledge base of soot
formation/oxidation.