* 1133700
* Computation of marine atmospheric boundary layer and nonlinear ocean wavefield for energy for sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Lian Shen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 283,174.00

1133700 PI Shen

This project is focused on establishing a computational framework for ocean
winds and waves that can be applied to renewable energy applications such as an
offshore wind farm and a wave power generator. The simulation tool builds on
several recent developments in computational fluid dynamics and hydrodynamics,
including a high-order spectral method for waves, large-eddy simulation on a
wave surface-fitted grid for wind turbulence, and a hybrid multi-fluid
simulation for steep and breaking waves. Using high-performance computing on
massively parallel computers, the PI plans to resolve the spatial and temporal
details of the wave and wind fields and provide valuable information for wind
and wave energy applications. The tasks of the project are to: (i) Develop
advanced numerical capability for the wavephase-resolving simulation of ocean
wave and wind motions. (ii) Use the wind?wave simulation tool to obtain a better
understanding of the ocean wind and wave fields as resources for sustainable
energy. (iii) Apply the simulation tool to applications in offshore wind farms,
and explore the extension to wave energy harvesting. The PI will improve the
simulation and prediction capabilities for offshore winds and waves that are
particularly useful for the study of offshore renewable energy. The proposed
simulation approach, which considers the full coupling between wind turbulence
and nonlinear ocean waves and resolves the details of wave phases, is the first
of its kind and possesses an advantage over traditional wave-phase-averaging
simulation methods. The application to the simulation of marine atmospheric
boundary layer with wind turbine arrays will help answer many scientific and
engineering questions related to the development of offshore wind farms. The
simulations, with the wave phases resolved, will also be valuable for the
understanding of nonlinear wave dynamics and will be helpful for the design of
wave energy converters. Broader impacts: The topic of this study, sustainable
energy from offshore winds and waves, is of great interest to the scientific
community as well as the general public. The simulation tool developed in this
project will have direct applications in offshore wind and wave energy
harvesting. It can be used for the mapping of renewable energy resources, site
selection of wind farms, optimization of wind turbine array arrangements, and
operation of wind turbines and wave energy devices in various sea environments.
Doctoral graduate education will stress multi-disciplinary training with a focus
on modeling multiscale and multi-physics problems. Recruiting of domestic
graduate students will leverage an existing NSF IGERT project. The IGERT project
focuses on the training in scientific modeling and computation for Ph.D.
students in their first two years of study. The project will lead to natural
continuation for an IGERT trainee for the remaining three years of Ph.D. study.
Ongoing outreach to local Baltimore high schools will be actively continued by
providing research experiences for high school students, especially under-
represented minorities.