* 1133222
* Increased Depth Penetration in Coherence Imaging Using Multiply Scattered Light
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Adam Wax, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

1133222&lt;br/&gt;Wax&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop ms/LCI
(multiple scattering/low coherence interferometry) to image through thick
tissues with multiply scattered light. The specific tasks proposed are:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Instrument development:The system will be modified to enable
optical scanning and multispectral interferometric imaging. Optical scanning
will improve the speed of acquiring 2D images while inclusion of multiple
illumination wavelengths will allow recovery of important biochemical
information such as hemoglobin concentration and oxygenation. &lt;br/&gt;2.
Theoretical modeling:To better understand the mechanisms of imaging contrast in
this approach the PI will take a dual pronged effort to model the light
propagation. An analytical form is presented which is based on a random walk
formalism that will be used to evaluate this imaging modality. To validate this
model, they will also use Monte Carlo modeling as well as comparing to
experimental results. &lt;br/&gt;3. Demonstrate imaging of hemoglobin
distribution in thick tissues.To demonstrate the utility of the method, they
will image hemoglobin distribution through thick (~1 cm) tissues. Samples will
include tissue phantoms, designed to validate the method, and ex vivo animal
tissues, such as muscle and fat as would be encountered in breast imaging and
retinal samples as would be used in OCT ophthalmic imaging, where penetration to
the choroid has remained a challenge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will advance a novel imaging modality with unique potential to extend
imaging depth. In addition, new multispectral interferometry instrumentation
will advance optical engineering while the proposed random walk model will
advance understanding of light propagation in tissues.