* 1133101
* Understanding the Thermophysical and Solvent Properties of Lipid-Inspired Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* James Davis, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2015
* USD 248,522.00

1133101&lt;br/&gt;West&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introduction: This new class of
Ionic Liquids (ILs) can potentially create a new, rapid means of separating
biomolecules such as proteins that is faster than chromatography and other well
established methods. This is also a major advance in that the new ILs should
provide a platform to investigate enzyme catalyzed reactions in ionic liquids
and should serve as model systems for cell membranes for thermodynamic and
transport processes. The development of these new ILs could result in more
environmentally benign and economical processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Ionic liquids (ILs) are organic salts,
which are liquids at temperatures below 100°C. They are a unique class of
compounds that are essentially non-volatile and have highly tunable properties.
As one might expect, ionic liquids typically exhibit the same solvent
characteristics as polar molecular solvents, readily dissolving moderately-polar
and polar solutes (like-dissolves-like) but often being poor solvents for non-
polar compounds. This limits the applicability of ILs for chemical reactions and
separations processes that involve non-polar compounds, including those of
biological origin such as fatty acids and cholesterol. We have developed a new
class of ILs that contains long alkyl chains, incorporated to impart non-polar-
like solvent properties, which remain room temperature liquids. Typically, ILs
with long alkyl chains remain solids at room temperature due to the enhanced
interactions created by the long chains; however, our recent work has overcome
this problem. We accomplished this by taking cues from biological systems, i.e.
the manner in which certain organisms regulate membrane fluidity in colder
temperatures by including unsaturation in the alkyl chains of phospholipids.
Like these ionic liquids, phospholipids are charged species with long alkyl
chains. In this work we propose to study the thermophysical behavior of these
ILs as pure components and in binary mixtures with non-polar solutes to examine
how they may be used in separations processes in the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having demonstrated this phenomenon in a
recent publication, we now propose to study the thermophysical properties of an
expanded set of non-polar-like room temperature ionic liquids and to study the
solvent and solution thermodynamic properties of the entire class of species. We
hypothesize that incorporating these long non-polar alkyl chains, while
maintaining low melting points, will result in ILs that can exhibit non-polar-
like solvent properties and potentially have the capability to separate non-
polar solutes based on the sizes and shapes of the non-polar domains present in
the liquid. Such ionic liquids would open the door to new areas of research
including more environmentally benign and economical processes involving non-
polar molecules that are currently not possible due to solubility limitations.
Additionally, we anticipate that these ionic liquids will provide a platform for
researchers to investigate a broader class of enzyme catalyzed reactions in
ionic liquids, and they may serve as excellent model systems for cell membranes
for thermodynamic and transport processes. At the University of South Alabama,
we have pioneered the development of several novel classes of ionic liquids
including Brønsted acidic ILs and Lewis basic ILs that chemically capture CO2,
which have been licensed for commercial production and sale. With the recently
initiated collaboration between the departments of Chemical &amp; Biomolecular
Engineering and Chemistry, we are well equipped to advance our research to the
next level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As ILs
are essentially non-volatile, as compared to volatile molecular solvents,
technologies enabled by the development of these new species will result in more
environmentally benign processes. Also, this work constitutes a new line of
research at the University of South Alabama that stems from the collaboration
between Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering and Chemistry and will enhance
interdisciplinary efforts in this direction. Coupling the engineering component
to the in-place expertise in synthesis will enable us to be more internationally
competitive. Also, with these molecules sufficiently characterized, researchers
around the world will have access to a novel and scientifically rich resource
currently absent from the possibilities offered by ILs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate and graduate research students will be
directly involved in conducting this research and will benefit from the cross-
disciplinary training as they work as a unified team. The project will be
incorporated into pedagogy as research activities are integrated into the
undergraduate and graduate curricula. Because USA is an EPSCoR state institution
serving many students in the greater Gulf Coast region from historically
underrepresented groups, this project will allow those students who have not
traditionally had access to this level of technological sophistication to
actively participate in research. Additionally, the outreach effort (YouTube
videos with downloadable classroom content) stemming from this work will help
demonstrate the societal value of science and engineering to K-12 students, and
motivate them to engage in careers in STEM related fields.