* 1133512
* Robust surface enhanced Raman biosensor using a novel optofluidic platform technology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Gerard Cote, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 340,000.00

1133512&lt;br/&gt;Cote&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Award funded by the Biosensing/CBET
program supports the work of Professors Cot√© and Kameoka at Texas A&amp;M
University to develop a transformative optofluidic-based platform technology for
use as a point-of-care (POC) biosensor. The technology platform would
incorporate functionalized gold colloidal nanoparticles trapped at the entrance
to a nanofluidic channel providing a robust means for analyte detection at trace
levels using surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) by eliminating the need
to look for ?hot spots? which are nonuniformly distributed in many other
roughened metal surface approaches to SERS detection. The optofluidic technology
is generalizable to any biomarker in complex biological media but the initial
application will be the detection of cardiac biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity: This proposal responds to the
current needs of biomarker detection, namely an improvement in the robustness,
repeatability, and sensitivity of biosensing. More specifically, we will produce
and optimize a highly robust and transformative SERS signal enhancement
technology using a novel optofluidic-based device. We will also optimize the
chemistry platform for biomarker detection with an initial focus on cardiac
biomarkers (CKMB, myoglobin, and troponin) for aiding in the diagnosis of
myocardial infarction (MI) or rather a heart attack. This basic knowledge will
open up a new field of ?optofluidic sensing at the nanoscale?. This unique
patent pending platform technology was conceived of by biomedical engineering
and electrical engineering faculty researchers at Texas A&amp;M University.
These investigators collaborate with an expert in chemical engineering,
specifically protein biosensing. This multidisciplinary team has a history of
collaboration as evidenced by several co-authored papers. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts resulting from the proposed activity: The activities identified in this
proposal promote discovery of a new biosensing platform that is based on
multidisciplinary collaboration in the areas of biomedical sensing,
nanotechnology, and functionalization chemistry. This proposal focuses on an
innovative means of cardiac biomarker monitoring for diagnosis of myocardial
infarction and thus has the potential for enormous benefit to society as well as
commercial and clinical potential. The proposed research provides an excellent
opportunity to carry out innovative multidisciplinary research at the interface
of biomedical engineering, electrical engineering, nanotechnology, chemical
engineering, and biosensing. All Ph.D. level students trained within the frame
work of this grant will have committee members from both departments thereby
training students who embrace and actively pursue a multidisciplinary approach.
Beyond individual training, parts of this material will be taught in courses to
hundreds of students. We will use this opportunity to teach our Ph.D. students
how to mentor junior (i.e., undergraduate) investigators. Every effort will be
made to broaden participation of underrepresented groups. Specifically,
undergraduate students will be recruited in collaboration with the NSF?Texas
A&amp;M LSAMP. We will use college level resources by participating in faculty
presentations at National Meetings of the Society of Mexican American Engineers
and Scientists, National Society of Black Engineers, Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers, and Society of Women Engineers. Specifically, this
proposal will be used to fund graduate students and additional REU supplements
will be written to fund undergraduates, targeting recruitment at existing
collaborating minority serving universities. The PI?s have a strong history of
including diverse students and in publishing their results in high quality
journals, presenting them at meetings, posting them on their web sites,
promoting the science and engineering in the popular press, and providing lab
tours, commonly given by participating investigators, to K-12 groups. Lastly,
the PI has a long history of contributing to the innovation ecosystem by
translating discoveries to small companies and starting small companies. Thus,
as part of our training of students, we will expose them to all aspects of the
entrepreneurial enterprise.