* 1133297
* Remote-Sterilizing Coatings Using Magnetic Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Eric Nuxoll, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2016
* USD 256,086.00

1133297&lt;br/&gt;Nuxoll&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial biofilms on implanted
medical devices afflict hundreds of thousands of Americans each year and cause
billions of dollars in increased medical costs. These infections are extremely
difficult to kill, prompting substantial research efforts on coatings which
would either prevent bacterial adhesion or chemically hinder the bacteria. These
approaches have yet to translate to devices with lower infection rates,
however.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long
term goal of this research program is the elimination of infection as a major
liability of implanted medical devices. The central hypothesis is that these
biofilm infections can be thermally sterilized by heating the device coating
upon which they are growing. By immobilizing magnetic nanoparticles in the
coating, precisely localized heat can be wirelessly delivered directly to the
coating, sterilizing the biofilm growing on it. The objective for this
particular proposal is to estimate the temperature profile of adjacent tissue
during this heating and demonstrate biofilm deactivation under these conditions.
The rationale for the proposed research is that an understanding of how to
minimize thermal tissue damage while sterilizing the coating under a variety of
heat sink conditions will translate into an inexpensive, versatile medical
implant coating which can be non-invasively sterilized on command.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this objective, this project will: 1) Estimate
the temperature profile of surrounding tissue from given thermal protocols.
Coatings will be held at a several temperatures for several durations while
transient temperature profiles are recorded. Three extreme scenarios will be
modeled: immobile tissue,&lt;br/&gt;aortic blood flow, and adjacent immobile
tissue/large convective blood flow. Transient temperature profiles from these
scenarios will inform a computational model. 2) Demonstrate equivalent heating
using remotely-activated magnetic nanoparticles. Each temperature/time protocol
first achieved in each of the three scenarios in Objective 1 with wired
electrical resistors will be achieved using wireless magnetic-nanoparticle-laden
coatings. Film thickness, magnetic particle content, and field strength will be
altered to match the protocols. 3) Determine degree of biofilm deactivation from
each temperature/time protocol. Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms will be
cultured, subjected to each temperature/time protocols in each heat sink
scenario, and characterized for degree of deactivation. This project represents
the first systematic attempt to eliminate biofilms via heat and the first
adaptation of magnetic hypertherapy for device-based applications, where the
bottleneck of targeted particle delivery does not exist. It provides the basis
for a new non-invasive, localized approach to biofilm infection
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project lays the foundation
for a new way of dealing with medical implant infections. One day, rather than
require a second surgery to remove the implanted device, followed by weeks of
hospitalization and a third surgery to implant a replacement, the doctor may
simply hold a metal coil up to the patients skin near the device for several
minutes and send the patient home. One of the first steps toward making this
vision a reality is understanding how the temperature and exposure time needed
to sterilize the infection will affect the surrounding tissue. Alternative
heating approaches can be pursued for magnetically susceptible devices, but
regardless of the heating approach, the in situ power requirements and the
potential adjacent tissue damage will be the same. This project experimentally
estimates those items for multiple physiological scenarios and develops a model
for predicting them in other scenarios. The approach can be generalized to most
implant types without major redesign of the implant, also facilitating its path
to bedside relevance and broadening the scope of its potential impact. The
impact of the research goes beyond the health-care industry and related research
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong integration of engineering and the
life-sciences,coupled with the works amenability to smaller subprojects, makes
the proposed work a particularly valuable educational tool for both graduate and
undergraduate researchers. This accessibility will be capitalized for UI's
McNair/SROP program, through which minority, first generation, and low-income
undergraduates participate in 8-week, full-time research projects culminating in
an intercollegiate research conference and, in most cases, eventual successful
application to graduate school. The proposed research will be incorporated with
McNair/SROP to increase the pipeline of underrepresented populations in the
research community.