* 1133386
* Engineering phases and kinetics for processing DNA-linked particle materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Talid Sinno, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 330,000.00

1133386&lt;br/&gt;Crocker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: DNA has been
suggested as an effective way to program collections of microscopic particles to
self-assemble into desired structures. The idea is appealingly simple: particle
species bearing complementary DNA strands will stick together, and the ordered
structure that maximizes such contacts between complementary species will self-
assemble spontaneously from the mixture. Unfortunately, the notion of pre-
programmed structure is not appropriate for realizing a broad array of useful
DNA-linked particle materials, or DLPMs. It is not, for instance, how real
atomic materials work: there are typically several different crystal structures
that are local minima of a systems free energy, and what structure actually
forms under prescribed conditions depends on relative nucleation and growth
rates, and possible solid-solid transformations between different phases.
Moreover, the quality of any resulting ordered structure, as defined by the
density of morphological and compositional defects, is strongly influenced by a
variety of processing variables such as the thermal history during nucleation
and growth. Here, the PIs propose that the correct pathway to establish DLPMs as
a practical material class is to consider simultaneously both materials and
processes in the context of an expanded design paradigm. The overarching
intellectual goals of this proposal are therefore (1) to establish a
quantitative understanding of the nucleation and growth thermodynamics and
kinetics of binary DLPMs using experiments and predictive computer simulations
(2) to demonstrate the ability to process DLPMs much in the same way as any
other material, i.e. by developing approaches for controlling nucleation,
growth, and any potential solid-solid transformations using thermal or chemical
stimuli to achieve these goals, we aim to develop an experimental system to
enable real time real space optical microscopy for dynamical analysis of binary
DLPMs with tunable interparticle interactions. The experimental work will be
coupled closely to a comprehensive computer simulation effort that will
elucidate fundamental mechanisms and provide high-throughput analysis of
material-process combinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In principle, new materials called metamaterials,
formed of organized arrays and circuits of optically active nanoparticles
instead of atoms, promise to allow the manipulation of photons with the same
density and versatility that microelectronics brings to computation. This would
alleviate the current optoelectronic technology bottleneck between
microelectronics and fiber optic telecommunications as well as enable new
information technologies. The primary challenge is building these revolutionary
new materials. This project will develop and validate a general self-assembly
design and material processing platform for producing complex, ordered particle
composite materials. It is anticipated that the design rules that emerge from
this project will be directly applicable to the making useful metamaterialsif
optically active particles are assembled with DNA, the resulting material can be
used as is for prototyping and proof of concept studies, or alternatively, as a
template for conversion into a solid composite material more appropriate for
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will provide
ample opportunities for student training at both the graduate and undergraduate
levels. The two graduate students principally involved in this project will be
expected to be actively involved in both the computational and experimental
facets. Students will be exposed to a state-of-the-art toolkit which includes
nanoparticle and colloidal functionalization, advanced microscopy and various
numerical modeling and simulation techniques. Moreover, the rich, visual nature
of the simulation and experimental data, and their potential application in
remarkable technology. directed self-assembly will facilitate outreach efforts
to high-school students in the Philadelphia public schools and convey the
excitement of scientific research. Both Sinno and Crocker are increasingly
active in various outreach activities at Penn and neighboring institutions and
this project will provide additional materials for continuing these efforts.