* 1133250
* Carbon nanotube detection in plants through microwave-induced heating
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mohammad Saed, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,001.00

1133250&lt;br/&gt;Green&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Environmental
Health and Safety of Nanotechnology program supports work by Professors Micah
Green, Jaclyn Ca√±as, and Mohammad Saed of Texas Tech University to develop new
methods to detect the presence of carbon nanotubes in agricultural crops. Carbon
nanotubes are among the most widely used carbon-based nanomaterials, and one
area of potential use for nanotubes is for the improvement and benefit of
agricultural production, such as smart delivery systems for pesticides and other
chemicals. The study of nanotube uptake into the roots of agricultural crops is
a pressing issue; this is particularly true in regard to the industrial interest
in utilizing nanotubes in agricultural pesticides and other products that might
deposit nanotubes in soil. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; However, common methods of
detecting trace amounts of nanotubes in crops are limited. The Texas Tech
&lt;br/&gt;team will pioneer a new technique to detect these materials in crops
by using low-power microwave exposure. Although this unusual property has been
known for some time, it has never been utilized to solve scientific challenges
in the area of environmental toxicology. Nanotubes undergo rapid heating in
response to microwaves at levels much higher than other common materials. The
Texas Tech team will test the hypothesis that microwave exposure will show a
marked difference between nanotube-laden and nanotube-free agricultural samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The microwave-based characterization method is both novel
and useful, as it addresses a major scientific problem in the field of
nanotoxicology. This concept is enabled by the uniquely collaborative
combination of expertise fielded by the PI and co-PIs in their respective areas
of nanomaterials, toxicology, and microwave physics. Microwave heating of CNTs
has never been used for detection before and has never been applied to the
critical issue of nanotechnology?s environmental and agricultural effects. Thus,
this program has the potential to have widespread impacts on safety and testing
protocols for nanomaterial-based agricultural products in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The outreach and diversity efforts of the program
will place a particular emphasis on recruiting undergraduate researchers from
underrepresented groups and incorporating these students and their
interdisciplinary research findings into educational outreach programs. These
activities will augment and further disseminate successful K-12 educational
programs initiated by the PI and co-PIs under prior NSF awards.