* 1133625
* Improving Sound Perception with an Advanced Intracochlear Electrode Array and Integrated Insertion Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Pamela Bhatti, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2017
* USD 311,999.00

PI: Bhatti, Pamela&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1133625&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this proposal is to test the hypothesis that intracochlear
electrical stimulation with a polymeric high-density electrode array enables a
more focused and selective activation of auditory neurons when compared with
contemporary cochlear electrode arrays. To achieve the research objective we
must develop a method for integrating a flexible high-density array with a
silicone insertion platform (IP), and test the integrated device mechanically,
electrically, in-vitro, and eventually in-vivo. We divide the proposed research
into two phases. In Phase I we will focus on using an IP that has been validated
in humans and (a) microfabricate and integrate a thin-film array with the IP,
(b) using a 3D human cochlear model, validate the integrated array mechanically
through bend tests and insertion studies, and electrically by impedance
measurement, and (c) compare the efficacy of intracochlear electrical
stimulation of the high-density array with a contemporary array in the cat
model. In Phase II we leverage the methods established in Phase I to develop an
array specifically sized for the cat model by integrating a thin-film array with
a molded silicone insertion platform. &lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT Over 180,000
individuals use cochlear implants worldwide and many achieve a high level of
speech recognition. But there remains a group of patients achieving poor speech
recognition and difficulty understanding speech in noisy environments. One
potential means to overcome this challenge is to provide an enhanced coupling
between the electrical to neural interface with a high-density array.
Implementing such an array is impossible with contemporary fabrication methods
where arrays are constructed by hand from bundles of wire encased in silicone.
There simply is not enough room in the cochlea to scale up this method. This
proposal is the first effort at integrating a thin-film based array with an IP.
This is a transformative approach as it leverages the fine feature resolution
(1Ã¬m) offered by microfabricated thin-films and combines such arrays with an IP
commanding the same mechanical flexibility, dimensions and features of
contemporary arrays validated in humans. Furthermore, the introduction of
integrated high-density arrays sized for the cat model will enable fundamental
studies exploring and comparing novel electric fields shaping strategies, such
as current steering and current focusing, employed to optimize the electrical-
to-neural interface.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS Integrated thin-film arrays open
a host of possibilities to further improve patient performance with cochlear
implants. Recent studies have illustrated the benefit of combined electrical
(high frequency) and acoustic (low frequency) stimulation for improving speech
perception, especially in noisy environments. An important component is a short
(10mm) array inserted into the base of the cochlea that preserves any remaining
low frequency neural elements by minimizing trauma. By decoupling the mechanical
design of the platform from the array, our approach enables continued
development of less traumatic platforms while retaining the high-density
electrode configuration. Furthermore, integrating a thin-film array with an
insertion platform may enable such arrays to approach other structures such as
stimulation of vestibular nerve fibers for a vestibular (balance) prosthesis and
potentially deep brain stimulation to mitigate Parkinson's disease, epilepsy and
depression. To broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, the PI
maintains a strategy for integrating her research with outreach, mentoring, and
teaching to engage students across the K-graduate continuum. This includes
"Science Nights" at the Fernbank Science Center (Atlanta, GA) and codeveloping
science modules with local middle/high schoolteachers. She guides undergraduate
and graduate researchers in her BioSystems Interface Lab, mentors minority
students, and is creating a graduate-level Hybrid Biosystems course addressing
vestibular, cochlear and cardiac biosystems. The PI has developed a LabVIEW
simulation of a cochlear implant signal processor as an IEEE Real World
Engineering Project supporting free open-licensed educational materials thereby
enabling her to reach an international student/teacher population. And finally,
the PI is partnering with the local cochlear implant community to create
undergraduate and graduate research opportunities for deaf students in her lab.