* 1133289
* Protein-Polyelectrolyte Coacervation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Paul Dubin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

1133289&lt;br/&gt;Hoagland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial biofilms on implanted
medical devices afflict hundreds of thousands of Americans each year and cause
billions of dollars in increased medical costs. These infections are extremely
difficult to kill, prompting substantial research efforts on interfacial
coatings which would either prevent bacterial adhesion or chemically hinder the
bacteria. Theseapproaches have yet to translate to devices with lower infection
rates, however. The long term goal of this research program is the elimination
of infection as a major liability of implanted medical devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The central hypothesis is that these
biofilm infections can be thermally sterilized by heating the device coating
upon which they are growing. By immobilizing magnetic nanoparticles in the
coating, precisely localized heat can be wirelessly delivered directly to the
coating, sterilizing the biofilm growing on it. The objective for this
particular proposal is to estimate the temperature profile of adjacent tissue
during this heating and demonstrate biofilm deactivation under these conditions.
The ationale for the proposed research is that an understanding of how to
minimize thermal tissue damage while sterilizing the coating under a variety of
heat sink conditions will translate into an inexpensive, versatile medical
implant coating which can be non-invasively sterilized on command. To achieve
this objective, this project will: 1) Estimate the temperature profile of
surrounding tissue from given thermal protocals. Coatings will be held at a
several temperatures for several durations while transient temperature profiles
are recorded. Three extreme scenarios will be modeled: immobile tissue, blood
flow, and adjacent immobile tissue/large convective blood flow. Transient
temperature profiles from these scenarios will inform a computational model. 2)
Demonstrate equivalent heating using remotely-activated magnetic nanoparticles.
Each temperature/time protocol first achieved in each of the three scenarios in
Objective 1 with wired electrical resistors will be achieved using wireless
magnetic-nanoparticle-laden coatings. Film thickness, magnetic particle content,
and field strength will be altered to match the protocols. 3) Determine
degree&lt;br/&gt;of biofilm deactivation from each temperature/time protocol.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms will be ultured, subjected to each
temperature/time protocols in each heat sink scenario, and characterized for
degree of deactivation. This project represents the first systematic attempt to
eliminate biofilms via heat and the first adaptation of magnetic hypertherapy
for device-based applications, where the bottleneck of targeted particle
delivery does not exist. It provides the basis for a new non-invasive, localized
approach to biofilm infection control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project lays the foundation for a new way of dealing with medical implant
infections. One day, rather than require a second surgery to remove the
implanted device, followed by weeks of hospitalization and a third surgery to
implant a replacement, the doctor may simply hold a metal coil up to the
patients skin near the device for several minutes and send the patient home. One
of the first steps toward making this vision a reality is understanding how the
temperature and exposure time needed to sterilize the infection will affect the
surrounding tissue. Alternative heating approaches can be pursued for
magnetically susceptible devices, but regardless of the heating approach, the in
situ power requirements and the potential adjacent tissue damage will be the
same. This project experimentally estimates those items for multiple
physiological scenarios and develops a model for predicting them in other
scenarios. The approach can be generalized to most implant types without major
redesign of the implant, also facilitating its path to bedside relevance and
broadening the scope of its potential impact. The impact of the research goes
beyond the health-care industry and related research disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong integration of engineering and the life-
sciences, coupled with the work's amenability to smaller subprojects, makes the
proposed work a particularly valuable educational tool for both graduate and
undergraduate researchers. This accessibility will be capitalized for UIs
McNair/SROP program, through which minority, first generation, and low-income
undergraduates participate in 8-week, full-time research projects culminating in
an intercollegiate research conference and, in most cases, eventual successful
application to graduate school. The proposed research will be incorporated with
McNair/SROP to increase the pipeline of underrepresented populations in the
research community.