* 1133600
* Collaborative Research: Role of Organic Matter Source on the Photochemical Fate of Pharmaceutical Compounds
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Allison MacKay, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 305,668.00

PIs: Allison MacKay / Yu-Ping Chin / Charles Sharpless&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Numbers: 1133600 / 1133094 / 1132207&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluating the impacts
of human pharmaceutical compounds in the environment is a daunting task, given
the wide variety of chemicals administered for medical conditions and the
various wastewater management schemes that facilitate their release to aquatic
systems. Prior studies suggest photodegradation reactions to be important
attenuation processes for pharmaceutical compounds in the environment. The
susceptibility of pharmaceuticals to photochemical reactions will be impacted by
the co-release of these compounds with effluent organic matter (EfOM). EfOM is
expected to have differing photoreactivity, relative to well-studied natural
organic matter (NOM) sources, presumably because of its anticipated lower
aromatic content and lower color, compared to NOM. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs
hypothesize that pharmaceutical compound photodegradation will be altered with
increasing proportion of wastewater effluent in natural channel flow because of
the increased presence of EfOM, relative to NOM. The ultimate goal of the
proposed research is to identify key environmental system characteristics that
are associated with enhanced environmental photodegradation rates of
pharmaceutical compounds. They propose three major research activities to
evaluate their hypothesis. (1): Field measurements of environmental degradation
rates and pathways will be obtained for representative wastewater discharge
scenarios ? forested New England watershed (Pomperaug River, CT), agricultural
Midwestern watershed (East Fork of the Little Miami River, OH), and an urban
stream with combined sewer outfalls (Park River, CT). Flow-adjusted samples will
be obtained downstream of the effluent discharge to measure pseudo-first order
environmental degradation rates with differing seasonal EfOM-to-NOM ratios.
Photolysis losses will be differentiated from other losses by comparing daytime
and nighttime observations. Supporting lab degradation studies will resolve
contributions of organic matter (OM) type to photochemical pathways. (2): OM
will be isolated from the field sites, including from effluent streams directly.
Isolation methods of XAD-8 resin and tangential flow ultrafiltration will be
used for consistency with geochemistry methods. Isolates will be characterized
for their biochemical constituents (thermochemolysis), and for optical and
structural properties (UV-Vis, fluorescence, solid-state 13C NMR). (3): Quantum
yields of singlet oxygen, hydrogen peroxide and excited triplet-state OM will be
obtained for OM isolates and correlated to OM characteristics (Task 2).
Together, the results of Tasks 2 and 3 will yield critical insights for
interpreting differences in photodegradation rate constants (Task 1) among the
sites and within seasons, as effluent contributions change at each site.
&lt;br/&gt;This study will be the first to examine the fate of pharmaceutical
compounds in New England and Midwestern rivers, expanding on prior fate studies
from arid systems. They will establish an important body of knowledge about
environmental system drivers of pharmaceutical compound fates that will
contribute to robust science-based decisions about regulation, remediation,
and/or ?green? design for pharmaceutical compounds. They will work closely with
the Pomperaug River Watershed Coalition and the East Fork Watershed Cooperative
to engage citizens in cutting-edge science through semi-annual project progress
presentations, to involve water managers and community members in water quality
sampling, and to organize a cross-disciplinary Roundtable to bring together
environmental scientists and engineers, regulators, with ecologists and
pharmacologists to discuss environmental management of pharmaceutical compounds
in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will mentor graduate and undergraduate
researchers through the process of scientific discovery ? experimental design,
manuscript preparation and national professional society presentations. The PIs
will continue their record of engaging student researchers from groups
underrepresented in the sciences and engineering. Students will have a unique
opportunity to work with a guiding PI team with expertise in engineering (PI
MacKay), geochemistry (PI Chin), photochemistry (PI Sharpless) and systems
ecology (Collaborator Nietch), providing broad context for their own projects.