* 1133800
* Collaborative Research: Large-scale kinetic energy entrainment in the wind turbine array boundary layer - understanding and affecting basic flow physics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Charles Meneveau, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 294,795.00

1133800 PI Meneveau/1133993 PI Castillo

The objective of this project is to develop and apply experimental and
computational tools for predicting and improving wind farm performance by
placing particular attention on large scales of turbulence and vertical fluxes
of kinetic energy that are of great significance for large arrays of wind
turbines. Much effort has been devoted in recent years to increasing the
efficiency of individual wind turbines, assuming a given inflow in front of the
turbine. Also, understanding how wakes affect the performance of downstream
turbines and modeling superpositions of multiple such wakes has received
considerable attention; however, there has been relatively little fundamental
understanding of how a large array of wind turbines interacts with the turbulent
atmospheric boundary layer at larger scales in the wind turbine array boundary
layer (WTABL). Recent research has demonstrated that an important performance-
limiting factor for large wind farms is the rate at which kinetic energy can be
entrained into the array from the flow aloft, above the wind turbines. No matter
how efficient an individual wind turbine is, or how well it can adapt to an
upstream wind turbine, ultimately it is the vertical flux of kinetic energy into
the overall array that largely determines how much power can be extracted from
the atmospheric flow. The questions addressed in this project aim at better
understanding the limiting factors and the effects of different scales of
turbulence on vertical entrainment processes. The resulting models should guide
wind turbine placement strategies and possible flow modifications so that
vertical entrainment rates can be increased. Specifically, wind tunnel
experiments coupled with large-eddy simulations (LES) will be employed to
address the following research questions: (a) What are the essential differences
between the developing and the fully developed WTABL? (b) What is the relative
contribution from streamwise large-scale coherent vortices to vertical
entrainment of kinetic energy? (c) What are the space-time correlations of hub-
height velocity and power output between different wind turbines in the array?
(d) Are there particular arrangements of wind turbines in the array that
increase, on average, the entrainment? and (e) Can large-scale flow structures
be affected through rotor modifications to increase such entrainment? Addressing
such questions requires the ability to experiment under the highly controlled
and reproducible conditions that can be afforded in the wind tunnel experiments
and computer simulations. The data will be supplemented with comparisons with
relevant new field data from a large wind farm.

Broader impacts: The robust growth of wind energy implies the possibility that
large portions of the land and near-shore surface of the US and the world may
ultimately be used for large wind farms. Predicting and better understanding the
physical processes coupling the modified surface and atmosphere under such
conditions is a timely and critical area of research. Through project activities
the PIs will help train the next generation of engineers and scientists with the
necessary tools and insights to help reach the US goal of 20% wind energy by
2030. Graduate education/mentoring will stress the interplay between wind tunnel
experimentation, computer simulation and field data analysis. International
(Switzerland, Spain) and industrial experiences (General Electric) will also be
emphasized in this project. Recruiting and outreach will leverage both PIs'
ongoing efforts to recruit US Hispanic graduate students through contacts in
Puerto Rico (NSF-AGEP and LSAMP), as well as an IGERT at JHU on modeling complex
systems. A GK-12 at RPI on energy and environment will leverage NSF resources in
training teachers on wind energy issues. The PI's ongoing outreach to a
Baltimore high school will be continued, providing research experiences for
high-school juniors and seniors.