* 1133015
* Instability Mechanisms for Low Density and Reactive Transverse Jets
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Owen Smith, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 09/30/2015
* USD 295,000.00

1133015&lt;br/&gt;Karagozian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the
study of low density non-reactive and reactive (burning) jets injected into
crossflow, a topic applicable to improved efficiency and reduced emissions for a
range of energy and propulsion systems. The ability to control the trajectory,
spread, mixing, reaction completion, and temperature or density field associated
with such jets is the overall goal of these studies. The present approach is
primarily experimental, involving optical diagnostics as a means of
interrogating and analyzing the instabilities in the flowfield as a means of
developing methods for their control. This work will help to advance our ability
to design and develop highly efficient future engines for stationary power
plants, airbreathing propulsion systems, and rocket propulsion
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this research involve
detailed explorations of the mechanisms underlying convective to absolute shear
layer instability transition for low density non-reactive and reactive
transverse jets. For both equidensity and low density jets in crossflow, there
is significant evidence to confirm that the shear layer becomes globally
unstable or self-excited; such evidence includes the initiation of strong
single-tone disturbances that do not vary along the jet's shear layer, the
inhibition of subharmonic initiation, lock-in to applied frequencies only at
very large forcing amplitudes and/or at frequencies close to the fundamental,
and evidence of a Hopf bifurcation. We are able to take advantage of the
knowledge of these instabilities in applying strategic forcing to the transverse
jet, whereby relatively weak sinusoidal jet excitation can enhance the
convectively unstable jet, but strong square wave forcing at specific temporal
pulse widths is required to control the absolutely unstable transverse jet. Yet
the specific mechanisms for this transition, a quantification of altered mixing
states during different excitation conditions, and the behavior of transverse
jets in the presence of a chemical reaction are all significant unknowns, with
substantial practical relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These experimental studies
employ laser diagnostics, including particle image velocimetry (PIV)
simultaneous to planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) imaging of seeded
acetone, in order to quantify 3D velocity and vorticity fields as well as scalar
transport processes in transverse jets. Building on these explorations will be
quantification of mixing associated with the non-reactive flow (equidensity as
well as low density jets) via acetone PLIF, as a means of determining flow and
excitation conditions to optimize jet-crossflow mixing. Closed loop control
methods are being developed for the optimization of jet behavior and response to
upset conditions, using non-intrusive sensing whose measurements may be related
to global flow characteristics. With respect to the reactive jet in crossflow,
OH* chemiluminescence imaging will be used to determine flame characteristics,
instabilities, and flow characteristics. These fundamental explorations will be
critical to the ability to predict and control such instabilities in a range of
engineering systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed
studies go well beyond the practical applications of the transverse jet and the
usual "graduate level research and education". Our track record in such impacts
has included undergraduate research training as well as outreach to and
laboratory experiences for local high school students and underrepresented
students at other universities. In the present project, undergraduate
researchers will continue to be trained and employed in our laboratory, and
outreach presentations and demonstrations will continue to be provided for local
high school and potentially middle school and elementary school students, with
special focus on students at public schools. Opportunities for local high school
students to gain laboratory experiences in the summer will be provided. Cutbacks
in funding by the state of California to the public schools- MESA (Mathematics
Engineering Science Achievement) programs has made it even more important for
universities such as UCLA to extend outreach programs to public middle schools
and high schools as a means of encouraging the development of future engineers
and scientists.