* 1133023
* RAPID: NEES/E-Defense Collaboration for Design of E-Defense Smart Base Isolation Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Erik Johnson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2014
* USD 67,630.00

This award enables U.S. and Japanese researchers to collaborate on the design of
smart base isolation experiments to be conducted using Japan's Earth Defense
(E-Defense) shake table facility in Miki, Japan. This effort is time sensitive
as Japan's National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention
has recently committed the resources for these experiments, with high-level
conceptual design to be completed during April through June 2011, followed with
analysis and simulations completed by August 2011. Further design and detailing
will occur next fall and winter, construction in 2012, and testing in late 2012
or early 2013. Japanese/E-Defense researchers plan to test the seismic
performance of a three-to-four story, three-dimensional asymmetric reinforced
concrete superstructure that incorporates different smart base isolation
systems. In addition to linear rubber bearings in the isolation layer, tests
will incorporate semi-active controllable damping devices to explore their
potential for improving seismic performance over a wider array of ground motions
than is possible with conventional isolation (fixed systems), as well as
consider other types of devices that U.S. researchers may propose. This
bilateral collaboration brings together expertise in controlled base isolation
and semi-active devices, as well as experimental design and execution, so that
both countries can maximize benefits from the experiments. The impetus for the
experiments and the opportunities for this international collaboration were
fostered in joint NEES/E-Defense planning meetings in 2009, 2010 and 2011 and is
the outcome of the joint NEES/E-Defense Isolation and Control Working Group.
This award supports several U.S. researchers to travel to Japan to work directly
with E-Defense researchers on the design of the smart base isolation
experiments, including superstructure, isolation system strategies,
instrumentation, and post-test analyses. This award also supports the necessary
design analyses and simulations to make experimental design
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned E-Defense experiments of a base
isolated structure with semi-active controllable damping devices are unique and
provide a one-time opportunity for U.S. researchers to participate in full-scale
experiments that currently cannot be conducted in the U.S. These E-Defense
experiments will enable researchers to investigate and calibrate the level of
seismic performance achievable with controllable dampers by extending isolation
effectiveness to a much broader array of ground motions than possible with
current conventional isolation technology. The tests will be the first
laboratory experiments of magnetorheological fluid dampers at this scale for
base isolation. This award will foster new research collaboration between NEES
and E-Defense, as well as build new ties between U.S. and Japanese researchers.
The experimental designs and resulting data will be disseminated to the research
community via an already-established NEEShub group
(http://nees.org/groups/isolationcontrol).