* 1133992
* GARDE: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Accommodate Fine Motor Control Disorders
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Andrew Gouldstone, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2016
* USD 285,654.00

PI: Sipahi, R.; Frank, S.; Gouldstone, A.; and Jaeger, B. K.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 1133992&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Synopsis &lt;br/&gt;This GARDE proposal
describes activities to investigate fundamental aspects of hand-pen-paper
interaction during writing, with a movement disorder that causes undesired
oscillation (tremors). Efforts will lead to strategies to accommodate such a
disorder, and in return improve writing ability of those suffering from kinetic
tremor - a type of impairment found in 10-12 million people in the US with
Parkinson's Disease, Essential Tremor, and Dystonia. The novelty of our proposal
is the interdisciplinary, engineering-based approach; we frame this problem in
terms of the following questions: -Given a set of wrist vibrations, what are the
pen grip/pen mechanics conditions that would cause "unintended penmanship"
(i.e., pen slip on paper)? How can penmanship be improved actively or passively?
To address this complex problem, we first frame writing ability in the context
of human factors and performance metrics (PM) on end-users. The elderly target
population will be established via collaboration with a neurologist at Boston
Medical Center. We then build dynamic models of a pen being oscillated by the
hand, under various conditions, and use a control theory approach to accommodate
oscillations, on the pen. Finally, we will implement and construct these
approaches into a "Smart Pen" that will be tested on an end-user population.
Design refinements will also include 3D contact mechanics models of grip and
friction, and undergraduate Senior Design team efforts in prototypes, using a
series of sensors and actuators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;This activity is important, in that beyond simply making a "better
pen", it seeks to fully define the design space within which researchers can
work to accommodate the effects of a movement disorder upon writing. The problem
is tractable, as we have assembled experts in contact mechanics (CAREER
awardee), controls, human factors and neurology. We believe this work could
transform the field, as other researchers can access our modeling data and use
guidelines to explore further therapeutic concepts. In addition, this work will
promote the concept of "computational design." We have made every effort to make
the thrusts correct, synergistic, relevant and within the scope of the devised
program, and will leverage existing resources at NU (including startup grants)
to purchase necessary equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The graduate assistant(s) in this program will be exposed to a
highly interdisciplinary set of scientific studies, creating a well-rounded
base, with strong societal perspective. The PI's and expected undergraduate
participants represent a range of demographics, including support from NU?s
minority programs. Specific dissemination activities are ambitious and
pervasive, and will leverage the PIs' projects BELLA (Bringing Education and
Lifelong Learning to Adults) through seminars and discussions directly to the
elderly population. Undergraduate senior engineering students will use the
design criteria to build actual prototype devices. The results, devices and
dissemination will be highly enabling and empowering, particularly to the
elderly, as it will provide them with a non-invasive means to maintain
independence later in life. Other possible uses for this work include healthy
subjects and/or tremor patients holding a cup filled with liquid, holding a
utensil, manipulating a joystick, operating machinery, holding a sensitive
device in precision surgery or in a vibratory environment.