* 1133394
* GOALI: Thermal Transport by Phonons in Device-Grade Nitride Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Tanya Paskova, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 397,236.00

PI: Jonathan A. Malen&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1133394&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitride-based semiconductors are a centerpiece of
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) for solid-state lighting, select high-
frequency/power electronics, and future multi-junction photovoltaics. Progress
towards commercialization of these technologies demands high current densities
that compel improved thermal management to lower operating temperatures. While
packaging strategies improve heat dissipation, preliminary data show that the
device itself has a large thermal resistance. Thermal conductivity (k)
measurements on device-grade nitride films show very low values of k in thin
100nm aluminum nitride (AlN) and 100nm gallium nitride (GaN) layers. Electron
microscopy images suggest that these reductions are caused by structural
imperfections inherent to industrial growth processes. As yet, a clear
scientific explanation is lacking.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The objective
of this GOALI proposal is to study thermal transport in nitride semiconductor
heterostructures composed of GaN, AlN, and indium gallium nitride (InGaN) thin
films (~100nm), fabricated by scalable growth processes. An interdisciplinary
team of academic investigators at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), in
partnership with Kyma Technologies, will study the nature of thermal transport
by phonons in nitride nanostructures. Defective films and interfaces separated
by distances commensurate to the bulk phonon mean free paths will be considered.
Open scientific questions include: What is the thermal boundary resistance (R)
at the device-substrate interface and between nitride layers? Can highly
defective crystals transport heat in a manner similar to disordered materials?
How do growth techniques impact thin film thermal
properties?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, the investigation
will focus on a common base structure that includes a sapphire, silicon carbide,
or GaN substrate with an AlN nucleation layer followed by an InGaN buffer layer.
Specific inquiries include: (i) the effect of the substrate on R and k of the
AlN nucleation layer, (ii) the effect of growth technique on k and R of the AlN
nucleation layer, and (iii) the effect of indium concentration on k and R of the
InGaN buffer layer. Controlled growth of nitrides and imaging of defect density
and structure (Davis, Paskova) will be used to inform the atomic structure for
molecular dynamics simulations (McGaughey). Simulation results will be compared
with direct measurements of k and R on these samples, made using a pump-probe
optical method called Frequency Domain Thermoreflectance
(Malen).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Partnership with Kyma Technologies
makes this research directly transferable to industry, where nitride devices
have the potential to revolutionize lighting and to outperform silicon-based
electronics. Kyma recognizes the critical need for incorporating thermal-
management into the nitride device structure. Access to Kyma's growth
technologies, which represent the future of nitrides, will make any discoveries
far-reaching. Continuing collaborations on nitride science and technology with
the Cree Corporation and the Naval Research Laboratory further support the need
for this research. &lt;br/&gt;The educational activities will expose students to
industry-driven academic research through curriculum development, guest lectures
and seminars, and summer internships at Kyma. Kyma, in turn, will receive
exposure at CMU through integration of the research topics and results within
courses taught by the academic PIs. An LED-based outreach activity "Lighting:
The Next Generation" will be developed for the Society of Women Engineers High
School Day, Pittsburgh public schools, and the YWCA TechGyrls program.