* 1133834
* Establishing a Rational Design Algorithm for Higher-order Biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Corey Wilson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 358,963.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The control of gene expression is an important
tool for metabolic engineering, the design of synthetic gene networks, gene-
function analysis, and protein manufacturing. The most successful approaches to
date are based on modulating gene production via an inducible coupling to known
transcriptional effectors. However, the current set of useful regulatory
elements lacks sufficient diversity to advance the abovementioned
biotechnologies. Accordingly, the invention of novel higher-order biosensing
proteins that modulate gene expression will catalyze a revolution in how we
conduct basic and applied research over the next decade. The challenge now is
how to translate knowledge regarding allosteric communication?a hallmark of
biosensing?into a rational design protocol for cooperative function.
Accordingly, the objective of this study is to establish an innovative rational
design algorithm for creating higher-order biosensing elements that are highly
sensitive and orthogonal to native functions. The novel molecular switches
generated in the study will become the foundation of exciting technologies in
natural and non-natural systems alike. To accomplish this objective, bio-
inspired engineering principles that involve both experimental and computational
strategies with feedback between the two will be employed. The technology
developed in this proposal will exist at the intersection of engineering, life
science and information technology. Thus, this research will advance both
engineering and life sciences via the creation of not only novel but useful
biosensing elements in addition to addressing complementary scientific
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Establishing an
integrated multidisciplinary program that is complementary to the aforesaid
research initiative, while promoting diversity and increasing the involvement of
underrepresented groups in biological engineering and science, will require the
development of three underpinning and reciprocal criteria, namely: i)
articulating the overarching goals of this research program and expressed
interest in including underrepresented groups in these efforts to the broader
community; ii) establishing a rigorous training initiative at both the
undergraduate and graduate level; and iii) developing the necessary
infrastructure to support these efforts. Likewise, this program will exist
within the context of the mission goals and resources of the University. In
turn, this effort will pave the way toward catalyzing a cultural change in
undergraduate and graduate education, for students, faculty, and the University,
by establishing an innovative model for promoting diversity and training in a
fertile environment in the context of research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. This initiative will contribute to the development of a
diverse engaged science and engineering workforce, building a firm foundation
for a lifetime of contributions to research, education and their integration.