* 1133117
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Catalysis on Carbon Nanotube Surfaces For Selective Liquid Fuel Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Saikat Talapatra, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 246,993.00

Researchers have tried to increase the efficiency of various catalyst particles
by dispersing them on carbon nanofiber/nanotube (CNTs) catalyst supports, due to
the availability of higher specific surface areas of these tubular carbon
nanomaterials. Success has not been notably achieved. In evaluating CNTs as
supports for Fischer-Tropsch catalysts, PIs Kanchan Mondal and Saikat Talapatra
of Southern Illinois University and Mauricio Terrones of Pennsylvania State
University observed that the CNTs themselves perform better than conventional
catalysts, exhibiting an order of magnitude more activity with three orders of
magnitude less iron content. It was thought that this was due to some uniqueness
in the residual iron from the CNT synthesis, but subsequent extraction of the
residual Fe resulted in still another order of magnitude improvement in
activity. This is a potentially dramatic change in the nature of CNT catalysis.
One of the aims of this proposal is to investigate the role of CNTs themselves
as catalysts in heterogeneous catalysis, especially FT catalysis. Other
significant factors such as their curved carbon surfaces (offering higher
adsorption potential to the adsorbate gases near its vicinity), surface defects
and functionalization have been primarily over looked as to their possible
contribution to heterogeneous catalysis. The PIs propound an excellent series of
questions related to catalysis on CNTs that they intend to address, and to then
creatively adjust synthesis and treatment processes to optimize the CNT
catalytic performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspects of this
project are interesting in that the undergraduate and graduate students will be
exposed to a truly cross-cutting and multi-disciplinary research effort about
the use of nanommaterials in heterogeneous catalysis. The potential tie-in to
renewable fuels and energy is an added plus in the educational experience.