* 1133106
* Dispersion in Microfluidic Suspensions: Experiments and Numerical Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Martin Maxey, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 347,356.00

1133106 PI: Maxey

Dispersion of microspheres and cells has become a critical issue in a number of
biological and microfluidic applications. While it is well known that pressure
driven flows through a microchannel leads to ?Taylor dispersion? of solute
plugs, the dispersion characteristics of particulate or biological cell
suspension plugs have not been explored in detail. The dispersion is observed on
time scales such that the particles sample many streamlines due to microchannel
wall and multiparticle hydrodynamic interactions. In most of the above
microfluidic applications, single or multiple dilutions of reagents are required
in order to perform reactions or measurements over a range of concentrations
using only one set of sample solutions to fill the inlets. It is often unclear
how to design the dilution channel or channels for achieving minimum dispersion
of the plugs. New insights on particle fluxes and mixing in microchannel flows
are needed to develop models for concentration fronts or strongly inhomogeneous
flows as opposed to fully populated flows. The proposed research and education
program launches a fundamental approach to analyze dispersion in microfluidic
suspension flow of microspheres and biological cells.

The research program will develop a new experimental platform for performing
benchmark suspension plug transport experiments using different kinds of solid
and soft particles. The program will also develop a new, fully resolved,
numerical simulation framework for exploring isolated suspension plugs that are
inherently inhomogeneous and may vary rapidly over short distances. These
studies will impact our fundamental understanding of transport in microscale
systems, and will lead to technological advances in diverse areas relevant to
micro-reactor design and two-phase flows with applications to high throughput
screening and bio-separations.

The project will develop a crucial understanding of transport of suspension and
cellular plugs under different length and time scales. This will accelerate the
exploration of new systems for performing rapid screening with high efficiency
to detect and analyze minuscule samples. The project will also provide valuable
training for new graduate research assistants in developing and applying the new
research techniques. The work is at the interface of microfluidic device
technology and scientific computing for a fundamental class of suspension flows,
and will provide cross-disciplinary experience. There will be a coordinated
outreach program involving undergraduate research projects and incorporating new
material for interdisciplinary courses to train undergraduates from biology,
physics, engineering and applied mathematics in new approaches. The PIs will
participate in and contribute to Brown University?s Research Experience for
Teachers Program (RET).