* 1133304
* Innovations in the Measurement and Analysis of Environmental Exposures
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Jody Roberts, Science History Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Each day, every citizen of the U.S. is exposed to an unknown number of natural
and synthetic chemicals in her or his environment--through the air we breathe,
the food we eat, the water we drink, and the consumer products we use as a part
of our daily routines. Most researchers working in environmental and public
health now recognize that these daily exposures likely play a significant role
in our health and well being across the life course. The 2008-2009 Annual Report
of the Presidents Cancer Panel, Reducing Environmental Cancer Risk, for example,
highlighted evidence of widespread human exposure to industrial chemicals and
the serious concern that environmentally induced cancer risks have been
profoundly underestimated and under-documented. Yet, despite some new tools,
such as human biomonitoring and the advancements in analytical chemistry, that
can measure the chemical burden that individual bodies carry with increasing
degrees of exactness and sophistication, the field of environmental exposure
studies has not received anywhere near the level of investment given to other
techniques. For example, public and private investment in the measurement and
investigation of the relation between genomic connections and health outcomes
outweighs investment in the development and use of environmental exposure
technologies.

This workshop is devoted to addressing the following questions: What counts as
evidence when documenting environmental exposures? How can social scientists,
engineers, and computer scientists collaborate to produce innovations in data
collection and analysis? How can environmental exposures be made to matter in
public policy? The workshop will bring together researchers from a diversity of
disciplinary backgrounds and institutions to develop strategies for collecting
and translating environmental exposure data into health and policy contexts. The
workshop will draw on the expertise developed in fields such as sociology,
science and technology studies, epidemiology, information systems, environmental
engineering, and biosensors as well as tools for translation and
contextualization. More data and/or new exposure technologies, however, do not
necessarily result in meaningful knowledge. This workshop aims to foster
collaboration across disciplines to ensure that efforts to develop new exposure
technologies and methods benefit from input from a variety of fields.

The workshop will have broad impact by producing a set of possible initiatives
for collecting new data and making better use of existing environmental exposure
data. The workshop will include graduate students as participants. Workshop
findings will be distributed widely on the Chemical Heritage Foundation website
and through print sources to ensure broad access.