* 1133883
* Repair and regeneration of osteochondral defects in mouse articular joints
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Mei Wei, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,123.00

1133883&lt;br/&gt;Wei&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a high percentage of patients,
damages to the articular cartilage surface and the underlying subchondral bone
can easily progress to joint degeneration, especially osteoarthritis which is
the main cause of chronic disability in US. Extensive efforts have been made in
osteochondral defect treatment, but there is still no widely accepted method
which produces consistent satisfactory results. The regenerated cartilage is
inferior to the original cartilage morphologically, biochemically, and
biomechanically. Instead of forming articular cartilage, fibrocartilage is
normally generated, which lacks of the long-term stability and cannot withstand
prolonged stress to the joint. Thus, there is a need for a new approach that
outperforms currently used methods. In this study, we propose to develop a
graded scaffold with structure and mechanical properties mimicking those of
natural cartilage, load the scaffold with articular-specific chondroprogenitor
cells identified by GFP reporters, and then implant the cell-loaded scaffold
into a novel transgenic mouse cartilage model to test for osteochondral repair
and regeneration. It is expected that an optimum cell-scaffold construct will be
determined which effectively regenerates osteochondral cartilage with excellent
functionality and long-term stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:
The novelty of the current proposal includes: (1) the development of a graded
scaffold with structure, orientation, composition and mechanical properties
mimicking those of natural cartilage and subchondral bone; (2) the development
of an in-depth understanding of chondrocytes differentiation pathways and
establishment of their lineage interrelationships; (3) the identification of
articular-specific chondroprogenitor cells using a series of cartilage GFP
reporters; (4) the development of an informative transgenic murine cartilage
model to assess osteochondral repair and its integration with host tissues at a
relatively low cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The proposed project
has a broader impact on various scientific disciplines. The results of the
proposed research will contribute to our understanding of the cell-scaffold
interactions, chondrocyte differentiation pathways, and host/donor cell
contribution to the articular cartilage restoration for the first time. The
information gained here will be an essential ingredient in developing and
interpreting tissue engineering strategies to determine the optimal scaffold
design and source of progenitors, and whether a repair process is initiated from
the host or donor. Distinguishing the completeness of the repair in terms of the
composition of cells that fill the repair region will be another measure of
success of a repair strategy. The proposed research will be transformative to
the tissue engineering field as it directly addresses the existing problems of
the osteochondral cartilage repair and its approach may provide an effect
solution to these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in the
training of a graduate student and a number of undergraduate students in areas
of tissue engineering, while exposing them to a multidisciplinary working
environment. Efforts will be made to recruit female and minority students by
integrating our research activities with existing recruiting efforts at the
Department, the School and the University levels as well as participating in
activities organized by various professional societies dedicated to
underrepresented minorities. In addition, we will perform K-12 outreach to get
high school students, especially female and underrepresented minorities, excited
about engineering research. The results obtained from the project will be
disseminated broadly via publishing in scientific journals, presenting in
conferences and publicizing to general public via a website. We will make sure
that all data will be kept for at least three years after conclusion of the
award or three years after public release, whichever is later. We will also make
our transgenic mice available to the tissue engineering community so that more
researchers can use them to optimize their repair strategies.