* 1133682
* Floating Offshore Wind Turbines:  Conceptual Assessment of Highly Compliant Platforms using Theory, Design and Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* John Sweetman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 318,008.00

1133862 PI Sweetman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop new theory and numerical tools to accurately simulate the behavior of
floating offshore wind turbines subject to large angular displacements, and use
those results to assess the economic and technical feasibility of potential
next-generation structures. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The potential for a
change in design philosophy from highly rigid wind turbine support structures to
highly compliant ones will be investigated. New designs and operational control
systems will be developed that allow the tower to lean significantly in response
to the wind force, and the technical and economic merits of these new designs
will be assessed. A shift to highly compliant structures would be a major shift
in design philosophy paralleling that of the offshore oil business as drilling
and production moved into very deep water. A family of new designs will be
developed with rotational restoring properties ranging from very stiff (very
small lean of the tower due to wind) to very compliant (leans easily). These
designs will be completed in sufficient detail to identify all challenges to
existing technology. Computing the dynamics of these highly compliant structures
is both difficult and important, in part because of the gyroscopic effect of the
huge whirling blades. This challenge will be met through theoretical development
and practical implementation of a new dynamic simulation methodology that could
prove useful beyond the field of wind energy to other rotating equipment subject
to large angular displacements. The new method will be based on conservation of
angular momentum in Euler-space for a cloud of rigid bodies representing a
floating wind turbine. Development of this new theory and simulation methodology
is necessary because conventional wind turbine design tools do not consider the
order of rotation of angular deflections and so are inadequate for large angular
motions. Additionally, the overall system is extremely nonlinear: the
environmental forcing, hydrostatic restoring moments, time-domain control
system, and gyroscopic effects are all nonlinear; accurate simulation in the
time domain is necessary to assess the viability of the any design concept.
Proof that highly compliant support structures have both technical and economic
value could begin a technical revolution that enables economic development of
wind farms in very challenging deepwater offshore locations. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: As the US continues to work towards ``greener?? sources of alternative
energy, there is increasing interest in installing wind turbines offshore, where
good winds and adequate space are both available. Public pressure continues to
push for having these structures beyond sight of land, and new technologies are
needed for more cost-effective generation of wind-powered electricity in very
deep waters. This proposal explores for the first time the viability of highly
compliant structures for that purpose, the result of which could be a dramatic
shift in the design philosophy for floating wind turbines. The education and
outreach components include course development, education of graduate and
undergraduate students and outreach to K-12 students and teachers as well as to
at-risk college students. The teaching will include development of innovative
course curricula on off-shore wind energy to teach about design of both bottom-
founded and floating offshore wind turbines, and will include education of
graduate and undergraduate students in the rapidly advancing area of offshore
wind turbine design. Outreach to K?12 students and teachers will be include
presentations on offshore energy by the PI and his graduate students in the
well-established ``Sea Camp?? program at Texas A&amp;M at Galveston; outreach to
at-risk college students, who include many historically underrepresented and
financially disadvantaged students, will be through an established program.