* 1133279
* Jamming and Glass-like Behavior of Thermosensitve and Barosensitive Particulate Dispersions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Gregory McKenna, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 237,053.00

1133279&lt;br/&gt;PI: McKenna&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental investigation
of the aging, dynamics and rheology of thermo-sensitive colloidal dispersions
near to the glass and jamming transitions is proposed. The investigation brings
the PI's expertise and experience in glassy physics, aging and rheology to bear
in a novel and transformative approach to the understanding of colloidal
glasses. While the relevant behaviors have been extensively studied in
experiments in which the suspension has been subjected to shearing deformations
at a fixed concentration, there are very few works in which the response is
followed after rapid, constant volume concentration changes. The advent of
thermosensitive particles, such as the poly(n isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAAM)
systems that swell and deswell in water with temperature variation have changed
this situation and offer the promise of an experimental route to investigate the
glass-like behavior, and specifically, the structural recovery based behavior of
colloidal dispersions near to the glass or jamming transition. In addition to
the thermo-sensitivity of these particles they are also barosensitive, i.e.,
application of pressure can change the particle swelling, hence isotropic
stresses (pressure changes) impose concentration changes. The proposed research
offers a transformational outcome as it promises to validate or invalidate a
frequent underlying hypothesis in colloid physics that the colloidal glass is a
model system for molecular glasses. Furthermore, independent of the specific
outcome of the hypothesis validation, highly novel experimental results will be
obtained that are relevant to the behavior of colloidal systems in the range of
concentrations that are related to glass-like or jamming behaviors. It is
specifically proposed to perform the temperature- and pressure-jump experiments
using responsive PNIPAAM and PS/PNIPAAM core/shell particles to cross the
concentration phase boundary (liquid-to- glass) along a two different paths (T
and P) using diffusing wave light scattering to probe the aging dynamics of the
non-equilibrium colloids. These experiments will provide the first extensive
cataloguing of the structural recovery behavior of colloidal glasses in the
Kovacs catalogued signatures of structural recovery, viz., intrinsic isotherm,
asymmetry of approach, and memory effect. The results will provide insights to
effects of particle "hardness" or "softness?"and colloidal glass fragility on
the aging dynamics. Classical physical aging experiments using torsional
rheometry will also be performed in the thermosensitive response regime
following the methods originally proposed by Struik for molecular glasses. While
there is much work in the literature that addresses the dynamics of concentrated
colloidal systems in the context of the equilibrium dynamics and their
divergence with concentration, the present work is transformative in that it
applies concepts related to the non equilibrium behavior of molecular glasses
explicitly in concentration-jumps induced by the thermo- and baro response
properties of the PNIPAAM-based colloids. Thus, new understanding of the
dynamics of colloidal systems will be created. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide research training and experience to students at all levels in the
methods of characterizing and synthesis of colloids and the physics of glassy
colloids. The PI and his graduate students will also be involved in outreach
activities of middle-school girls.