* 1133135
* Photostable Luminescent Coatings Assembled from Flow-Purified Silicon Nanocrystals: Effects of Size, Packing Order, and Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Daniel Kroll, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 266,329.00

1133135&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hobbie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique optical properties
of semiconductor nanocrystals, or quantum dots, are well suited to a range of
needs in biomedical imaging and sensing, but work so far has focused on toxic
materials like cadmium selenide. Silicon, in contrast, is an abundant nontoxic
element that can be readily synthesized into luminescent nanocrystals in
nonthermal plasmas. Like all quantum dots, silicon nanocrystals have limited
photoluminescent stability. Motivated by preliminary data that demonstrate a
clear link between nanoparticle packing and ensemble photostability, we will
perform a combined experimental and computational study of the influence of
particle size distribution, particle packing order, and local environment on the
photostability of films and clusters assembled from purified silicon quantum
dots. The plasma-synthesized nanocrystals will be (i) dispersed in organic
solvents using ligands of varied length, (ii) separated by size in a scalable
fashion through density-gradient ultracentrifugation into highly monodisperse
fractions, and (iii) assembled into ordered films and clusters through
controlled drying. Correlations between packing density, crystalline order,
local environment, and photostability will be established by independently
measuring the microstructure with optical and electron microscopy while
simultaneously measuring the time-dependent spectral response. To interpret
these experiments, we will combine numerical simulations of non-equilibrium
self-assembly in drying colloidal suspensions with a quantum-mechanical model
that accounts for the influence of inter-particle interactions on the
photophysics of closely packed nanoparticle ensembles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project represents the first comprehensive scientific study of the influence of
particle interactions on the photostability of silicon quantum dots, and it will
have significant impact on a number of diverse fronts. The striking visual
signal of photoluminescence is a particularly accessible manifestation of
nanotechnology at macroscopic scales, and we will exploit this to engage the
public, including high school students from across the state of North Dakota. We
also have a strong record of mentoring undergraduates, including women and
underrepresented minorities, through challenging projects that culminate in
high-impact publications. A significant portion of the preliminary data in this
proposal were collected and analyzed by undergraduates. Motivated by the
interdisciplinary scope of the research, the PI is also developing a new
graduate course specifically designed to train doctoral researchers at the
?soft-hard? interface, which represents a paradigm for nanotechnology in the
21st century. Finally, the potential technological impact of the knowledge
gained is tremendously broad, ranging from efficient solid-state lighting and
solution-processed photovoltaics to fiber-optic cryothermometers and stable non-
toxic fluorophores for live cell diagnostics.