* 1133260
* Blood Flow Regulation in Normal and Diseased Tissues: Signal Transduction and Integration in Physiological Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Brian Carlson, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Continuing Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 10/31/2014
* USD 316,881.00

1133260&lt;br/&gt;Carlson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: How blood flow is
regulated to match tissue metabolic demand in normal and disease states such as
hypertension is still an open-ended question in the field of physiology. What is
known is that blood flow is modulated in the microcirculation by vascular
dilation and constriction affected by contraction and relaxation of the vascular
smooth muscle cells that encircle regulatory microvessels. Several local vessel
and tissue level stimuli are known to control the contractile state of vascular
smooth muscle cells such as intraluminal pressure, shear stress imparted on the
vessel walls and metabolic state of the surrounding tissue. This proposed study
aims to understand how these mechanical, chemical and electrical stimuli are
integrated together to modulate normal and hypertensive microvascular blood flow
by using a combination of theoretical and experimental analyses. The theoretical
portion of this approach will use models containing detail at molecular,
cellular, single vessel and tissue scales and these models will be parameterized
and validated using experimental data obtained at the cellular (ion channel and
cellular electrophysiology, vascular smooth muscle cytosolic Ca2+, etc.), single
vessel (isolated vessel response to mechanical and chemical stimuli) and tissue
(tissue blood flow observations) levels both from literature and current
experimental collaborations. Integration of the cellular and single vessel
theoretical models into a tissue level microvascular network model will
facilitate the prediction of functional differences between normal regulatory
networks and those altered by hypertension. In Objective 1 single vessel
regulatory models will be developed and parameterized. These theoretical models
will provide the foundation for tissue level regulatory models of microvascular
networks in Objective 2, which will be in turn used as a predictive tool to
describe the vascular regulatory dysfunction present in hypertension in
Objective 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits of the Proposed Research:
The proposed research is fundamentally aimed at uncovering the quantitative
integration of mechanical, chemical and electrical stimuli in the
microvasculature facilitating the regulation of blood flow. A fully integrative
approach aimed at describing the large body of experimental data compiled at the
cellular, vessel and tissue levels has not been developed to date. In the
process of understanding the tissue level phenotype of blood flow regulatory
response the investigators will be able to functionally test hypotheses
concerning transduction of mechanical stimuli at the cellular level, chemical
and electrical communication between vascular smooth muscle and endothelial
cells in the vessel wall and integration of a variety of stimuli at the vessel
and tissue level. The method the investigators will use in developing and
testing these models is based on representation of experimental data using
multiple theoretical hypotheses which in turn can be either confirmed or
eliminated through analysis of simulation and experimental results allowing
further hypotheses to be developed and experimental investigations to be
performed, Via this systematic approach a mechanistic understanding of how blood
flow is controlled through the synergistic operation of processes operating from
the molecular to tissue scales will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact of the Proposed Research: This project addresses two important
considerations outlined in the NSF Mission, namely to promote the progress of
science and to advance our national health prosperity. This project aims to
promote the progress of science in a broader sense by using the blood flow
regulatory system as an example of how information provided by various local
stimuli, sensed at the smallest system scale, are integrated to govern global
response of the entire system. This system along with mechanisms of
mechanotransduction and cellular communication can be readily applied to other
biological systems. Furthermore, by spanning mathematical, computational and
biological disciplines this project provides the opportunity for training the
next generation of interdisciplinary researchers. Models and analysis developed
under this project will be used in coursework for graduate students in
physiology, a discipline in desperate need of young investigators trained in
computational modeling methods. In addition undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to participate through independently funded summer research programs
at the Medical College of Wisconsin. The proposed research will advance the
national health prosperity by using these models as predictive tools to develop
novel and testable hypotheses relating to vascular dysfunction in hypertension,
a disease affecting over 25% of the U.S. population. Additional applications of
the findings from the proposed study will be relevant to microvascular
dysfunction that accompanies other diseases such as renal and cardiovascular
disease.