* 1133275
* Collaborative research: Controls affecting greenhouse gas fluxes in restored and natural tidal wetlands
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Karina Schafer, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 121,736.00

1133275 (Schafer). Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O),
methane (CH4), and carbon dioxide (CO2) are largely unknown for estuarine
wetland areas. The notion that constructed wetlands are net radiative sinks has
not been verified for coastal wetlands and many of the studies informing this
hypothesis have not considered N2O fluxes. Fluxes of nitrogen and carbon species
between estuarine wetlands, the atmosphere, and an adjacent river will be
measured along a hydroperiod-, salinity-, and mitigation gradient and scaled to
the ecosystem level. The eddy covariance technique will be the principal method
used to constrain estimates of the CO2 and CH4 fluxes. Flux chamber and
subsurface dissolved CH4, N2O, and inorganic carbon measurements combined with
modeling/scaling of these fluxes will be used to determine the N2O fluxes and
verify the accuracy of this technique by comparing CO2 and CH4 fluxes from both
techniques. Net losses of dissolved organic carbon, dissolved inorganic carbon,
and dissolved nitrogen from selected marshes via tidal flow will also be
monitored at point inlets to these marshes. Concurrent photosynthesis
measurements of Phragmites australis, a C3-plant, and Spartina spp, C4-plants,
will account for the CO2 exchange by these species. This gas-exchange is driven
by biophysical, hydrological and hydrochemical drivers. The balance between
carbon sequestration in brackish coastal wetlands and CH4 and N2O emissions from
the same systems remains unclear. Thus, monitoring and modeling the effects of
these drivers on overall greenhouse gas exchange, at the individual plant and
ecosystem-level, will help assess these controls and scale GHG fluxes in urban
tidal wetlands to the ecosystem level. A combination of bottom-up approaches,
via measurements and process-based models developed by the PIs, and top-down
approaches via eddy flux measurements will be used to tackle the different
drivers of biosphere-atmosphere GHG exchange and enable scaling to ecosystem and
regional levels. This research will enhance our understanding of coastal wetland
GHG dynamics in urban tidal marshes. These new insights will be shared with the
many visitors of the Meadowlands Environmental Center, including ca. 15,000
schoolchildren who participate in a wide range of workshops and educational
activities about urban estuaries each year. This research will also include
funding for a Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) student
to be hired for a summer internship to assist the graduate students in field
data collection and outreach activities. In addition, every four years since
2003, Meadowlands Environmental Research Institute (MERI) has collaborated with
government agencies and universities to sponsor the Meadowlands Symposium, a
gathering of over 200 research scientists, students, and professionals, to
discuss and address environmental issues of urban estuaries. The project will
also train two graduate students, one at Rutgers University and one at Princeton
University. Results from this research will be disseminated via conference
presentations and peer-reviewed journal articles. The experimental setup and
data generated will be used by both PIs to augment hands-on experiences for
students in their graduate and undergraduate experiments. This research will
yield a rich data set, maintained by MERI, that will be highly valuable to the
green-house-gas modeling scientific community&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1133074 (Jaffe). Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of nitrous oxide
(N2O), methane (CH4), and carbon dioxide (CO2) are largely unknown for estuarine
wetland areas. The notion that constructed wetlands are net radiative sinks has
not been verified for coastal wetlands and many of the studies informing this
hypothesis have not considered N2O fluxes. Fluxes of nitrogen and carbon species
between estuarine wetlands, the atmosphere, and an adjacent river will be
measured along a hydroperiod-, salinity-, and mitigation gradient and scaled to
the ecosystem level. The eddy covariance technique will be the principal method
used to constrain estimates of the CO2 and CH4 fluxes. Flux chamber and
subsurface dissolved CH4, N2O, and inorganic carbon measurements combined with
modeling/scaling of these fluxes will be used to determine the N2O fluxes and
verify the accuracy of this technique by comparing CO2 and CH4 fluxes from both
techniques. Net losses of dissolved organic carbon, dissolved inorganic carbon,
and dissolved nitrogen from selected marshes via tidal flow will also be
monitored at point inlets to these marshes. Concurrent photosynthesis
measurements of Phragmites australis, a C3-plant, and Spartina spp, C4-plants,
will account for the CO2 exchange by these species. This gas-exchange is driven
by biophysical, hydrological and hydrochemical drivers. The balance between
carbon sequestration in brackish coastal wetlands and CH4 and N2O emissions from
the same systems remains unclear. Thus, monitoring and modeling the effects of
these drivers on overall greenhouse gas exchange, at the individual plant and
ecosystem-level, will help assess these controls and scale GHG fluxes in urban
tidal wetlands to the ecosystem level. A combination of bottom-up approaches,
via measurements and process-based models developed by the PIs, and top-down
approaches via eddy flux measurements will be used to tackle the different
drivers of biosphere-atmosphere GHG exchange and enable scaling to ecosystem and
regional levels. This research will enhance our understanding of coastal wetland
GHG dynamics in urban tidal marshes. These new insights will be shared with the
many visitors of the Meadowlands Environmental Center, including ca. 15,000
schoolchildren who participate in a wide range of workshops and educational
activities about urban estuaries each year. This research will also include
funding for a Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) student
to be hired for a summer internship to assist the graduate students in field
data collection and outreach activities. In addition, every four years since
2003, Meadowlands Environmental Research Institute (MERI) has collaborated with
government agencies and universities to sponsor the Meadowlands Symposium, a
gathering of over 200 research scientists, students, and professionals, to
discuss and address environmental issues of urban estuaries. The project will
also train two graduate students, one at Rutgers University and one at Princeton
University. Results from this research will be disseminated via conference
presentations and peer-reviewed journal articles. The experimental setup and
data generated will be used by both PIs to augment hands-on experiences for
students in their graduate and undergraduate experiments. This research will
yield a rich data set, maintained by MERI, that will be highly valuable to the
green-house-gas modeling scientific community