* 1133589
* SPINCATS, an investigation of Spin Caloric Transport in magnetic Semiconductors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Joseph Heremans, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 350,000.00

Proposal # 1133589 PI: Roberto C. Myers, Co-PI Joseph P. Heremans

Like thermoelectricity is the study of the direct conversion of heat into
electricity, the new field of spin caloric transport (SPINCATS) that will be
studied here is the direct conversion of heat into magnetism, more specifically
into a magnetic polarization. Experiments will be carried out to understand how
this effect occurs by exploring its properties in various types of materials.
Particularly important questions that will be addressed are: (1) Can this effect
be reversed (i.e. is there a heat pumping activity associated with magnetic
polarization)? (2) Is the effect is accompanied by an additional dissipation of
waste heat?

The spin-Seebeck effect is a spin-polarization induced by a temperature
gradient, and was recently discovered in ferromagnetic metals, semiconductors,
and insulators. This is a new thermal transport phenomenon, the first mixed
effect that involves spins rather than charge. While the effect is real, it is
not understood. The project will lead to the fundamental understanding of the
classical and irreversible thermodynamic properties of the transport of magnetic
polarization. Three material classes will be studied, MnAs/GaMnAs, EuO and
GdGaN. Spin-Seebeck measurements as a function of position, temperature, thermal
gradient, and longitudinal conductivity will be carried out.

The broad technological impacts will come from the fact that these questions
have a direct technological impact on the use of spin polarization as the basis
for computer logic (spintronics). Indeed, one of the main limitations on the
further miniaturization of computer logic circuits is the fact that they heat
up, and waste heat management becomes overwhelming at small dimensions. While
spin-polarization indeed can be the basis of logic circuits, it is crucial to
know how much waste heat they will produce, if any. Other technological
applications may be in the recovery of waste heat or in spin-caloric heat
?engines? and refrigerators. Further broad impact arises from the training and
research experience for undergraduates and graduate students in the field of
fundamental and irreversible thermodynamics, molecular beam epitaxy growth of
compound semiconductor heterostructures, lithographic processing, electronic,
magnetic, and thermoelectric / thermomagnetic characterization. Students will be
recruited into a strongly interdisciplinary research environment spanning
Mechanical Engineering, Materials Science, and Physics.