* 1133043
* Outsourcing, Offshoring, and Performance:  A Data Set and Analysis of Production Sourcing Decisions in the Semiconductor Industry since 1990
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* John Gray, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 341,721.00

In this project the Principal Investigators will examine the causes and
consequences of outsourcing and offshoring decisions. Specifically, the research
will integrate models from organizational economics with models from
organization theory to examine a series of questions associated with the de-
integration and globalization of the semiconductor industry. By jointly
examining ownership and location decisions this research will provide precise
statements regarding the primary factors driving these critical investment
decisions and clarify important conceptual associations between exchange
characteristics (that create different coordination and control challenges) and
organizational forms (that emphasize different coordinating and control
solutions). The longitudinal nature of the examination will provide a test of
the stability of these associations. In addition, by providing evidence
regarding the influence of the alignment between the underlying attributes of
exchanges and discrete organizational solutions on innovative (e.g., measures of
the frequency of product and process innovation) and financial (e.g., return on
invested capital, return on sales) performance measures this study provides a
foundation for more integrative research on the implications of organizational
governance. Finally, by exploring the persistence of any performance advantages
(or disadvantages) associated with these decisions, the findings may suggest
heretofore unrecognized temporal tradeoffs associated with these decisions.

In terms of broader impacts, this research will contribute to both managerial
decision-making and public policy. The results may provide new insights about
the short- and long-term performance implications of offshoring and outsourcing
decisions under various conditions that will aid managers and policy makers who
are concerned with production sourcing decisions. Also, this project will
develop protocols that other scholars can use to analyze a publicly available
database of information describing financial and organizational decisions in
this industry.