* 1133671
* Cu2Zn(Sn,Ge)S4 Nanocrystal-Ink Based Solar Cells: Colloidal Nanocrystal Growth and Control of Electrically Active Traps
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Hugh Hillhouse, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

PI: Hugh W Hillhouse&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1133671&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar
energy is an abundant and promising renewable energy resource for the generation
electricity. However, the realization of solar photovoltaics (PV) for achieving
a sustainable energy future will require low-cost and earth-abundant elements
for PV materials which offer high solar energy conversion efficiency. In this
regard, Copper-Zinc-Tin-Sulfur/Selenide (CZTSSe) is emerging as top candidate PV
material, but suffers from low solar energy conversion efficiency because the
electronic trap states cannot be controlled through current PV layer fabrication
approaches. The proposed research will engineer a colloidal nanocrystal-ink
route to yield dense CZTSSe layers with low concentrations of electrically-
active traps to yield high quality optoelectronic films with low rates of non-
radiative recombination that offer potentially high efficiencies which approach
theoretical limits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the nanocrystal-ink route for
fabrication of CZTSSe layers, colloidal nanocrystals will be synthesized and
then suspended in an ink that is coated on substrate. The nanocrystal layer is
then sintered to yield a high quality dense polycrystalline photoabsorbing layer
for the solar PV cell. Strategies to control CZTSSe nanocrystal growth with
surfactants, solvents, and ligands that do not yield electrically active traps
will be identified through a suite of measurements, including small-angle x-ray
scattering (SAXS), in-situ UV-Vis-NIR spectroscopy of the nucleating and growing
nanocrystals, and photoluminescence of the nanocrystals and sintered films.
Furthermore, a unique ultrasonic spray deposition strategy will be developed to
form films with a well defined lateral composition gradient, as small
differences in the absorber layer composition can have a profound effect on the
electronic quality. The spatial photovoltaic properties will then be screened
with spatially resolved photocurrent measurements to identify favorable defect
chemistries, and operating solar cells will be fabricated and tested from the
most promising compositions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training graduate students, the
proposed activities will engage the public and K-12 students in solar energy
topics. A graduate student working through the Society of Women Engineers will
mentor local elementary school students with science fair projects. The PI work
will with the Pacific Science Center in Seattle to create clean energy
demonstrations, make presentations through the Science Cafe program, and mentor
local high school teams to prepare projects for Solar Day, which is being held
in Seattle in conjunction with the 50th Anniversary of the IEEE Photovoltaics
Specialists Conference.