* 1133722
* Collaborative Proposal:  Rheology and Flow of Geometrically Cohesive Granular Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 195,702.00

1133722 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Franklin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1133722&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Teitel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a class of granular
materials that are geometrically cohesive, e.g. a collective pile of particles
that resists tensile forces. Examples of geometrically cohesive granular
materials (GCGM) include long, thin rods (e.g. haystacks) and concave-shaped
particles (semi-circles or U-shaped staples). These materials present a rich
opportunity for basic research as well as new practical applications where
structural rigidity, lightweight, and porosity are
desired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer simulations and experiments for a variety
of particle shapes - rods, semi-circles, and U-shaped staples - will be carried
out to provide a better micro and macroscopic understanding of how particle
shape affects fluidization and solidification in GCGM. Experiments previously
carried out to characterize spherical granular media?basic rheology, tumbling,
collapse, and flow ? will be repeated for the above complex-shaped particles.
Numerical simulations using the Discrete Element Method will be used to probe
the particle-level mechanism by which geometric cohesion occurs. New
parallelization techniques involving graphics processing units (GPUs) will be
developed for simulating thousands of particles. These experimental and
computational studies will be used to explore the possible universality in
geometric cohesion, the scaling of critical lengths, and the fundamental
mechanism by which this cohesion occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
lead to increased understanding of granular materials consisting of complex
shaped particles, a common occurrence in many industrial processes. The project
also initiates collaboration between two institutions: a primarily undergraduate
institute, Rochester Institute of Technology, and an R1 research university,
University of Rochester. The collaboration will engage undergraduate and
graduate students in a rich educational experience that emphasizes communication
between experimentalists and computational researchers. Simulations and table-
top experiments will allow undergraduates to engage in cutting edge research at
both institutions.