* 1133813
* Fundamental Studies of Graphene Solutions: Exfoliation, Dispersion, and Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Daniel Blankschtein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 332,001.00

1133813 Blakschtein

Intellectual Merit. In this project, the investigators seek to understand the
origin of the interactions between suspended graphene with surrounding
solvent/surfactant molecules via large-scale molecular dynamics simulations.
They will quantify these interactions by calculating the potential of mean force
between graphene sheets in solvents or aqueous surfactant solutions to establish
a library of thermodynamic properties for dispersed graphene sheets. A
theoretical framework that combines molecular dynamics simulations and kinetic
theories of colloid aggregation will be developed to further design optimal
solvent/surfactant molecules which can stabilize graphene dispersions
efficiently. Experimentally, they will produce layer-controlled graphene
dispersions using ionic graphite intercalation compounds (GICs). By carefully
controlling the intercalation kinetics, the PIs will synthesize high-quality
Stage-2 and Stage-3 GICs, which are expected to be excellent precursors for
bilayer and trilayer graphene dispersions. Systematic characterizations of
graphene dispersions will be carried out to optimize the exfoliation process
such that the produced dispersions are sufficiently concentrated, and that the
graphene flakes are large enough, for conventional photolithography in which
they will be deposited on a target substrate. Advanced separation techniques
will also be developed to produce monodisperse bilayer and trilayer graphene
solutions. The fundamental and practical insights gained from the proposed
modeling and experiments will be used to guide the fabrication of electronic
devices. The combined expertise of the two PIs across colloid science,
engineering nanotechnology, computer simulations, and molecular modeling will
enable rapid progress towards engineering graphene solutions for device
manufacturing.

The development of an advanced technique to exfoliate graphene in liquid phases
will greatly increase the capability to produce AB-stacked bilayer and trilayer
graphene for practical applications, such as fabricating electronic devices. In
addition, fundamental insights into the interactions between graphene and other
molecules will also contribute to the overall fundamental and practical of the
kinetic behavior of graphene in the liquid phase. Ultimately, such knowledge can
lead to the rational design of better media for graphene dispersions.

Broader Impacts. Due to their distinct electronic properties, stacked bilayer
and trilayer graphene have shown extraordinary potential for next-generation
optoelectronic and microprocessor applications. These promising materials,
nevertheless, require new synthesis methods to effectively control the number of
AB-stacked layers through graphite exfoliation and advanced processing
techniques. Solution graphene dispersions are promising raw materials for
printable electronics and nanocomposites, and most importantly, this approach
represents the only possible route at this time for the mass-production of AB
stacked bi- and tri-layer graphene. However, since the first graphene solution
was reported in 2008, there are still many unanswered questions and technical
bottlenecks that hinder the progress of this field. Although experiments have
shown that the distribution of graphene layer numbers highly depends on the
choice of solvents or surfactants used, very little is known about the molecular
origin of the interactions between graphene and solvent/surfactant molecules,
including correlating these interactions with the colloidal stability of the
graphene solution. In addition, regardless of the methods used to produce
solution-phase graphene, its size, shape, and number of stacked layers are all
polydisperse. Engineering approaches that can directly control the size and the
stacking geometry (by narrowing their distributions) of the exfoliated graphene
flakes will be developed.

The modeling and experimental advances made will be incorporated into courses
and workshops at MIT that will expose a larger scientific audience to the
fundamentals of graphene dispersion and stabilization in liquid phases, as well
as to modeling these phenomena at the molecular level. The students involved in
the proposed research at both the graduate an undergraduate level will gain
intellectually and professionally from the integrated experimental/modeling
research proposed here.