* 1133422
* Collaborative Research: Reducing the Burden of Global Materials Manufacture: Enabling Increased Use of Secondary and Renewable Materials in Production Planning
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Gabrielle Gaustad, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 79,237.00

1133286 Kirchain/1133422 Gaustad&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce a
systematic mapping of relative performance of deterministic and several forms of
uncertainty-aware stochastic batch planning models for a range of production
contexts. Specific contexts to be explored include at least three forms of batch
quality performance functions (linear, power-law, and logarithmic) and four
distributional forms of raw material (RM) quality (Lognormal, Max Extrema,
Gamma, or Student's t). Additionally, this research will provide both analytical
and quantitative case analysis that supports the economic and resource
efficiency value of diversification of interdependence within industrial
ecosystems. For three planned industrial case analyses, this research will
quantify the distributional nature of RM quality and the current and potential
ability to utilize secondary and renewable raw materials (SRRMs) while examining
the impact of the number of raw materials attributes. The educational component
of this research seeks to develop methods and case studies to incorporate
sustainability into engineering education. These course materials will be
integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses on industrial ecology and
sustainable firm strategy taught by the PIs at MIT and RIT. The ultimate goal is
to provide students with the knowledge-base to improve their engineering
decisions by understanding how their decisions will impact society. The outcomes
of these efforts will be shared with the broader academic community through
forums such as the Center for Sustainable Production at RIT and MIT?s
OpenCourseWare, a free and accessible web-based publication of much of MIT?s
course content. The post-docs employed within this project will receive
mentoring through a structured program to improve teaching, presentation,
publication, and fund-raising skills. The broader impact of this work stems from
the collaborations it necessitates between industry and academia; this
collaboration enables real-world implementation tests to ensure that the
research leads to actionable methods not just abstract concepts. The outcomes of
the work will be widely disseminated to audiences outside of traditional
academic communities because of the industrial partnerships employed in the
research. Overall, the outcomes of the work are targeted to benefit society by
developing tools that seek to reduce the environmental impact of the process
industries and create sustainable material systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1133422
(Gaustad). This research will produce a systematic mapping of relative
performance of deterministic and several forms of uncertainty-aware stochastic
batch planning models for a range of production contexts. Specific contexts to
be explored include at least three forms of batch quality&lt;br/&gt;performance
functions (linear, power-law, and logarithmic) and four distributional forms of
raw material (RM) quality (Lognormal, Max Extrema, Gamma, or Student's t).
Additionally, this research will provide both analytical and quantitative case
analysis that supports the economic and resource efficiency value of
diversification of interdependence within industrial ecosystems. For three
planned industrial case analyses, this research will quantify the distributional
nature of RM quality and the current and potential ability to utilize secondary
and renewable raw materials (SRRMs) while examining the impact of the number of
raw materials attributes. The educational component of this research seeks to
develop methods and case studies to incorporate sustainability into engineering
education. These course materials will be integrated into graduate and
undergraduate courses on industrial ecology and sustainable firm strategy taught
by the PIs at MIT and RIT. The ultimate goal is to provide students with the
knowledge-base to improve their engineering decisions by understanding how their
decisions will impact society. The outcomes of these efforts will be shared with
the broader academic community through forums such as the Center for Sustainable
Production at RIT and MIT?s OpenCourseWare, a free and accessible web-based
publication of much of MIT?s course content. The post-docs employed within this
project will receive mentoring through a structured program to improve teaching,
presentation, publication, and fund-raising skills. The broader impact of this
work stems from the collaborations it necessitates between industry and
academia; this collaboration enables real-world implementation tests to ensure
that the research leads to actionable methods not just abstract concepts. The
outcomes of the work will be widely disseminated to audiences outside of
traditional academic communities because of the industrial partnerships employed
in the research. Overall, the outcomes of the work are targeted to benefit
society by developing tools that seek to reduce the environmental impact of the
process industries and create sustainable material systems.