* 1133239
* GOALI: Efficiency Enhancement of Solar Cells Through Electronic Structure Design
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Jing Wang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,998.00

PI: Rudiger Schlaf&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1133239&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this GOALI award is to precisely engineer solar cell interfaces for
improved solar energy conversion efficiency through atomic layer deposition
(ALD) processes. The proposed research has the potential develop scalable
manufacturing processes for ALD dipole layer coatings that precisely tailor the
electronic properties of solar cell structures for increased solar energy
conversion. This approach will facilitate further development of ALD
methodologies for large-area coatings, which are necessary for the photovoltaics
(PV) industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the fabrication of solar PV
materials, ALD will be used to grow conformal metal oxide dipole layers at
semiconductor interfaces with controlled atomic layer thickness and uniformity,
in order to adjust the band alignment for optimized charge transfer or blocking.
This process has the potential to controllably enhance the photocurrent and cell
voltage. Photoemission spectroscopy (PES) and inverse photoemission spectroscopy
(IPES) will be used to characterize each deposited dipole layer in situ, so that
the evolution of both the valence and conduction bands density of states can be
followed during the ALD process. These measurements will yield a detailed
picture of the evolution of the electronic structure of ALD dipole layers and
interfaces as they are grown. Once the dipole layers can be grown reliably,
solar cell structures with inserted dipoles will be investigated, and the
performance changes will be correlated with electronic structure modification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI research
is a collaborative effort between the University of South Florida (USF) and
Novellus, and major semiconductor fabrication equipment supplier. USF offers
expertise in electronic structure and surface science of semiconductor PV
interfaces, whereas the industrial partner Novellus offers expertise in ALD.
This collaboration will focus the proposed research so that 1) industry and
manufacturing relevant materials systems will be investigated, and 2) processes
and intellectual property (IP) developed under this grant will find applications
in industrial production settings. In addition to the potential benefits to the
photovoltaics industry, the proposed activities will also train students in an
industrial context. Specifically, participating graduate students will visit
Novellus as summer interns, and two undergraduate students are expected to
participate in the proposed research through REU supplements.