* 1133016
* UC Berkeley - Ewha Womans University Research Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* George Smoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2014
* USD 34,875.00

Korean Collaborators at the Ewha Womans University have expertise in fabricating
an unusual type of MEMS (microelectro-mechanical) mirror array with a very large
angular travel. We have expertise in astrophysical instrumentation and
investigations. In order to apply the MEMS micromirror devices to astrophysics,
we need to work with our collaborators in Korea to demonstrate that the devices
can be scaled up in size, and refined to improve specific performance goals
relevant to astrophysics observations, including the PSF spread. We therefore
propose to work with our Korean collaborators to move our projects forward to
the formal instrument proposal stage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will make new astrophysics
instrumentation possible. One application will allow pointed observations of
astrophysical transients at least three orders of magnitude faster than ever
before, opening up a completely new parameter space for inquiry. An obvious
application is the study of optical emission from gamma-ray bursts, where
observations of fast-peaking optical emission would be greatly advanced. A
second application would bring a radical new technology to bear on multi-object
and integral field spectroscopy, offering an alternative to previous fiber optic
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCB/SSL and
Ewha will work together to build up new experimental astrophysics knowledge at
Ewha, particularly among their post-doctoral researchers and students, while our
UCB post-doctoral researchers and students will receive training and hands-on
experience with MEMS mirror devices and instrumentation. Our group has
collaborative education programs with exceptional engineering students at
various universities and colleges in our area. These students will participate
in our activities, including the development and operation of our instruments,
in order to broaden participation of this student population in astrophysics,
space research, and international collaborations. This student population is
largely made up of groups that are underrepresented and underserved in
astrophysics, space research, and international collaborations, including a
large fraction of Hispanic students.