* 1133281
* Volatilization dynamics in wetland systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Peter Jaffe, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 310,404.00

1133281 PI Jaffe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wetlands, both natural and designed, can
be a cost-effective tool for the remediation of groundwater contaminated with
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that discharge into these wetlands. The
widespread use of wetlands for remediation has been hindered by uncertainties
surrounding the rates and time scales of remediation mechanisms. Volatilization
is perhaps the least understood of these removal mechanisms. Initial laboratory
and modeling results suggest that volatilization represents a major removal
pathway, with the strength and mechanism of volatilization highly dependent on
the physiochemical properties of the target compound. Our understanding of the
physiochemical drivers of volatilization pathways and rates remain incomplete,
however, precluding any predictive modeling techniques to accurately estimate
VOC fluxes from wetlands. Questions of fundamental importance to the transport
of volatile compounds in saturated shallow, vegetated soils must be addressed in
order to close this knowledge gap: What is the balance between gas-phase and
transpiration-driven transport of VOCs through wetland plants? To what extent
will plant-mediated volatilization vary as a function of vegetation type? How
can plant uptake of volatile organic compounds be described appropriately with
predictive models, and how can these models be validated in the field? To what
extent do volatile compounds partition into subsurface bubbles, how does bubble
ebullition contribute to atmospheric fluxes of VOCs, and what is the interplay
between bubble dynamics and plant enhanced gas transfer? The PI will perform a
comprehensive study into the fundamental dynamics of volatilization through
emergent wetland plants. Measurements that will span multiple scales from single
stems in controlled experiments to a field pilot study will be carried out. The
experimental program will include: (1) systematic laboratory hydroponic studies
using multiple volatile tracers and single stems to probe the fundamental
relationships between the physiochemical properties of a compound and the rates
and mechanisms for its volatilization; (2) greenhouse mesocosm studies to
validate predictive models for phytovolatilization in saturated soil conditions
and examine interspecies variability in contaminant removal rates; and (3) a
pilot field test in a freshwater wetland to quantify spatial and temporal
heterogeneities in rates of VOC removal from wetland systems. An important
objective of this research is the development of a single-well ?push-pull?
technique that will be developed in greenhouse mesocosms and implemented in the
field, providing a novel and valuable tool for the assessment of volatilization
rates in diverse wetland ecosystems where other mechanisms to determine gas
exchange between the rhizosphere of wetland systems and the atmosphere are not
feasible. In terms of the broader impacts, the proposed research will address
fundamental questions concerning transport of chemicals in saturated soils and
in vegetation that have implications across the earth sciences. Proposed
technological innovations in measuring groundwater-atmosphere gas exchange will
have multidisciplinary applications including the design and management of
wetlands and assessment of attenuation in natural wetlands. This work will fund
one Ph.D. student and contribute to the education of other graduate students in
the PI?s laboratory and laboratories of outside collaborators, including Rutgers
University and the Meadowlands Research Institute. Undergraduate students from
different schools will be involved via an ongoing REU program. This REU program
has been successful in recruiting minority and female students. Undergraduates
will be involved via Senior Thesis Research. Outreach to the community is
planned via participation in QUEST, a science institute for upper elementary
school teachers taught by Princeton University faculty and staff, as well as by
participation with the educational programs of the Stony Brook-Millstone
Watershed Association, which also engages in active dialogue with municipal
officials, citizens, and businesses concerning decisions that affect the local
environment. Results of this research will be incorporated in undergraduate
(Environmental Engineering Laboratory) and graduate (Water Quality Modeling)
courses, and will be disseminated to the scientific community via presentations
at National Conferences and peer-reviewed journal publications.