* 1133452
* Travel Grant for International Symposium on Spatial and Temporal Databases (SSTD), 2011
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Shashi Shekhar, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

To encourage more US-based participation in geo-spatial research, this support
will enable 20 promising graduate and undergraduate students in computer science
the necessary financial support to attend one of the field's premier forums, the
International Symposium on Spatial and Temporal Databases (SSTD), to be held
this year in Minneapolis August 24-26. The biennial event showcases cutting-edge
research spanning a vast array of topics and attracts researchers, developers,
and end users around the world from academia, industry, and government. The
engagement and subsequent education of the next generation of scientists and
engineers working with spatial and temporal data will have a significant impact
on the lives of ordinary people everywhere. In addition to improvements in
vehicular and various forms of public transportation, security mechanisms
featuring unprecedented sophistication will be made possible by enhanced
intelligence gathering via spatial analysis of satellite imagery, and
macroscopic ecological health will be more accurately modeled with more
informative uses of spatio-temporal data. Promoting this conference
participation by U.S. based graduate and undergraduate students is important for
helping the United States to maintain a major foothold in the exciting products,
services and ideas to come out of the field of spatial and temporal data.