* 1133162
* Early-Career Participants at the 3rd International Conference on NeuroProsthetic Devices, Sydney Australia, November 26-27, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Victor Pikov, Huntington Medical Research Institutes
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 03/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

1133162, Pikov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICNPD-2011 conference will bring
together international investigators of all levels to Sidney, Australia in order
to discuss recent research findings and to establish new collaborations in the
new and exciting field of neural prosthetic devices. The conference will take
place on November 26-27, 2011. It will be preceded by a series of online
discussions by the organizing committee, resulting in the selection of several
key innovation challenges in the field that will be addressed at the conference.
This proposal aims to expand the participation of junior US researchers at the
conference by subsidizing their travel costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The overall conference theme will be the technological and
biological challenges in translating the neural prosthetics into clinic. There
are multiple research groups worldwide involved in development and testing of
neuroprosthetic implants for a variety of neurological disorders and similar
difficulties often arise in selecting biocompatible encapsulation materials, in
applying modern wireless communication technology, in better understanding of
clinical and user needs, etc. Several discussion panels will be held at the
conference to stimulate the interaction of participants in seeking the solutions
for these prevailing challenges, rather than simply reporting on the progress
from the laboratories. An additional emphasis of the conference will be upon
identifying the areas of possible collaborations between the US and Australian
scientists and finding the mechanisms for jump-starting these collaborations.
There are multiple opportunities for the researchers to initiate productive
collaborative projects in the development and testing of devices for the hearing
and vision loss, muscle paralysis, Parkinson?s disease, epilepsy, and other
neurological disorders. The conference described in this proposal is one that
will bring together established investigators and early-career researchers just
entering this field. To enable a focused exchange at the discussion panels
during the two-day meeting, there will be a series of brainstorming online
discussions preceding the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The conference can inform the NSF about new developments in the
rapidly growing neural prosthetics field. A specific goal of the NSF that will
be aided by the conference is the establishment of new programs which emphasize
integration of neural technology research and medical device industry. The
conference will provide a good opportunity to highlight best practices in this
area and to bring lessons from this experience to the NSF initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference participants will be selected to represent
a broad spectrum of interested participants from academia, national
laboratories, government, and industry. Recruitment of participants representing
researchers at all stages in their careers from well established to new
researchers just starting their career will be actively pursued. A special
effort will be made to increase the representation of women and underrepresented
minorities at the conference. The conference program, poster and talk abstracts
will be posted on the conference website as well as on Frontiers Conferences, a
premier online depository for the conference proceedings in
the&lt;br/&gt;neuroscience-related fields (www.frontiersin.org/conferences), to
serve as a practical educational tool. In addition, the selected short papers,
submitted to the conference, will be peer-reviewed and published as a special
issue of the open-access journal Frontiers in Neuroscience.