* 1133013
* US - Chile workshop and field visit:  Late Quaternary alluvial fan systems in semiarid Chile: evolution and paleoclimate linkages.
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Eric McDonald, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2012
* USD 23,969.00

This U.S. - Chile award will support a small workshop on alluvial fan research,
accompanied with a field visit to the semiarid region of central Chile. The
conditions under which climate variability in arid and semiarid regions affects
sediment transfer and deposition from hillslopes to alluvial landforms are well
documented in only a few regions in the world. In order to successfully expand
knowledge on this multidisciplinary subject, research collaborations in
paleoenvironmental reconstruction, paleoclimate, pedology and geomorphology are
needed. This project will link complementary research expertise in Chile
(Universidad del Norte, Universidad de La Serena, and Universidad de Chile) and
the US (Desert Research Institute, DRI). Additionally, this new collaboration
will link alluvial processes and landforms to Quaternary climate variability and
result in the development of joint research projects. DRI will contribute
expertise on soil and chronological analyses of alluvial landforms in arid
regions around the world, while the Chilean researchers will contribute
extensive experience on South America paleoclimate and geomorphology. The
workshop will be organized by Dr. Jose Antinao from DRI in collaboration with
Drs. Antonio Maldonado, Rodrigo Riquelme, and Gabriel Vargas from Universidad de
la Serena, Universidad del Norte, and Universidad de Chile, respectively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary nature of the proposed workshop and
field visit will promote field-based interactions between researchers and
students from both countries and will involve one early-career PI and one
graduate student from the US. Furthermore, this project will allow for a broader
testing of conceptual geomorphic models for alluvial fan evolution. Currently
most of these models are derived from Northern Hemisphere sites. A more precise
calibration of variables involved in these models will have a positive impact in
our ability to predict effects of future global change in arid and semiarid
alluvial landscapes. Improved forecasts of the combined hydrologic, ecological
and geomorphic response of hillslopes, and associated alluvial systems, are of
high societal relevance. They allow for efficient planning of resource
allocation and mitigation of natural hazards, which benefits a large, vulnerable
population across the globe. This workshop is supported by the Office of
International Science and Engineering, Americas Program and the Directorate for
Geosciences, Division of Earth Sciences, Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics
Program.