* 1133563
* Rational Engineering of Semiconductor Nanowire Crystal Structure for Next Generation Energy Conversion Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Michael Filler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2014
* USD 275,201.00

Proposal Number: 1133563 PI: Filler, Michael A.

Intellectual Merit: The overarching research objective of this NSF proposal is
to test the hypothesis that precise control of nanowire surface chemistry during
growth can enable the rational engineering of semiconductor nanowire crystal
structure. Successful validation of this hypothesis would improve the prospects
for fabricating highly efficient nanowire-based photovoltaic and thermoelectric
energy conversion devices. As opposed to the trial-and-error approaches that
dominate the field, a custom-built in-situ infrared spectroscopic experimental
platform will be utilized during these studies to fundamentally interrogate the
chemistry that governs bottom-up semiconductor nanowire synthesis and structure.
The combination of an ultrahigh vacuum growth environment and in-situ
measurement is transformative in its ability to limit nanowire degradation and
access a level of chemical detail not previously achievable. It will be possible
to clearly distinguish which surface species or combinations of surface species,
as well as what specific bonding structures, most strongly influence nanowire
structure. Si nanowires serve as a technologically relevant model system and
will be the focus of this work, but key findings will be broadly applicable to a
range of important semiconductor nanomaterials. The specific objectives are
three fold: (1) determine the role of surface-bound hydrogen on nanowire crystal
orientation, (2) control nanowire crystal structure through the organic
functionalization of nanowire sidewalls during growth, and (3) modulate nanowire
structure as a function of axial position to create novel superstructures.
Results from these objectives will collectively serve as the basis for
semiconductor nanowire chemistry-structure and structure-property relationships
that are essential for realizing devices with advanced performance. Preliminary
data has demonstrated the importance of surface chemistry during nanowire growth
and provides a strong foundation from which to begin this research effort.

Broader Impact: Breakthrough photovoltaic and thermoelectric technologies that
could be widely deployed could transform our energy systems and reduce their
carbon footprint. The insight gained during this work will greatly accelerate
the design of nanoscale components for next generation devices, making a
significant contribution to the United States declared goal of reducing carbon
emissions over the coming years. Although this effort will be focused on energy
conversion, advancements are expected to have broad applicability in a range of
fields including photonics, electronics, quantum computation, and
electrochemistry. In addition, students at all levels of STEM education, as well
as the general public, will be prepared to intelligently discuss and navigate
the emerging renewable energy landscape. The use of the Internet and social
networking tools will directly integrate key outreach efforts into the daily
activities of a broad, multidisciplinary audience. In particular, the Prof.
Solar blog will be used to disseminate recent scientific and technological
advances via short video vignettes produced in a format that leverages everyday
experiences in an educational and entertaining manner. The PI is also involved
in local outreach activities that focus on underrepresented minority students at
the K-12 level. These efforts will be continued and broadened through speaking
engagements and hands-on scientific demonstrations. In addition, Georgia Tech
undergraduate students will have opportunities to participate in research
internships.