* 1133268
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Social and Political Role of Domestic Architecture in Chachapoyas,Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Alan Kolata, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Alan Kolata, Anna Guengerich will map, excavate,
and analyze artifacts from the site of Monte Viudo in northern Peru in order to
determine the significance of the unusual residential architecture of ancient
Chachapoya societies. Monte Viudo was a mountaintop settlement that was occupied
by people of the Chachapoya culture, which flourished between AD 800 and 1500 in
a rugged environment located between the Andes and Amazon. Although some of the
most spectacular archaeological discoveries in Peru in recent decades have come
from this region, these societies remain little understood. This project will be
the first to focus entirely on a single, non-monumental settlement site, and in
so doing will contribute important basic data on political, social, and economic
characteristics of Chachapoya societies and on the daily lives of their
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the unusual characteristics of
Chachapoya homes will contribute more broadly to the study by social scientists
of the relationship between households, politics, and architecture, and will
help refine the archaeological principles used to identify and understand
residences in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, research will
investigate how the attributes of residential architecture at Monte Viudo were
related to ritual and political activities within this community: how did these
behaviors shape the construction of residences, and how did these buildings in
turn continue to shape the activities that took place within and beyond them?
The architecture of this site, like many Chachapoya sites, consists entirely of
circular stone structures that scholars have generally interpreted as houses,
but no researchers have yet carried out excavations to test this inference. In
fact, the artistic elaboration of these buildings, the expert techniques of
their construction, and the absence of public architecture or even open spaces,
suggest that circular residential structures may have played an important role
in society that extended beyond the normal definition of a "house." Research
will compare architectural features and the kinds of craft production, food
preparation, consumption, and ritual activities that occurred in different
circular structures, in contrast to other kinds of spaces at this site; this
should reveal whether residential spaces were important locations for politics
and ritual, as well as domestic activities. Understanding the unusual
characteristics of Chachapoya homes will contribute more broadly to the study by
social scientists of the relationship between households, politics, and
architecture, and will help refine the archaeological principles used to
identify and understand residences in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project are both local and international. First, it will develop
infrastructure and intellectual resources for future research in Chachapoyas. By
including graduate and university students from North America and Peru, the
project will contribute to the formal education of future experts. Including
local residents in the process of data recovery and interpretation will equip
them to share this knowledge at the community level. Many of these individuals
already work as local tour guides, and archaeological experience will enable
them to serve as scientifically informed experts able to educate Peruvian and
international visitors. Results will be disseminated in nearby towns through
presentations at schools and community gatherings, and will be published in
journal articles in the U.S. and Peru, in conference presentations, and as part
of a public website.