* 1133484
* Engineered Applications of Carbon Nanotubes in Reverse Osmosis Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2015
* USD 355,553.00

PI: Chinedum Osuji&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1133484&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decline in water quantity and quality has
accelerated the adoption of desalination as a reliable source of potable water.
Widespread implementation of membrane-based desalination technologies, however,
is constrained by the high energy requirement. A fundamental redesign of reverse
osmosis (RO) membranes will be needed to meet water resource needs in an energy
constrained environment. The overarching aim of the proposed research is to
reduce the energy demands of membrane-based desalination by increasing membrane
permeability and reducing fouling. This project exploits the unique properties
of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in the design of novel RO membranes with high flux
and resistance to biofouling. &lt;br/&gt;The first objective is to improve
permeability and reduce biofouling of conventional thin-film composite (TFC) RO
membranes by incorporating single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) into the thin-
film barrier. They hypothesize that SWNTs will perturb the polymer packing
structure of the thin-film polyamide layer, thereby enhancing the permeability
of conventional TFC membranes. The antimicrobial characteristics of SWNTs also
offer novel strategies for the prevention of membrane biofouling. The proposed
research will optimize SWNT incorporation into TFC RO membranes, evaluate the
impact of SWNTs on membrane permeability and selectivity, quantify microbial
inactivation at the SWNT-TFC membrane surface, and elucidate the mechanistic
pathways for permeability enhancement and bacterial cytotoxicity. The second
objective of the proposed research is to fabricate an aligned SWNT membrane.
Theory predicts high flux and high salt rejection through aligned CNT membranes,
but current fabrication techniques cannot produce membranes that meet
theoretical requirements for desalination through a size exclusion mechanism.
Post-synthesis alignment of SWNTs using liquid crystalline agents will yield a
membrane with SWNT diameters small enough to reject hydrated salt ions. Their
research will involve the preparation and characterization of SWNTs,
optimization and characterization of the liquid crystalline system,
demonstration of SWNT alignment, characterization of aligned SWNT membranes, and
optimization of membrane porosity.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop
the scientific base for the fabrication of robust RO membranes with high
permeability and reduced biofouling propensity. These next generation RO
membranes will substantially reduce the energy use and cost of desalination,
thereby providing a viable avenue for augmenting and diversifying global water
supplies via seawater desalination. Knowledge gained from this research can be
readily applied to the development of highly selective carbon nanotube-based
ultrafiltration and nanofiltration membranes that can be used in biomedical,
chemical, analytical, and environmental separation processes.&lt;br/&gt;The
majority of requested funds will be applied toward the training of a doctoral
student on an emerging and interdisciplinary research topic. The student will
have the opportunity to serve as a TA on a newly developed Polymer Physics
course that features a lab module on experimental techniques heavily utilized in
the proposed work. Additionally, two undergraduate students will carry out their
senior theses research as part of this project. Both the PI and co-PI are
committed to recruitment of underrepresented groups in science and will further
that goal in this project. The proposed work will be used as the basis for the
design and implementation of high school science projects, as part of the New
Haven Science Fair for students and a Research Experience for Science Teachers
(REScT) program. Critically, these outreach efforts advance K-12 science
education and increase awareness of water quality and environmental issues.
Beyond the research and educational benefits, the proposed work has the
potential for profound, tangible societal impact, as it directly addresses the
advancement of science and development of technology to tackle a pressing
concern.