* 1133244
* US-Poland Workshop: Interfacial Phenomena at the Nanoscale: Fluids and Soft Matter, Poznan, Poland, June 19-23, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Igal Szleifer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 85,744.00

#1133244&lt;br/&gt;Szleifer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an International Travel
grant that provides support for U.S. participants to attend a four day
Conference on "Interfacial Phenomena at the Nanoscale: Fluids and Soft Matter,"
to be held in Poznan, Poland on June 19-23, 2012, at the Polish Academy of Arts
and Sciences. The proposed Conference is a follow-up to and builds upon three
earlier and successful Polish/USA Conferences held in Poznan (2006), Gdansk
(2008) and Krakow (2010). The purpose of the Conference is to encourage closer
scientific contacts and long-term research collaboration between researchers in
this area between the U.S. and Poland. The Workshop will involve 17 U.S.
participants and 15-20 from Poland, with a balance between junior, mid-career
and senior researchers, and between experiment and theory, with similar or
complementary interests on the two sides. In addition, young researchers in
these areas from Poland will attend the meeting, present poster papers, and
interact with the more senior participants throughout the meeting. The
conference travel award also provides funds to support follow-up visits to the
US by Polish Researchers to promote research collaborations initiated through
contacts made at the Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic of the Conference will represent cutting
edge research in the areas of soft and hard materials, bio-materials, polymers,
polymerization, self assembly, complex fluids, microemulsions, surface science,
interfacial phenomena, catalysis, colloids, adsorption, adhesion, rheology,
computational nanoscience, and thin films. The participants are leading
researchers in these areas, and the objective is to provide a survey of current
research in these areas and to explore fruitful future possibilities for
research collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The Conference is
expected to strengthen existing and initiate new individual and institutional
collaboration among the participants. For example, we know that some US
participants have ongoing collaboration (Professors Grzybowski, Gubbins,
Matyjaszewski, and Radosz). These and other participants plan to visit other
academic centers in Poland (for example, Krakow, Gdansk, Warszawa) to discuss
future projects. Such projects will enrich the research and education
infrastructure of both countries. The project budget includes funds for travel
by young Polish researchers to the U.S. during the year following the conference
to facilitate collaborations initiated at the conference. These funds will be
available to graduate students and postdocs.