* 1133082
* Particulate-based Imaging Amperometry for Rapid Measurement of Current Dist ribution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Paul Sides, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 329,998.00

1133082&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sides&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The core
hypothesis of this project is that colloidal particles can function as probes of
local electrochemical current density. The essence of the innovation is using
scattered light from colloidal particles during polarization of electrodes. In
experiments, colloidal particles will be scattered across test electrodes used
in electrochemical cells. Laser radiation introduced at an angle of incidence
greater than a critical angle will create evanescent radiation proximate to the
electrodes. The particles scatter these evanescent waves as visible light. The
particles respond dynamically to local current density, which means that the
particles transduce the local current density to light having an intensity that
can be measured. Theory will convert the light intensity to a determination of
current density. When ensembles of particles are used, the method creates an
image of current density on the electrode. Imaging the scattering of a 2D
ensemble of particles on a composition spread alloy working electrode during
polarization of the film will reveal the regions of high electrochemical
activity over the entire sample within minutes, with a resolution of areas as
small, or perhaps smaller, than 100 microns on a side. This will mean that a
library made from a sample one square centimeter in area will have 104 samples
in its collection. The project focuses on oxygen evolution from aqueous solution
as the test electrochemical reaction. This reaction is highly irreversible and
has been of considerable interest for decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
significance and importance: There is broad interest in developing high
throughput methods for accelerating research. This project focuses on
development of a high throughput method for investigation of an electrochemical
reaction that is critical to enabling the supply of hydrogen as a fuel. The
project will make possible a thousandfold increase in productivity in the search
for new electrode materials for carrying out the splitting of water to produce
hydrogen and pure oxygen. The concept of imaging amperometry might be the best
solution to this problem; if so, the method will be adopted at other
laboratories and/or a scientific instrument will be developed by an
electrochemical instrument company or a startup. The proposed research has the
potential for a large payoff in capability in addition to the richness of its
research in education.