* 1133167
* Graph-theoretic methods for reduction and control of complex process networks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Prodromos Daoutidis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2016
* USD 317,988.00

Proposal Number: 1133167&lt;br/&gt;PI: Daoutidis, Prodromos
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex process networks, consisting of interconnections
of numerous reaction, separation and heat exchange units, represent a key
feature of modern chemical and energy plants. Controlling such networks
effectively, especially in the context of transitions between different steady
states, is a challenging problem. The intricate dynamics and model complexity
that such networks exhibit, make conventional decentralized control design
inadequate and fully centralized control design approaches impractical. Despite
some progress in analyzing simple networks and designing distributed or
hierarchical controllers for such networks, a rigorous yet scalable model
simplification and controller design framework for complex networks is currently
lacking. The goals of the this research are therefore: (i) to develop scalable
methods for model reduction and decomposition of complex process networks, (ii)
to develop concrete control algorithms for transition control of such networks,
and (iii) to apply the developed methods to representative systems from the
process and energy industries, including complex thermally coupled distillation
trains, cryogenic systems and integrated reformer - fuel cell
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The main novelty of this work
is the introduction of graph theory as a framework for analyzing the structural
properties of such complex networks, responsible for their ensemble behavior.
Specifically, their modular structure lends itself to a graph theoretic
analysis, whereby weak and strong connections between process units arising from
time scale separation or other connectivity properties can be identified from
structural information; these can be used either for model reduction (when a
reduced model does exist, e.g. owing to a slow, low-order network dynamics) or
model decomposition in the more general case where the ensemble behavior is
captured through the aggregate behavior of some distinct, loosely coupled
community structures within the network. For both cases, scalability to large
scale networks will be enabled by using powerful graph-theoretic algorithms for
automating the model simplification and possibly the controller design
procedure. A software tool that will achieve this will be built within an object
oriented programming framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Controlling
complex, integrated plants is a critical link to the economic viability, and the
energy and environmental sustainability of the chemical and energy supply
chains. This research will develop computational tools that will enable the
development of such control methods in an automated and scalable fashion. This
analysis framework can also be applied to complex networks from other
disciplines, such as complex reaction pathways, ecological networks and social
networks. The research will provide a setting for the effective training of
graduate students in fundamental research cutting across mathematics and
control, with a timely and important application component. The students will
also interact with industrial partners through summer internships. The research
results will be broadly disseminated through publications and presentations, and
through their integration into the teaching of process control. The software
that will be developed will further enhance the infrastructure for research and
education.