* 1133426
* Nanoparticle Transport in the Brain
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* William Olbricht, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,566.00

1133426 PI: Olbricht

The motion and transport of nanoparticles in the brain cortex will be examined
experimentally and analytically. Two-photon excited fluorescence (2PEF)
microscopy will be used to visualize and track in real time the motion of
nanoparticles infused directly into the cortex of live, anesthetized rats.
Recent evidence suggests that nanoparticles travel rapidly along perivascular
spaces -- thin annular regions surrounding cortical blood vessels -- and may be
propelled through perivascular spaces by heartbeat-driven pulsations of blood
vessel walls. The project comprises three approaches. First, 2PEF microscopy
will be used to measure the velocities of infused nanoparticles inside the
perivascular space and outside the perivascular space in the rat cortex. Effects
of particle size and heartbeat rate on these velocities will be determined, and
comparisons will be made between rigid nanoparticles and deformable liposomes.
Second, the motion of nanoparticles will be studied in vitro in thin neural
tissue slices to provide data that support and extend the in vivo measurements.
Third, an analysis of the hydrodynamics in the perivascular space will be
carried out to help interpret data and examine effects that are difficult to
test experimentally. Many new therapeutic compounds that have been developed in
recent years to treat serious brain disorders, including cancer, are difficult
to deliver to brain tissue. Most drugs administered intravenously are prevented
from entering brain tissue by the blood-brain barrier. Convection-enhanced
delivery (CED) is an innovative method that circumvents the blood-brain barrier
by infusing drugs and drug-laden nanoparticles through a fine needle or catheter
that is inserted into the brain through a small hole in the skull. Although the
method is promising, it has proven difficult in practice to predict the spatial
distribution of infused drugs and nanoparticles or to guarantee that they reach
targeted tissue. For example, in CED therapy for brain gliomas, the most
prevalent form of brain cancer, the drugs often do not penetrate far enough into
the brain to reach malignant cells that readily infiltrate healthy tissue. To
optimize CED therapy, it is essential to understand the fundamental mechanisms
of nanoparticle transport in brain tissue. The experiments and analysis carried
out in this project will provide results that researchers and clinicians can use
in planning CED strategies and that scientists and engineers can use in
developing computer-based models to predict the distribution of infused drugs
throughout the brain.