* 1133366
* A Theoretical and Computational Framework for Linking Tree form and Function to Forest Diversity and Productivity
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Kiona Ogle, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 487,320.00

The University of Wyoming is awarded a grant to develop a scaling framework for
understanding forest diversity and productivity. This study addresses three
questions that are paramount to developing this framework. (1) How do traits
related to tree form (e.g., allometries, morphology) and function (e.g.,
physiology, growth, allocation, survival) vary between species, and how do
evolutionary versus environmental drivers affect trait
variability?&lt;br/&gt;(2) Is a species-specific representation of form and
function necessary to accurately describe community and ecosystem properties
(e.g., diversity, succession, productivity, carbon cycling)? (3) How do we
develop a general scaling framework for predicting large-scale forest dynamics
that includes species-specific trait variability and key physiological
mechanisms? Towards addressing these questions, this study develops and applies
data-model integration methodologies, including: (i) dynamic process models that
link tree form and function, incorporate key plant functional traits, and are
applicable to broad spatial and temporal scales; (ii) new meta-analysis methods
for analyzing vast amounts of literature information on species-specific traits
that incorporate phylogenetic relationships and overcome limitations common to
³classical² meta-analytic approaches; and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) rigorous statistical
and computational methods for informing the process model with large and
disparate data sources (i.e., literature, forest inventory, and tree-ring width
databases). This highly integrative approach will provide a major step towards
building and testing a general scaling framework. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this work include multiple training opportunities in data-
model integration methods for undergraduates through post-graduate scientists.
Methods developed in this study will be partly disseminated through an annual,
daylong workshop on Bayesian analysis in ecology for the Ecological Society of
America annual meetings. Training in data-model integration, and specifically
Bayesian methods, is lacking in many university curriculums and two new
graduate-level courses in Bayesian data analysis and advanced/computational
Bayesian will be further developed and integrated, providing a modern curriculum
in applied statistical modeling and computing at the University of Wyoming (UW).
Training in modern statistical modeling will offer a unique educational
opportunity for those PhD students in UW¹s new and vibrant graduate Program in
Ecology. This study will also create independent research opportunities for UW
undergraduates, and it will provide one post-doctoral and two PhD students with
unique interdisciplinary teaching, mentoring, and research training in ecology,
statistics, mathematics, and computational science.&lt;br/&gt;