* 1133427
* IDR: Primary cilia as sensors of electric field during electrical stimulation induced hASC osteogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Elizabeth Loboa, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2016
* USD 635,210.00

This interdisciplinary research project, funded by the IDR program at NSF,
explores the extracellular physical stimuli greatly affect stem cell fate and
are necessary for successful tissue engineering of load bearing tissues. For
patient specific tissue engineering to become a reality, an interdisciplinary
approach encompassing multiple disciplines is required. The success of this
project relies on the specific knowledge base of each of the four investigators
in a broad range of interdisciplinary areas including stem cell biology and
mechanobiology, biomechanics, electric fields at micron size scales, nano- and
microfabrication, and advanced imaging techniques. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The investigators have unique preliminary data indicating that electrical
stimulation of magnitude 1 V/cm accelerates human adipose derived stem cell
(hASC) osteogenic differentiation and significantly increases their calcium
accretion. Moreover, they have determined that hASC possess primary cilia. They
hypothesize that the primary cilia bend in response to an applied electric
field, and thus play a key mechanotransduction role during electrical
stimulation; further, that this mechanotransduction preferentially induces hASC
osteogenesis over alternate differentiation pathways. Thus, the overall
objective of this project is to investigate the hypothesis that electrical
stimulation of magnitude 1 V/cm applied at a frequency of 1 Hz will promote hASC
osteogenesis that is dependent on intact primary cilia. To test this hypothesis,
the investigators will complete the following 3 aims:&lt;br/&gt;SA 1: Determine
effect of AC electric field of 1 V/cm applied at f = 1 Hz on hASC fate. Custom
interdigitated electrodes (IDEs) will be fabricated in our laboratory. Human ASC
response to electrical stimulation will be characterized for hASC viability,
proliferation, cytokine production, and differentiation. &lt;br/&gt;SA 2:
Determine role of primary cilia in the transduction of electrical stimulation to
hASC and on hASC differentiation. Primary cilia will be inhibited both
biochemically and with siRNA knockdown strategy. Human ASC without primary cilia
will be seeded on custom IDEs and exposed to an AC electric field of 1 V/cm at a
frequency of 1 Hz. Human ASC response will be characterized as described in SA 1
and compared with intact cilia cells.&lt;br/&gt;SA 3: Determine the physical
response of the primary cilia to electrical stimulation by imaging the cells'
primary cilia in the absence and presence of an electric field. Primary cilia
will be imaged with Hoffman modulation in side-view by seeding the cells onto
flexible substrates, which will then be folded and immobilized across the
IDEs.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Proposed Work: If an AC electric field of
1 V/cm at f = 1 Hz preferentially induces hASC osteogenesis, then autologous
hASC could be directly implanted in a critical defect and currently available,
FDA-approved, clinical devices could be utilized for electrical stimulation of
hASC to induce functional bone formation in vivo in a patient specific manner.
The role of primary cilia as sensors of electrical stimulation has not been
previously investigated. If primary cilia play a vital role in
mechanotransduction and functional bone formation from hASC, future work can
focus on biochemical or genetic means to modulate their expression, e.g., number
and/or length of primary cilia, in a population of hASC. Longer primary cilia
may be more mechanosensitive (e.g., less electrical stimulation required to bend
the primary cilia), potentially allowing for formation of structurally and
mechanically robust bone by hASC (this is not presently attained by chemical
osteogenic supplements alone), even at a reduced electrical-stimulation field
strength.&lt;br/&gt;Further broader impacts include: 1) advanced integration of
research and education; and 2) promotion of participation of underrepresented
groups. The investigators will use ongoing connections with universities, high
schools, and industry to create a rigorous and compelling methodology for
educational outreach. The PI will also host and mentor underrepresented
minorities in her laboratory using the NCSU Reaching Incoming Students
Enrichment (RISE) program for outreach to high school student groups, develop a
workshop for Expanding Your Horizons (program to introduce junior high school
girls to science and engineering), and provide extensive undergraduate research
opportunities to underrepresented students in science and engineering. The
involvement of women and underrepresented minority students will be particularly
emphasized in the project, consistent with the PI?s long-term research policies.