* 1134821
* Collaborative Center: I/UCRC in Center for Energy-Smart Electronic Systems (ES2)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,11/30/2017
* Dereje Agonafer, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 11/30/2017
* USD 293,000.00

Full Proposal for an I/UCRC for Energy Efficient Electronic Systems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1134867 SUNY at Binghamton; Baghat Sammakia
&lt;br/&gt;1134810 Villanova University; Alfonso Ortega &lt;br/&gt;1134821
University of Texas-Arlington; Dereje Agonafer &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
for Energy Efficient Electronic Systems will focus on optimizing energy
utilization in electronic systems. SUNY at Binghamton, Villanova University and
the University of Texas at Arlington are collaborating to establish the proposed
center, with SUNY at Binghamton as the lead institution
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed center will focus on the development of
systematic methodologies for operating electronic systems, including data
centers, as dynamic self sensing and regulating systems that are predictive and
verified in real time. Algorithms will be developed to control cooling resources
and to assist expert system schedulers to schedule and/or migrate workload to
achieve optimal energy consumption. Thermal management resources will also be
allocated dynamically in response to system needs. Problem-oriented research
related to Thermal Management Protocols, Software Systems, Control Systems, and
Implementation and Assessment, will be addressed during the Center's first five
year program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed center will enable a
significant reduction in energy consumption in electronic systems, including
data centers, thereby potentially reducing electrical power consumption across
the nation. This will, in turn, reduce the nations consumption of carbon-based
fuels and related emissions. The center will attract a diverse group of students
at the undergraduate and graduate levels, by providing industrially-relevant
training required by graduates entering the workforce. The proposed center is
committed to attracting talented and motivated students from all groups, and
will integrate a variety of mechanisms across the partners, including
enhancement of existing minority pipeline programs to exceed participation by
women and under-represented students. The center also intends to leverage
existing programming on its campuses to engage K-12 students in conversation on
energy conservation.