* 1134417
* Collaborative Research: Ion-exchange adsorption of proteins: a single-molecule investigation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Christy Landes, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 204,227.00

1133965/1134417&lt;br/&gt;Wilson/Landes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to understand protein chromatography by observing the adsorption
and transport of single protein molecules in realistic adsorbents, which has not
previously been possible. Specifically, the proposed work will: (1) observe the
adsorption and desorption of single protein molecules on thousands of adsorbent
sites, (2) determine the distribution of dwell times at each site, (3) directly
observe site heterogeneity, (4) measure activation energetics, (5) test the
effects of ligand density and type, (6) characterize competition among proteins
of different surface affinity but the same size and shape, and (7) measure
single-molecule transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to
open an entirely new way of investigating protein chromatography (and
immunoassays, microarrays, biosensors, etc.), through the use of single-molecule
fluorescence. Building on the co-PI?s experience in single-molecule
spectroscopy, and our previous successful collaboration on single-molecule
affinity recognition of proteins, we have developed methods for single-molecule
imaging and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) transport studies in
realistic agarose ionexchange adsorbents. Particular elements of the
investigation include the determination of the residence times of single
proteins on single adsorbent sites, the distributions of these residence times,
and the effects of ligand density, ligand clustering, ionic strength, and the
presence of competitors. Transport behavior inside the agarose gel will be
characterized by FCS. This approach will support the development of a predictive
moleculartheoretic approach to modeling chromatographic processes. It will
illuminate the molecular origins of the superior performance of clustered-charge
adsorbents, and should shed considerable light on the competitive protein
adsorption and displacement processes which underlie all chromatographic
separations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed work
should be extensive. Bioseparations, and chromatography in particular, dominate
the cost and process complexity of manufacturing of modern biopharmaceuticals,
and consume enormous effort in biomedical and biotechnological research. There
is a felt shortage of trained investigators and process developers in this
interdisciplinary area. The clustered-charge adsorbents to be characterized as
an element of the work show promise for broader applications. The results and
methods should be directly applicable to separations of nucleic acids and
bioconjugates, and to other methods including HIC, IMAC, and Protein A affinity.
These methods could also be applied to studies of non-separation technologies
such as immunoassays, biosensors, and DNA microarrays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide excellent training opportunities for students to work at
the interface of bioseparations/biochemical technology and
nanobiology/nanobiotechnology. Each of these areas enjoys rapid employment
growth, and the interface should be a very productive one for the foreseeable
future. The University of Houston is one of the very most ethnically-diverse
urban research universities in the United States, and the students involved in
this research will reflect that diversity. Opportunities for integration with
education are abundant, with multiple REU and RET programs in relevant areas.