* 1134468
* Investigation of the differential cytotoxicity of oxide nanoparticles using zebrafish model
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Alex Punnoose, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 486,000.00

1134468 Punnoose

This NSF award by the Environmental Health and Safety of Nanotechnology program
supports work by Professor Alex Punnoose at Boise State University along with
collaborators Professors Jeffrey A. Greenwood and Robert Tanguay at Oregon State
University to investigate the cytotoxicity of oxide semiconductor nanoparticles
using zebrafish as a model system. Thousands of nanotechnology-enabled consumer
products are already available on the market and the annual revenue from such
products is approaching several trillion dollars. Many semiconductor oxides,
such as zinc oxide, at all size ranges (including nanoscale) are currently
labeled as "generally recognized as safe" substances by the Food and Drug
Administration. However, in vitro experiments by Professor Punnoose's group
employing human immune cells have recently demonstrated that zinc oxide
nanoparticles display significant cytotoxicity, raising concerns about the
environmental safety and health impact of oxide nanoparticles in general.

The observed cytotoxicity varies with cell type, and cancer cells showed the
strongest effect. Based on these results, this project undertakes detailed in
vivo investigations of the cytotoxicity of a panel of commonly used
semiconducting oxides such as tin(IV) oxide, cerium(IV) oxide and copper(II)
oxide using zebrafish, a more relevant model system for cytotoxicity evaluation.
Furthermore, the cell specific cytotoxic response of zinc oxide nanoparticles to
cancerous cells observed so far using in vitro studies will be investigated in
vivo by injecting fluorescent dye labeled human cancer cells into 48 hour-old
transgenic zebrafish, and by noninvasively monitoring the tumor cell invasion,
metastasis and pathological angiogenesis. Finally, roles of the various
physicochemical properties of oxide nanoparticles in their cytotoxic behavior
will be investigated. Based on this information, careful materials engineering
approaches will be employed to develop new design rules (i) to remove unwanted
toxicity of oxide nanoparticles to normal healthy zebrafish making them safer
nanomaterials and (ii) to improve the selectivity and cytotoxicity of any oxide
nanoparticles that display selective cancer cell killing so that they can be
developed as potential anti-cancer agents.

This project will provide research opportunities for several graduate,
undergraduate and high school students. Results from the proposed research will
be integrated into several existing courses, and a graduate level seminar in the
area of nano-bio research will be introduced to educate students and local
community about related emerging fields such as nanotechnology, nanotoxicology
and nanomedicine.