* 1134296
* Adaptive Closed-loop Control of  Deep Brain Stimulation for Movement Disorders
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2015
* Daniel Graupe, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 12/31/2015
* USD 330,001.00

1134296&lt;br/&gt;Tuninetti&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS)
provides remarkable therapeutic benefits for otherwise drug-resistant
degenerative neurological disorders, such as Parkinson's disease and Essential
Tremor, for which no cure exists at present. DBS uses surgically implanted
electrodes to deliver high frequency electrical stimulation to the area of the
brain that controls motor functions. The stimulation blocks the abnormal nerve
signals that cause disease symptoms, such as tremor, but its underlying
mechanisms are unclear. Today's DBS systems operate open-loop, i.e., the
physician sets DBS parameters by looking at the patient's reaction to
stimulation and chooses the combination that reduced symptoms the most.
Stimulation is provided continuously and its parameters remain constant over
time until the next visit to the physician.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research integrates the forefront of electrical engineering,
mathematics, and neuroscience principles into the development of models and
methods to the response of the area of the brain that controls movement to DBS.
It proposes a concrete design of the next generation of DBS systems via adaptive
and predictive closed-loop control in an on-off fashion, where on and off times
of stimulation are determined/adapted in real-time with the patient's condition.
Adaptation of the stimulation parameters to each patient's condition at any
given time will: a) diminish brain over-stimulation, thus reducing the damage to
healthy neurons and delaying the development of a possible intolerance to DBS,
b) lower power consumption, thus prolonging DBS battery life and reducing the
risks and costs related to surgeries for battery replacement, and c) reduce DBS
side effects on other cognitive functions, such as speech, thus further
improving patients' quality of life besides better motor functions control. This
will yield improved and personalized health-care at reduced risks and
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three main thrusts: 1) Modeling
the dynamics of the area in the brain that controls movement by using signals
measured from the patient's brain so as to predict the effect of the DBS
stimulation parameters; 2) Designing a closed-loop DBS control where brain
signals are integrated with signals from the patient?s tremor affected limbs,
such as measured by noninvasive Surface ElectroMyoGraphy (sEMG), so as to obtain
a more complete picture of the patient?s pathological state. sEMG signal
parameters are continuously monitored to predict the re-emergence of the tremor
once DBS is stopped and serve as input to the controller, together with the
neuronal activity; 3) Prototyping in software the second generation of DBS
systems by implementing low-complexity and energy-efficient algorithms for real-
time predictive closed-loop control of DBS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although this
research focuses on degenerative movement disorders, the discoveries have far
reaching implications on the treatment of a number of neurological conditions,
such as severe depression, epilepsy, obsessive compulsive disorder, and chronic
pain, which have recently been considered for DBS-type treatments. The
transformative approach of this proposed research, based on the real-time
monitoring of the brain activity, enables DBS stimuli adaptation for those
diseases that do not present continuous and/or visible symptoms such as tremor;
such adaptation is impossible with any current open-loop technology.