* 1134273
* GOALI: Exploring Surface Interaction Mechanisms Enabling Plasma-Enhanced Atomic Layer Etching
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Gottlieb Oehrlein, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 325,000.00

1134273&lt;br/&gt;Oehrlein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs from University at
Maryland (College Park) and IBM Research plan to study surface interaction
mechanisms that will enable achievement of atomic precision in etching different
materials when transferring lithographically defined templates during nanoscale
structure fabrication in the semiconductor and related industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of ultra-thin gate dielectrics, ultra thin
channels, and sub-20 nm film thicknesses in field effect transistors and other
devices requires atomic scale etching control and selectivity. As critical
dimensions approach the 10 nm scale, the need for an Atomic Layer Etching (ALE)
method becomes essential. The objective of the proposed research is to establish
what atomistic surface modifications produced in several model materials using
plasma etching related equipment will enable directional and controlled removal
of one atomic layer at a time from those surfaces. The researchers will employ
controlled sequential reactions of surface passivation followed by directional
low energy ion attack for "volatile product" removal to establish for what
conditions self-limiting behavior with regard to both the reactive precursors
and/or energetic ions/species that are used to remove the products can be
established for prototypical materials/etching systems and how such a sequence
can enable ALE. The approach includes replacing complex plasma-surface
interaction steps by a sequence of individual, self-limiting surface reactions,
quantitative, temporally resolved real-time characterization of surface
modifications/atomistic thickness changes during processing, development of
surface modification/etching models based on complementary vacuum beam studies
performed in an ultra-high vacuum system, comparisons with theoretical precursor
adsorption/ion-surface interaction models, and industrial studies of the above
process parameter space using a variety of plasma reactors and aggressively-
scaled semiconductor device structures, along with analytical and electrical
characterizations of the impact on the semiconductor device fabrication
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this
work derives from the fact that for anisotropic ALE, "etch product" removal must
take place in a directional fashion, which is fundamentally different from
widely used atomic layer deposition methods, where isotropic reaction(s)
provide(s) a conformal coating. Elucidating the science underlying ALE presents
novel incident particle flux/surface chemistry challenges and energetic
species/surface interaction problems that are unique and offer opportunity for
primary contributions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Successful
completion of the project tasks will enable controlled precision patterning of
materials at the nanoscale, which will impact future efforts to design
manufacturing processes required in diverse areas, including semiconductors,
flexible carbon-based electronics, healthcare engineering and others. The
academic/industrial collaboration provides unique educational opportunities for
the students, faculty and researchers involved.