* 1134541
* Efficient synthesis of hydrocarbons using an engineered reversal of the B-oxidation cycle: A new paradigm for the production of advanced biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Ramon Gonzalez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 368,397.00

PI: Gonzalez Proposal Number: 1134541

Intellectual Merit

Advanced liquid biofuels based on long-chain hydrocarbons offer several
advantages compared to alcohol biofuels, including less hygroscopicity and
volatility, higher energy density, and compatibility with current infrastructure
for storage, distribution and usage. Many microorganisms possess biosynthetic
pathways for production of alkene and alkane hydrocarbons. For alkenes, the
?head-to-head? condensation of acyl-CoA thioesters has been proposed as the
primary pathway, whereas alkanes are synthesized through a two-step pathway that
involves conversion of acyl-CoA thioesters to fatty aldehydes, which are then
decarbonylated to alkanes. To date, the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway has been
used as the exclusive means to generate the acyl-CoA thioesters required for the
synthesis of hydrocarbons. However, the operation of this pathway is not
efficient because it consumes ATP in the synthesis of malonyl-ACP, which is the
donor of two-carbon units for chain elongation. As a consequence, the ATP yield
associated with the production of hydrocarbon through the fatty acid synthesis
pathway is very low. This, in turn, greatly limits cell growth and hydrocarbon
production.

The overall goal of the proposed research is to metabolically engineer a
functional reversal of the beta-oxidation cycle as a new metabolic platform for
the efficient biosynthesis of long-chain hydrocarbons in E. coli host strains.
Unlike the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway, the reversal of the beta-oxidation
cycle operates with coenzyme-A (CoA) thioester intermediates and uses acetyl-CoA
directly for acyl-chain elongation, rather than first requiring ATP-dependent
activation to malonyl-CoA. These characteristics enable product synthesis at
maximum carbon and energy efficiency. To achieve this goal, four objectives are
proposed: 1) engineer a functional reversal of the beta-oxidation cycle with a
minimal set of enzymes, 2) engineer pathways for the synthesis of alkanes and
alkenes from acyl-CoA intermediates generated in the functional reversal of the
beta-oxidation cycle, 3) improve the efficiency of the engineered reversal of
the beta-oxidation cycle during the synthesis of hydrocarbons, and 4) perform
system-wide characterization of wild-type and engineered strains.

Broader Impacts

The proposed research extends beyond the confines of advanced biofuel
applications, as the ubiquitous nature of beta-oxidation enzymes has the
potential to enable the combinatorial synthesis of a variety of non-native
products in industrial organisms with a minimum number of foreign genes, an
approach that has the potential to lead to efficient functioning of the
engineered pathways. The proposed research will train post-doctoral research
associates in metabolic engineering of these pathways.

The proposed outreach and education activities will focus on sustainable energy
topics, and work with school districts serving predominantly Hispanic
populations. In particular, collaborative efforts with the Houston Harmony
Science Academy will expose middle and high schools students to renewable energy
concepts and associated career opportunities in this field.