* 1134842
* Planning Grant: Collaborative Research: I/UCRC for Cyber-Physical Systems for the Hospital Operating Room
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Scott Berceli, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 11,500.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Cyber-Physical Systems for the Hospital
Operating Room

1134866 University of Houston; Marc Garbey 1134842 University of Florida; Scott
Berceli

The University of Houston and the University of Florida are collaborating to
establish the proposed center, with the University of Houston as the lead
institution.

The Center for Cyber-Physical Systems for the Hospital Operating Room (CPSOR)
vision is to provide the forum for industry/hospital/university cooperative
research on the further development, validation, and industrial implementation
of the emerging concepts in the design of operating room, and in the
optimization of procedural and surgical interventions. This center will be the
strong arm of Modern Surgery enabled by computational science and technologies.
The center will catalyze large-scale technology projects that request inter-
disciplinary efforts between surgeons and computational science in a broad
sense.

This collaboration should advance technology, discovery, understanding and
training in the operating room. It will utilize the facilities in Houston and
spread technology coupled with medical skills which will benefit society. The
center will operate at the core of the Texas Medical Center that is the largest
medical center in the word, and benefit from the site in University of Florida
Gainesville that has been a champion to encourage business startups in
bioengineering and technology transfer. The center will also benefit from the
forty million dollar infrastructure of the Methodist Institute for Technology
Innovation and Education (MITIE) that trains about 2000 surgeons per year coming
from all over the word. The center will benefit from a new established unique
international dual curriculum in computational surgery.