* 1134201
* Biomechanical Mechanisms of Oncogenic Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Douglas Kniss, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

1134201&lt;br/&gt;Ghadiali&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is a major cause of death
in the United States. Although uncontrolled cell division is a hallmark of tumor
formation, the spread of cancer cells from a primary tumor to other organs, i.e.
metastasis, is the key feature that leads to high mortality rates. During
metastasis, epithelial cancer cells detach from the primary tumor site and
acquire a highly motile and/or mesenchymal phenotype. Migration/invasion of
these cells into surrounding tissue and the circulatory/lymphatic system leads
to colonization of distal tissues and secondary tumor formation. The central
biological mechanism responsible for metastasis is known as epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT). In addition to its role in cancer metastasis, EMT
is a fundamental biological process that plays an important role in embryonic
development, wound healing and organ fibrosis. During EMT polarized epithelial
cells undergo dramatic biochemical and biostructural changes and acquire a
mesenchymal phenotype with enhanced migratory and invasive capacity. Although
many of the biochemical signaling events that occur during oncogenic EMT are
known, the biomechanical mechanisms governing oncogenic EMT are not well
established. Furthermore, although it is well established that the tumor
microenvironment can influence cancer progression and that increased tumor
stiffness is a diagnostic indicator of advanced disease, there is limited
information about how changes in the tumor?s biomechanical properties (i.e.
matrix stiffness) influence EMT and metastatic
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal utilizes a combination of
biophysical, molecular biology and quantitative engineering tools to investigate
the biomechanical mechanisms governing oncogenic EMT and to investigate how
changes tissue/matrix mechanics influences EMT and metastasis. Sophisticated
experimental techniques will be used to characterize changes in cellular
mechanics during EMT in different cancer cells. Several biomechanical markers of
EMT (i.e. stiffness, viscoelasticity and contractility) will be correlated with
cell migration and invasion behaviors. In addition to establishing a unique set
of biomechanical markers of EMT, these studies will also provide an innovative
way to quantitatively assess metastatic potential based on the cell's mechanical
phenotype. Experimental techniques will also be used to investigate how changes
in substrate/matrix stiffness influence the biomechanical and biochemical
signaling mechanisms responsible for oncogenic EMT. Finally, three-dimensional
multi-scale computational models of tumor cell detachment and migration/invasion
will be developed and these computational models will be used to develop new
insights into how changes in cell mechanics may be used to mitigate metastasis.
The proposed research studies will provide training for a post-doctoral research
scientist and undergraduate/graduate students in biomedical engineering at The
Ohio State University and will also be integrated into an undergraduate course
in quantitative physiology. Outreach activities included contributing to a
summer educational program for high school students in computational modeling
hosted by the Ohio Supercomputer Center.