* 1134229
* Observable Divergence Theorem: A new technique for deriving averaged equations for multi-scale shock problems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Kamran Mohseni, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,101.00

1134229 &lt;br/&gt;Mohseni&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An objective of modeling of
multiscale problems, such as shocks in complex flows, is to derive an evolution
equation for large scale quantities without resolving the details of the small
scales. This proposal aims at a new technique for deriving fluid equations
capable of regularizing discontinuities in the form of shocks without the
introduction of viscous dissipation. This is achieved by defining observable
fluxes and observable divergence. An observable divergence theorem is then
applied to the conservation of mass, momentum, and energy of an inviscid fluid
flow. A set of equations, called the observable Euler equations, are derived
where they satisfy the conservation laws at the observable scale, alpha. The
observable scale is often dictated by our ability to observe a fluid property.
This is the resolution scale in numerical simulations or the minimum resolvable
scale of an apparatus in an experiment. The classical Euler equations will be
recovered if the observable scale approaches zero. This effort is aimed towards
theoretical, computational, and physical understanding of the observability and
its application to single phase fluid problems with shocks. While the proposed
ideas are tested in the context of shock regularization in fluids, this
initiative has the potential to be applied to a wide variety of other multi-
scale problems such as elasticity, magnetohydrodynamics, multi-phase flows, etc.
Reduction in uncertainty of turbulent aero and hydrodynamic predictions will
help manufacturers of most related technologies to reduce the cost of their
machines and enhance their performances. Considering the role that such problems
play in our society, important socio-economical impacts are expected.
Undergraduate research assistants will be sought via supplementary REU support,
and can be expected to come from these fields. The PI's existing disciplinary
courses will be enriched with results from this work, expanding student
multidisciplinary exposure. A web site will be developed to disseminate
information to the general public.