* 1134464
* Operando Transmission Electron Microscopy - A New Tool for Catalysis Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Peter Crozier, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 313,998.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;In situ environmental transmission electron microscopy has
been employed for many years to investigate the structure and composition of
high surface area heterogeneous catalysts under reactive gas conditions. However
in heterogeneous catalysis research, we want to correlate the structural and
chemical changes taking place in a catalyst with simultaneous measurement of
reaction products, or so-called operand methods. The combination of atomic
resolution analysis coupled with simultaneous detection of gas phase catalysis
products has not yet been demonstrated within the electron microscope.
Investigator Peter Crozier of Arizona State University is willing to tackle this
challenge with some creative thought and equipment and methodology
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this proposal is to develop atomic
resolution operando transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and apply this
approach to fundamental problems in high surface area heterogeneous catalysts.
To accomplish this goal, sample preparation methods will be developed that
substantially increase the volume of catalyst in the reaction cell of the
electron microscope so that larger quantities of product gas are generated.
Quantitative methods for detecting product gases based on electron energy-loss
spectroscopy and mass spectrometry will also be developed. Gas analysis with
electron energy-loss &lt;br/&gt;spectroscopy is particularly well suited to the
proposed operando goal because it is compatible with atomic resolution imaging.
The operando technique will be employed to investigate the changes taking place
on nanoparticles during catalysis for a number of important energy related
reactions. CO oxidation at intermediate temperatures will be studied on a
variety of supported metal and supported oxide catalysts. With simultaneous
detection of gas products in the microscope reaction cell, it will be possible
to determine the unique structural and behavioral changes that take place in the
nanoparticles at the onset of catalysis. Experiments will also be performed on
reactions relevant to partial oxidation of methane to explore the operando
capability under high temperature conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is transformative because successful development of operando TEM will
provide researchers in catalysis with a powerful new atomic resolution tool for
correlating structure and catalysis on high surface area materials. An approach
for detecting gas adsorbates and intermediates on the surfaces of individual
nanoparticles will also be developed using high spatial resolution electron
energy-loss spectroscopy. Even partial success in this area would provide
completely new insights into gas-surface interactions on nanoparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique of operando microscopy will have wide
application to many problems in catalysis and allow structure-property relations
to be explored on high surface area materials. A long-term goal of this work is
to develop high spatial resolution in situ techniques that allow dynamic
nanostructural materials changes to be correlated with catalytic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will train graduate and
undergraduate students to contribute and learn about the developments in energy-
related heterogeneous catalysts, methods of nanomaterials synthesis and advanced
in situ nanocharacterization. The PI teaches a course on nanomaterials for
energy production and storage and will draw extensively on this research to
teach fundamental functionalities in catalytic nanoparticles. Educational
modules on energy and catalytic nanomaterials will be developed and targeted
using ASUs Best Program for middle school students and ASUs Science is Fun
program which targets K-12. Both outreach programs specifically target female
and minority student to encourage them to consider careers in science and
engineering.