* 1134877
* Enhancing expertise in archaeal taxonomy: Classical and molecular-based monographic research of the Nanoarchaeota
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Anna-Louise Reysenbach, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2017
* USD 725,000.00

Despite a ubiquitous distribution, the group of microorganisms known as Archaea
still remains the most unexplored of life's domains. Among the Archaea, one
organism (Nanoarchaeum equitans) is crucial for deciphering the history of the
archaeal domain, yet there is only one characterized representative of this
group. This heat-loving microbe grows and divides at the surface of another
archaeon suggesting an obligate symbiotic, possibly ectoparasitic, lifestyle.
The evolutionary placement of this organism is controversial and provides unique
problems in taxonomy for training the next generation of microbial taxonomists.
The major goal of this project is to clarify the pivotal position of the
Nanoarchaetoa in the Tree of Life. This information will greatly expand our
understanding of the taxonomy and physiology of this group as well as our
understanding of microbial systematics. In addition, the project will provide a
unique opportunity to address how a symbiotic versus free-living lifestyle has
impacted genome architecture, rate of evolution, and gene acquisition or loss in
Archaea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers research opportunities and
training to undergraduates, graduate students, and a post-doctoral research
associate in classical and molecular approaches to taxonomy, bioinformatics,
phylogenetic analyses, and novel concepts and controversies in modern microbial
taxonomy. In addition, the project will provide hands-on experience in microbial
taxonomic research to local high school students.