* 1134853
* RAPID: An Investigation of Information Diffusion Speed and Collective Intelligence During the Citizen Protests of Egypt and Middle East 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Raghav Rao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 03/31/2013
* USD 30,836.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will explore the
efficient and rapid consensus building systems among citizens within and across
countries, and examine how such a large scale of self-organized citizens can be
mobilized in a short period of time with common goals. In the Arabic countries,
an intensive campaign of civil resistance has spread rapidly from country to
country. Starting in December 2010 in Tunisia, it spread to Egypt, Algeria,
Yemen, Iran, Bahrain, Libya and Morocco. Both mainstream media and social media
agree that it is the largest citizen protest in human history, and debate that
social media has caused a revolution in Arabic countries. In this proposed
research, we will study two issues. First, we propose to investigate information
diffusion speed through social media. Second, we propose to explore the
emergence and organization of mechanisms of its diffusion and collective
intelligence within social media space. To measure the information diffusion
speed, we will apply the curve fitting regression method. What we observe today
is not just the spread of civil protests from one city to another, but also from
one country to another, on a day to day basis. We believe that this type of
large scale protest cannot be enabled without the extremely mobile and fast
information delivery and sharing systems that are available on a global scale.
To assess the patterns of emergence, organization, and spread of social
reporting we will run social network analyses. This will be done at two
different levels: one within country, and the second across countries. Data must
be collected rapidly because it is ephemeral.

Examining cross-border information spread will enable us to better understand
how social media can de-construct the territory based traditional concept of
national borders. This research will contribute to knowledge by throwing new
light on the way of harnessing citizens' potential at the collective level to
bring about social changes. Specifically, this research will attempt to
understand the co-evolution pattern of information diffusion speed, self-
organization of protesters, and communication technology and will empirically
show the potential of collective social media.