* 1134148
* A Novel Cell Release Method for Affinity-based Cell Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Wei Shen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2015
* USD 299,995.00

1134148&lt;br/&gt;Shen&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological
Separations program supports work by Professor Wei Shen to develop a novel
platform to efficiently detach affinity-captured cells with minimal biochemical
and biophysical perturbation. Cell separation is essential in many clinical
practices and biomedical studies, ranging from disease diagnosis and prognosis
to cell-based therapy and fundamental investigations of stem cell biology. Cell
separation mediated by the affinity between a cell surface biomarker and a
complementary ligand immobilized on a material is label-free and highly
specific, and therefore is particularly attractive. However, this method has
been limited by the difficulty in efficiently detaching captured cells in a
viable and unperturbed state due to the multivalent nature of cell-material
interactions. Although this limitation is not an issue for diagnostic and
prognostic applications, it is a major challenge when rare, sensitive cells need
to be isolated and recovered for use in an unperturbed and functional state,
such as stem-cell-based therapy. To fully unleash the potential of label-free,
affinity-based cell separation, new cell detachment methods must be developed.
In this project, we will harness self-assembly of biopolymers to bring
polyethylene glycol (PEG) to the material surface after cell capture, so that
multivalent cell-substrate interactions can be disrupted for efficient release
of affinity-captured cells due to the conformational energy of extended PEG
chains. Successful completion of this project will lead to a novel cell
detachment method that, together with label-free and highly specific affinity
capture, will allow cell separation to be performed with unprecedented
collective quality in terms of high specificity, high yield, and minimal
perturbation on cells. This cell detachment platform can be readily adapted for
affinity cell separation based on various cell surface biomarkers. The method is
compatible with various formats of cell separation: either small-scale operation
in microfluidic devices or large-scale affinity chromatography; either flat
affinity substrates or bead-based affinity matrices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. Such training opportunities are important for preparing
a qualified workforce in the field of biomedical engineering, which is one of
the major driving forces for the health care industries. Through this project,
the PI will promote the research activities of undergraduate students, in
particular underrepresented minority and women students, in her laboratory
through various programs. The PI will participate in K-12 outreach activities to
stimulate interest in biomolecular engineering, biomaterials engineering, and
regenerative medicine among young students and inspire more students to pursue
careers in these fields.