* 1134398
* Role of Interfacial Charging and Electrostatic Image Forces for Pickering Emulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Toan Nguyen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2015
* USD 329,486.00

1134398 PI: Behrens

Surfactant-free emulsions of oil and water can be stabilized by colloidal
particles with some wettability by both liquid phases. These so-called Pickering
emulsions have long been appreciated for their good stability, processing
properties, and lack of emulsifier toxicity; renewed interest in particles as
emulsifiers has most recently been sparked by their use in stimulus-responsive
emulsions and in emulsion-templated microcapsules. Despite these technological
advances, our theoretical understanding of Pickering emulsions lags far behind:
it is still impossible to predict reliably, from the properties of the liquids
and the particles used, even the most basic features of the emulsified system,
such as the type of emulsion (o/w or w/o) formed upon mixing. This project aims
at establishing a simple, yet predictive model for the emulsifying properties of
colloidal particles in a given liquid mixture.

Intellectual Merit: The main factors responsible for emulsion stabilization by
solid particles are explored experimentally and theoretically. Specifically this
project tests the hypothesis that accurate predictions of the "preferred
emulsion type" in a three phase system and far-reaching conclusions about the
achievable emulsion stability can be obtained by considering the interaction of
individual particles with the oil/water interface ? provided that two commonly
neglected electrostatic contributions to the free energy are accounted for: the
interaction of charged particles near oil-water interfaces with their
electrostatic image, and the energy stored in the dipole field around a charged
particle trapped within the oil-water interface. The approach combines the
experimental characterization of charging, wetting and far-field electrostatic
interactions in oil-water-particle systems with theoretical modeling and
experimental tests of model predictions for the achievable emulsion type and
stability.

Broader Impact: Results of this project will expand our fundamental
understanding of particle-stabilized emulsions with current applications ranging
from food formulations and skin care creams to oil recovery, and anticipated
uses e.g. in oil spill remediation or drug delivery via smart microcapsules. The
science of emulsions encountered in everyday life is introduced to preschoolers
through first graders in a predominantly (97%) African-American Atlanta school
through hands-on "science workshops" in close collaboration with the classroom
teachers. A "demo kit" including materials and instructions for the most
successful demonstrations will be made available to the teachers for use in
future classes. At the collegiate level, the PI's ethnically diverse and
predominantly female research group promotes diversity by example. Research
results from this project are incorporated directly in a graduate elective
course on Colloids & Surfaces taught by the PI; research in progress is
presented regularly in a Colloid and Soft Matter seminar organized by the PI,
which brings together more than 25 research groups from different disciplines at
Georgia Tech and Emory University.