* 1134020
* A New Method for Imaging Mixture Fraction in Turbulent Non-premixed Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Noel Clemens, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 322,779.00

1134020&lt;br/&gt;Clemens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improvement of combustion
models for turbulent non-premixed combustion is severely limited by the lack
measurements of mixture fraction and its dissipation in complex reacting
systems. Currently, the highest fidelity mixture fraction measurements are
inferred from Raman/Rayleigh scattering, but these measurements are difficult to
apply in more applied combustion environments where walls, soot or particles may
be present. We propose to develop a new technique that holds promise for
enabling space- and time-resolved imaging of a conserved scalar in turbulent
reacting flows, and which can be applied in a wider range of environments than
alternative techniques. This new technique is based on using two-photon laser-
induced fluorescence (LIF) of a noble gas (e.g., Kr or Xe), which is seeded into
the fuel or oxidizer stream. Noble gases are inert in the presence of combustion
and so can be treated as a conserved scalar. The noble-gas LIF measurement gives
the mole fraction of the conserved scalar, but a temperature measurement and
state relationship are required to infer the mixture fraction (i.e., mass
fraction of atoms originating in the fuel stream). &lt;br/&gt;Our main
objectives will be the following: (i) to improve our understanding of the
technique's limitations, particularly regarding the need for an assumed state
relationship, (ii) to determine if the technique can be applied with higher-
hydrocarbon fuels where laser beam absorption, fluorescence interference and
quenching may add additional difficulties, (iii) to combine the technique with
particle image velocimetry (PIV) to obtain important and still unique mixture-
fraction/velocity correlation data in flames, (iv) to investigate two-photon Xe
LIF as an alternative conserved scalar, and (v) explore combining noble-gas LIF
with filtered Rayleigh scattering to obtain simultaneous temperature fields when
particles/soot/walls are present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed work has as its objective the further development of a new diagnostic
technique, which holds promise for enabling measurements of mixture fraction and
its dissipation in non-premixed combustion systems. The main conserved scalar of
interest is krypton, although xenon will be investigated. The combined two-
photon LIF will enable conserved scalar measurements to be made in more applied
flows, such as confined combustors, or in flows with particles. This feature
will enable one to combine mixture fraction imaging with PIV, and potentially to
make conserved measurements in flows with soot or soot precursors. It also can
be effectively used as a technique for studying mixing/combustion where safety
concerns preclude the use of toxic-gas markers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This new technique holds promise for enabling measurements of mixture
fraction (or a related surrogate conserved scalar quantity) in combustion
environments where such measurements were previously not practical, such as gas-
turbines, IC engines, fires, and supersonic combustors. Noble-gas LIF is
potentially much easier to implement than alternative techniques and it is
likely that the technique will see much wider use in academics, government and
industry. The data that can be provided by the technique could potentially
impact the accuracy of advanced combustion models and therefore impact a wide-
range of technologies including those that utilize sustainable fuels. As great
strides are made in computational engineering, we must not lose sight of the
importance of validating the computations and this will require that we maintain
and develop the experimental infrastructure that enables the acquisition of the
needed data.