* 1134052
* In Situ Imaging and Analysis of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Anodes during Degradation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Wilson K. S. Chiu, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2016
* USD 302,489.00

1134052 PI Chiu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of this study is to
develop in situ imaging techniques that allow the direct observation of solid
oxide fuel cell (SOFC) anodes under operational conditions and provide a
scientific and engineering understanding of degradation in SOFC anodes. Meeting
this objective will help enhance SOFC long term performance and reliability and
enable SOFCs as a viable technology for efficient and sustainable energy
conversion. High resolution in situ x-ray imaging using a newly developed
transmission x-ray microscope (TXM) will be used to achieve this goal. The PI
will use hard x-ray nanotomography developed by him at the Argonne National
Laboratory Advanced Photon Source (APS) to nondestructively obtain high
resolution (32 nm) 3-D images of an operating SOFC anode. The PI will develop in
situ x-ray imaging and spectroscopy techniques to observe anode degradation
during operation and perform detailed microstructural analysis to understand
degradation mechanisms in SOFC anodes. Aged SOFC anodes will be provided by the
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL). Preliminary results obtained
from ex situ nondestructive 3-D imaging of SOFC anodes indicate Ni-phase
particle coarsening is significantly affected by operational time. This project
will build on the preliminary results to elucidate fundamental knowledge
regarding the mechanisms and pathways that cause degradation. This project will
involve two graduate students and will have outreach activities for
undergraduate and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit includes a
detailed understanding of SOFC anode degradation due to Ni coarsening during
operation and its effect on performance. Knowledge obtained from this study will
be used to elucidate degradation mechanisms, especially the role of different
coarsening mechanisms (Ostwald ripening, particle migration, and evaporation),
the corresponding operating conditions in which they occur, and how and where
such mechanisms originate in the microstructure. The research team assembled for
this study works extensively in the area of SOFCs including x-ray imaging of
SOFC materials, detailed charge-transfer modeling and testing, thermal stress,
and material characterization. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this study include
external collaborations that will explore new sustainable energy technologies
for our society. EPFL will provide SOFC samples, perform experiments, and
provide data for model validation. APS will provide synchrotron facilities to
image SOFC electrode samples using a 32 nm resolution hard x-ray microscope
system. In terms of education, the PI will work closely with the UConn
Engineering Diversity Program to identify several top high school students,
especially from underrepresented groups, from over 25 local area high schools
for a summer internship in the PI's lab. The PI and his students will engage in
on-site research at EPFL and APS.