* 1134256
* Integrated Program for Conformational Effects in Protein Chromatography
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Michael Shirts, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 08/31/2016
* USD 312,000.00

1134256&lt;br/&gt;Fernandez&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Chemical and
Biological Separations program supports work by Professors Erik Fernandez,
Michael Shirts, and John O'Connell to analyze and predict protein structural
changes during purification by chromatography. This will be accomplished by
combining extensive experimental measurements, detailed molecular simulations,
and thermodynamic modeling. The principal focus is hydrophobic interaction (HIC)
and especially ion-exchange chromatography (IEC), vital commercial methods to
separate desired proteins from chemically modified, high molecular weight, and
conformational variants. The aims of the research are to 1) establish molecular
details of global and local instabilities during protein adsorption to HIC and
IEC media, 2) develop a methodology for predicting effects of operating
conditions on structural and species distributions, and 3) test predictions with
our tools for structural and chromatographic consequences of conformation
changes in single- and multidomain proteins. This project will add molecular
modeling tools to enable analysis of more complex, larger (?multidomain?)
proteins. The outcomes should enable a priori design of surfaces and proteins to
enhance selectivity and yield in both HIC and IEC for pharmaceutically relevant
proteins such as antibodies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An educational module on
dynamics and equilibria of biomolecular systems will be created for use in
undergraduate biochemical engineering and thermodynamics courses, including a
variety of computational exercises and visualizations. Collaboration between the
chemical engineers and a prominent protein-folding researcher, will enable
students to work with advanced techniques on both fundamental and practical
problems. Collaboration with two biotechnology companies will expose students to
complex, commercially-relevant issues of protein stability and processing and
provide with pharmaceutically relevant multidomain proteins. Simulation tools
developed will be open-source and posted on-line for access by other
researchers.