* 1134736
* Wireless Internet Center for Advanced Technology (WICAT)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Stephen Patek, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Shashank Priya
* 06/30/2014
* USD 108,625.00

IIP-1134736 &lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia &lt;br/&gt;Horowitz
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to renew the University of Virginia's
participation in the Wireless Internet Center for Advance Technology (WICAT).
The multi-university center consists of New York Polytechnic, Virginia Tech,
Auburn University, and the University of Texas-Austin. WICAT, with Polytechnic
as the lead institution, has approximately 25 companies and 8 federal and state
agencies as industry associates. The Center research addresses cooperative
communications and networking; extending battery life of portable terminals; and
wireless applications and associated information delivery. Finding new and
better ways to meet the demands on wireless networks will continue to be the
goal of research being carried out in WICAT overall. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
UVA WICAT research activity addresses adaptive wireless system design patterns
and corresponding technology developments that serve to enable improved designs.
The proposed research effort will make important contributions to the future
development of adaptive wireless surveillance systems, wireless networking
systems, and telehealth systems. The concurrent engineering approach of carrying
out component technology research that is based on needs that emerge from system
application research provides an important basis for directing and managing the
proposed efforts. Based on historical work, both industry and the broader
wireless research community find UVAs coupling of system needs to technology
needs to be a useful basis for both directing research and evaluating the
benefits of research outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system-oriented
contributions of UVA to WICAT will continue to provide a significant
differentiating value to the overall mission of the Center. Multi-university
collaborations will continue to provide the other WICAT sites with an expanded
set of data and results derived from system-level activities to complement their
component technology results. The research collaborations will continue to
provide new opportunities to achieve greater diversity by creating student
interactions across the research institutions. The educational goals of the
center have supported the department's new curriculum which, in turn, serves the
industry members well. The site has also supported outreach activities through
summer camps. The diversity UVA brings to the center's research agenda has
broader impacts on industry and the community, as well.