* 1134687
* Collaborative Research: The Geography of Stress in the Woodfrog: Using Distributional Models to Predict the Relationship Between Population Health and Environmental Suitability
* SBE,BCS
* 12/31/2010,03/31/2014
* Erica Crespi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2014
* USD 75,000.00

Investigating the patterns and processes that determine the geographic
distributions of organisms is a central goal of ecology and evolutionary
biology, and an understanding of these processes is essential for scientists to
predict how species ranges will respond to environmental change. This study uses
modern ecoinformatic databases and spatially-explicit species distributional
modeling to resolve important relationships between the environment and stress.
The work will include measuring physiological stress in ways that are well
established in biomedical research, but until now have not been applied to
natural populations within an explicit geographic context. Measures of genetic
variability (e.g., inbreeding and heterozygosity) will also be measured, as
previous work has shown that populations at the edge of the species range have
reduced genetic variability that is associated with lower quality habitats and
reduced ability to survive or adapt to changes in environmental conditions.
Thus, this project will be one of the first to unify physiological, genetic, and
environmental assessments of stress in wild populations. While positive
correlations among risk of population extinction, inbreeding and isolation, and
physiological stress are widely assumed, direct comparisons among these
ecological, genetic, and physiological measures of fitness have never been
directly compared. The research focuses on the wood frog as a model system
because amphibians are sensitive to environmental change, and they are the most
threatened group of vertebrates on the planet. The result will be a statistical
assessment of the relationship between environmental quality and stress across
geographic space within the range of the wood frog. The goal is to provide a
toolkit of fitness indicators for conservation biologists and biogeographers to
use when predicting the geography of population health to make better
predictions about whether populations will persist given the threats of climate
change or habitat destruction.

This project aims to ground-truth a new technique that may become a useful tool
in conservation biology to help assess population health and sub-lethal
environmental stress in amphibians. This project provides the first integration
of environmental endocrinology, population genetics, and spatially-explicit
distributional modeling in a landscape-level stress assessment. This research
will also enhance the education of both undergraduate and graduate students and
train them to be integrative biologists who can use powerful bioinformatics
databases to design studies and ask important conservation questions. Finally,
in addition to research publications, presentations, and adding museum specimens
to a natural history collection, a workshop on the Biogeography of Stress will
be conducted to bring together research scientists, conservation biologists, and
students to enhance dissemination of findings and synthesis of future directions
in this field.