* 1134121
* Collaborative Research: Engineering monodisperse lipid-coated microbubbles with distinct scattering spectra for ultrasound molecular imaging applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Kausik Sarkar, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 12/31/2011
* USD 225,000.00

1134420/1134121&lt;br/&gt;Porter/Sarkar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bubbles with
diameters less than 7 Âµm with a narrow size distribution will be created that
can help in diagnosis of several diseases through ultrasound imaging. They will
be chemically engineered with a lipid shell such that they are 1) of a single
size, 2) able to attach to molecules associated with a specific disease, and 3)
have a unique acoustic signature based upon size and shell material properties.
Targeting different bubbles to different molecules expressed by diseased cells,
one can develop an accurate and cost effective ultrasound-based diagnostic
system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: One of the main innovations
of this effort lies in the ability to control the size of these bubbles. It will
allow an accurate investigation of their acoustic properties, specifically their
resonance frequency&amp;#61630;where they are most efficient to reflect
diagnostic ultrasound&amp;#61630;as a function of radius, acoustic pressure, and
lipid shell composition. The other innovation is physics-based accurate modeling
of bubble behavior. Mechanistic models that can accurately relate the molecular
composition of the encapsulating lipid shell to a bubble?s acoustic signature
will be developed. Experimental and theoretical methods will be utilized to
evaluate the relationship between the nonlinear viscoelastic properties (i.e.
the rheological relations between the stress and the deformation) of the shell
and the ultrasound excitation. The distinctive feature of the model development
is the dual experimental approach, where two separate sets of experiments will
be used for the determination of model parameters and the independent model
validation. There will be a close connection between the model development and
the experiments where each effort will be constantly guided by and calibrated
against the other. The results from the experimental measurements and
theoretical predictions will be used to formulate a suite of lipid-coated
microbubbles with distinct scattering spectra. Finally, tests will be performed
to assess the ability to detect small concentrations of monodisperse lipid-
coated microbubbles and distinguish echogenic signatures from distinct
populations. The knowledge gained from this study will lead to the development
of novel imaging schemes to specifically detect lipid-coated microbubbles
targeted to multiple biomarkers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The new
frontier for molecular imaging is the simultaneous detection of multiple
biomarkers of disease with a single diagnostic imaging modality. This is
possible provided contrast agents for a specific modality targeting different
biomarkers can be distinguished from each other within an image. Ultrasound may
be used for this molecular imaging application provided targeted lipid-coated
microbubbles with unique frequency-dependent scattering characteristics (i.e.
radiated pressure signal) can be engineered. Because the scattering
characteristics depend upon microbubble radius and shell material properties,
tight control over the microbubble size distribution and the viscoelastic
properties of the lipid shell are required to achieve this
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education: One graduate student in each university
will be involved in this project working towards their doctoral dissertation.
Both PIs are committed to spread engineering to minority students. PI-Porter
serves as the faculty advisor the student-governed Minority Engineers' Society
at BU, and will provide research opportunities for its members during the
academic year. PI-Sarkar has already established a contact with a Professor
(letter of support) in Morgan State University (HBCU) to recruit minority
student intern in his lab for the summer. PI-Porter will host at least two
undergraduate students each summer research student funded by the BU
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (letter of support) to work on the
production and characterization of targeted lipid-coated microbubbles. PI-Sarkar
has a history of involving undergraduates in his contrast microbubble research,
resulting in a publication coauthored by an undergraduate. Two undergraduate
students will be working in his lab on this project. He will also connect the
research lab to the very successful ?Engineering Cool Stuff? program run by the
UD Engineering Outreach.