* 1134301
* IDR: Thermal and Electronic Transport Processes in Monolayer-Scale Chemically Ordered Semiconductor Films
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Pamela Norris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2015
* USD 588,329.00

PI: Pamela M. Norris and Jerrold
Floro&lt;br/&gt;CBET-1134301&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The control of thermal energy
(heat) flowing through a material, expressed as the thermal conductivity of the
material, is critically important to many applications. A particular technology
that is relevant to concerns over energy consumption and global warming is
thermoelectric generators, which contain materials that allow the inevitable
waste heat generated in any fuel-burning process to be further converted
directly to electricity. Good thermoelectric materials (those that produce the
most electricity for a given heat load) are semiconductors that must
simultaneously have low thermal conductivity and high electrical conductivity.
These two requirements are at odds with one another, and this tension has
frustrated the development of highly efficient thermoelectric
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will investigate a new approach to
making better thermoelectric materials. The primary concept is that alloys of Ge
and Si will be grown into atomically ordered structures. This ordering takes
place spontaneously, producing alternating chemical arrangements of Ge and Si
atoms that cannot be formed by conventional synthetic approaches. Ordering
should keep the electrical conductivity high, since it reduces the scattering of
electrical charges compared to a disordered alloy, and it can reduce the thermal
conductivity by exploiting a special kind of scattering mechanism, called
Umklapp scattering. Simulations predict that Umklapp scattering will be enhanced
by chemical ordering, especially at higher temperatures where thermoelectric
generators typically operate. This project employs advanced growth and
characterization techniques to produce these materials, ascertain their ordering
and measure their transport properties. Molecular dynamics simulations of energy
flow in ordered structures will be performed in support of the results. The
research will lend new insights into how atomic-scale ordering affects both
electrical and thermal conduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
investigate a new materials design strategy for ultimate use in thermoelectric
generators. These devices convert waste heat into electricity, but much more
efficient thermoelectric materials are needed in order to be cost effective. In
addition to thermoelectrics, developing new approaches to controlling thermal
conduction in materials is critical to many technologies. An important example
is the computer chip, where high-power processors generate tremendous heat that
must be efficiently conducted away from the device so that is does not destroy
itself. Beyond the technical contributions of this project lies a strong
commitment by the investigators to tightly integrate research and education
through the experiential and formal training of two graduate students.
Additionally, undergraduate students will be recruited from underrepresented
groups in engineering. For these students, exposure to the research environment
can be career-defining. Both the principal investigators direct and participate
in extensive science outreach activities with K-12 schoolchildren and educators.
Much of the focus of these effors is on bringing nano to the public, and for
this new project a thermoelectric demonstrator module will be developed that
will serve as an example of how materials nanostructuring can improve properties
important in the drive to reduce fossil fuel consumption.