* 1134953
* NEESR: Seismic Rehabilitation of Substandard Building Structures through Implementation of Stiff Rocking Cores (SRCRehab)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Gilberto Mosqueda, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2015
* USD 616,403.00

A research team from Case Western Reserve University, the University at Buffalo
(UB), and California Polytechnic State University (Cal Poly) will investigate a
methodology for rehabilitation of seismically substandard buildings through
implementation of stiff elastic rocking cores. The stiff rocking core (SRC) has
the potential to redistribute seismic forces along the core height to create a
more uniform building drift distribution. Concentrated ductility demands on a
single story can develop due to a number of reasons that may or may not be
foreseeable in initial design. For buildings that do not have adequate seismic
ductility and/or strength, added energy dissipating devices, such as steel
yielding devices or viscous dampers, can be implemented between the SRC and the
existing framing to reduce these demands. Implementation of the elastic SRC adds
the potential for re-centering of the building and is expected to be a cost-
effective and an architecturally flexible rehabilitation technique. This
research will investigate the behavior of the SRC and its interaction with
existing framing that includes low-rise and mid-rise, braced frame and moment
frame buildings to understand the key parameters for effective rehabilitative
design of substandard frames. Advanced analytical studies will be performed to
investigate the behavior and assess the effectiveness of the SRC for a range of
parameters. A key component of the research includes near full-scale
experimental hybrid testing of a three-story frame at the George E. Brown, Jr.
Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) facility at the UB. The
hybrid testing technique will allow for computational modeling of the existing
substandard framing and experimental testing of the SRC with added passive
energy dissipation. The testing is critical for understanding the interaction
between the existing framing and SRC and for verifying implementation issues at
or near full-scale. Data from this project will be archived and made available
to the public through the NEES Project Warehouse data repository at
http://www.nees.org.

This research will generate key knowledge needed to implement this
rehabilitation technique, which is both economical and sustainable, for
substandard building structures in moderate and high seismic regions. The
analytical and experimental results and design guidelines developed will be a
valuable resource for researchers and practitioners in the seismic design
community. Through technology transfer via the Project Advisory Committee, the
research outcomes will have an immediate impact on practice. Through
collaboration with the Cal Poly Multicultural Engineering Program, the project
will engage students from underrepresented groups to give them experience with
structural engineering research and laboratory experimentation, ultimately
helping to promote diversity in engineering and science and developing the next
generation of engineers. This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP).