* 1134919
* Arcadia: The Next Generation - Transforming STEM Learning through Transmedia Games
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,595.00

Designers and researchers from the Educational Gaming Environments group (EdGE)
at TERC are studying the design features (e.g., tools, media platforms,
facilitation) of an experimental gaming environment called Arcadia: The Next
Generation. This gaming environment supports high-quality scientific knowledge
building in a diverse, public audience. EdGE and its partner, GameGurus are
integrating web-based social networking, augmented reality, and data sharing
apps on smartphones into Arcadia and are working with a group of formal and
informal educators to study the connections between scientific inquiry in
Arcadia and STEM learning. EdGE is also examining various economic models that
can support the long-term sustainability of STEM gaming environments that bridge
home, community, and formal and informal learning. The project provides a
dynamic and evolving place where gamers, educators, parents, and citizen
scientists can come together to share, rate, and build knowledge through a
variety of fun science inquiry games. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
associated with Arcadia looks specifically at how game design (tools,
environment, storyline, reward system) can support and sustain scientific
inquiry. Researchers will relate these design features to the extent and nature
of scientific inquiry in Arcadia, the impact the gaming experience has on
players' sense of science identity and behaviors, and how this varies for
different types of players. Researchers are using methods from netnography
(Kozinets, 2002, Hine 2000) where digital records of avatar activity are
incorporated along with participant observations, surveys, and interviews. A
group of players recruited through colleagues' programs in informal and formal
science education settings are the subjects for a smaller sub-study that looks
at how to help transfer the science skills and knowledge gained in social games
to classroom and other forms of science education. EdGE has two small advisory
groups: a group of formal and informal educators to help with formative
evaluation and a group of experts in the areas of research to help guide the
interpretation of the research findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arcadia: The Next
Generation is an important step in working towards a vision of future learning
environments that span schools, homes, community settings, and social
entertainment sites where transmedia learning networks integrate real-life
components such as indoor and outdoor classrooms with free-choice Internet
experiences and citizen science programs. The primary deliverable of Arcadia:
The Next Generation is a model game environment that attracts and retains a
player audience and engages them in high quality scientific inquiry. The
associated research informs the field on how to leverage the tremendous amount
of time the public spends in social digital games, and how to direct that time
towards productive science learning. EdGE is partnering with youth and adult
programs at informal and citizen science centers to recruit and select the
research sample that is representative of the US population, including minority
youth and adults, so that researchers can learn how to sustain inquiry for a
broad and diverse population of social game players.