* 1134238
* An integrated molecular simulation, biophysical experimentation and toxicology bioassay approach for mechanistic understanding of toxic effects of ionic liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Edward Maginn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2015
* USD 352,820.00

PI: Jindal Shah&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1134238&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this research is to understand the molecular level mechanisms of
toxicity of ionic liquids, an emerging class of industrial solvents, and how
such mechanisms manifest at a systems level to result in toxicity to a given
organism. The proposed research will be guided by the as-yet unproven hypothesis
that ionic liquids directly interact with the phospholipid bilayer and thereby
compromise membrane integrity. An interdisciplinary team of biologists, chemical
engineers, and molecular modelers will collaborate on this project.
Toxicological bioassay experiments will be carried out to determine the ionic
liquid concentrations EC50 that cause a 50% reduction in growth of microbes
relative to a control. Single molecule spectroscopy and imaging experiments will
be used to determine the morphology and dynamics of model lipid bilayers around
the EC50 concentrations. Advanced molecular dynamics simulations will be carried
out at the same concentrations to quantify structural and dynamical quantities
for the lipid bilayer along with details on the molecular-level motion of the
bilayer. The simulations will also be used to determine the structure and
dynamics of ionic liquid species at the lipid bilayer interface, information
that is difficult to obtain experimentally. Two types of organisms will be
studied for toxicological bioassays: the alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and the
bacterium Escherichia coli. A neutral-lipid bilayer and a negatively-charged
lipid bilayer will serve as model organism membranes. Two very different classes
of ionic liquids will be investigated. The first set of ionic liquids will be
based on 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium cations with varying alkyl chain length
paired with anions such as chloride and bistrifluoromethylsulfonylimide, which
have been studied in great detail and are likely to be manufactured in large
quantities. The second set of ionic liquids will be comprised of the cation
tetrabutylphosphonium with similar anions. These ionic liquids and their
variations are less toxic than imidazolium-based ionic liquids and currently
being studied as potential CO2 capture solvents. &lt;br/&gt;The work is inspired
by the fact that ionic liquids defined as pure salts that are liquid at ambient
conditions ? have emerged as promising new solvents for a range of technological
applications including gas separations, lubrication, batteries, and as
therapeutic agents. An explosion in ionic liquid research within academia and
industry coupled with increasing likelihood of adoption of ionic liquids by
industry has resulted in an urgent need to understand the environmental impact
of these materials in terms of their fate, transport, and toxicity towards
organisms. A number of toxicity bioassay studies have suggested that alkyl chain
length, anion type, and lipophilicity all play a role in ionic liquid toxicity.
However, a fundamental molecular level understanding of how these factors
contribute to toxicity and how they can be manipulated to achieve desired
toxicity characteristics of ionic liquids is lacking. To address this critical
gap in knowledge, the proposed linked molecular simulation, biophysical
experimentation, and toxicity bioassay approach is highly promising as it will
result in a greater mechanistic understanding of ionic liquid toxicity than
would be possible by a single technique alone. &lt;br/&gt;Although the proposed
research is targeted at two classes of ionic liquids, the fundamental
understanding gained has broad implications and can be integrated into the
rational design of less toxic ionic liquids which will lead to development of
chemical processes and products with reduced environmental footprint. This work
also benefits current efforts aimed at exploiting therapeutic properties of
ionic liquids, where knowledge of ionic liquid interactions with the lipid
bilayer is critical. The study will provide essential information on the
characteristics of the cell membrane that determine susceptibility to disruption
by ionic liquids, which may ultimately enable the engineering of microorganisms
able to transport ionic liquids inside the cell for biodegradation of ionic
liquids. Another major goal of this research is to teach and train students how
to make an intellectual connection between molecular level interactions and the
manifestation of such interactions at a systems level by working in an
interdisciplinary experimental/computational environment. Efforts to recruit
women and students from underrepresented groups will follow the PI?s proven
methods and will build on several existing programs at Notre Dame. A wide
dissemination of the results from this activity to a broader audience is planned
through the Notre Dame Public Affairs Office