* 1134594
* Characterization and Control of Bioaerosol Toxicology for Indoor Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Mark Hernandez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 05/31/2015
* USD 273,761.00

PI: Mark Hernandez &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1134594&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While gas phase pollutants and suspended
particulate matter in atmosphere have received much attention, the biological
content as well as the biological activity of aerosols respectively termed
bioaerosol toxicology has been largely ignored by the engineering community.
Certainly this is not consistent with the environmental engineering perspective
concerning water quality. In response, this work will adapt quantitative
molecular biology methods for use in the atmospheric environment, with the
express purpose of assessing the composition and toxicological properties of
indoor bioaerosols. The methods developed will be applied to indoor aerosols
because most human exposure occurs indoors.&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing body of
evidence suggesting that both biogenic and inorganic pools of airborne
particulate matter can act as potent adjuvants that sensitize lungs and mucosal
membranes to air pollution both indoors and out. This sensitization manifests
through a broad spectrum of serious health effects, some of which are well known
infectious diseases, but many of which fall into generic respiratory diseases
including, but not limited to, allergenic, hypersensitivity and toxigenic
responses which often present as asthma. With the rapid growth of respiratory
illnesses over the last generation come their marked association with poor
indoor air quality IAQ and the reclamation of commercial and residential
building stocks from large-scale disasters: floods, storms, tsunamis and
earthquakes. There is relatively little information regarding bioaerosol
exposures within buildings impacted by water/structural damage. IAQ regulatory
criteria for building reoccupation have not been defined from an epidemiological
perspective appropriate for building stocks impacted by disasters.&lt;br/&gt;In
response to this paucity, a primary scientific goal of this study is to
comprehensively characterize bioaerosol loads: biochemically, ecologically and
toxicologically. An associated engineering goal of this study is to assess the
in-situ efficacy of applying a new generation of electrically enhanced air
filter technology for the express purpose of reducing indoor bioaerosol exposure
? both in the lab with surrogate bioaerosols, and in the field. High incident,
water damaged buildings on the campuses and in the proximity of Dillard
University and the University of Colorado, will serve as field sites for this
demonstration study. Dillard is a historically black college in New Orleans,
which sustained tremendous damage from Hurricane Katrina. Supplementing
Dillard?s related NSF support HRD 1118254, mentoring from Colorado?s graduate
bioaerosol research group will be formally extended to&lt;br/&gt;Dillard?s
students, who will be trained in modern bioaerosol assessment techniques using
REU-like formats and university exchanges. Buildings that have been previously
identified with elevated or otherwise dangerous indoor bioaerosol levels
pathogenic microbes, will be retrofit with electrostatically enhanced filters.
Carrier Corporation and the Hunter Fan Company have agreed to provide in-kind
stand alone filtration equipment for the purposes of this intervention study.
The performance of this emerging technology will be as evaluated for its IAQ
remediation ability in a sustainable context.&lt;br/&gt;The intrinsic scientific
merits of this study lie in establishing a robust suite of fundamental
aerobiological characterization tools for indoor aerosols, to include
biochemical and toxicological indices which have never collectively been used in
the atmospheric environment before. Engineering merit lies in the assessment of
emerging filter technology to cost-effectively manipulate indoor bioaerosol
levels for broad public health benefit. &lt;br/&gt;Broader reaching impacts stem
from a discovery-driven partnership between an ?R1? University with extensive
bioaerosol and IAQ engineering expertise, and an HBCU recovering from Katrina.
This project will enhance Dillard?s educational infrastructure and bring modern
industrial hygiene training capabilities to underrepresented students in a
region that because of Katrina, no longer has Environmental Engineering programs
Tulane has closed its program. This work will demonstrate a fundamental basis
for the regulatory suite of IAQ indices to include more robust bioaerosol
analyses in the future, and link biological characterization of indoor
atmospheric environments to building reclamation and reoccupation practices.