* 1134416
* Engineering high-performance voltage sensors for optogenetic imaging of neuronal circuit activity
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Michael Lin, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 319,996.00

1134416&lt;br/&gt;Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being able to both control and
monitor neuronal activity is critical for learning how
neuronal&lt;br/&gt;circuits process information and make decisions. However,
while powerful tools to control neuronal firing&lt;br/&gt;using genetically
encoded light-activated channels have recently been developed, limitations of
current&lt;br/&gt;genetically encoded sensors of neuronal activity severely
restrict their use for monitoring brain function.&lt;br/&gt;In particular,
calcium sensors are slow and cannot report on subthreshold depolarizations.
While voltage&lt;br/&gt;sensors could in principle be used to follow fast trains
of action potentials and monitor subthreshold&lt;br/&gt;depolarizations, the low
dynamic range of existing sensors makes them unsuitable for most
experiments&lt;br/&gt;in vivo. Moreover, there are presently no calcium or
voltage sensors that are efficiently excited by red&lt;br/&gt;(&gt;550nm)
wavelengths, a region of the spectrum that would enable their concurrent use
with blue/greenabsorbing&lt;br/&gt;light-activated channels.&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this proposal is to address these needs by developing a new generation of
genetically&lt;br/&gt;encoded voltage biosensors with significantly improved
dynamic range and speed and the ability to be&lt;br/&gt;used concurrently with
light-activated channels. This work will enable finer and more powerful
functional&lt;br/&gt;dissection of the nervous system, while also establishing
new protein engineering methods. The expertise&lt;br/&gt;of the lab in
fluorescent proteins engineering will be leveraged to educate future scientists
and engineers&lt;br/&gt;about research in protein engineering, and to introduce
educators to the utility of genetically encoded&lt;br/&gt;biosensors for
teaching scientific concepts in laboratory
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The engineering
objective of this proposal is to apply knowledge of fluorescence
spectroscopy&lt;br/&gt;and protein structure to quantitatively improve the
performance of an existing class of voltage sensors&lt;br/&gt;(Aim 1) and to
develop an entirely new class of voltage sensors (Aim 2). In the first aim, we
will increase&lt;br/&gt;dynamic range via rational optimization of Förster
resonance energy transfer (FRET) between fluorescent&lt;br/&gt;proteins linked
to a voltage sensing domain. In the second aim, we will use a conformationally
sensitive&lt;br/&gt;red fluorescent protein to report on movements of a voltage
sensing domain with rapid kinetics. For both&lt;br/&gt;aims, we will employ
rational design combined with comprehensive saturation mutagenesis and
screening&lt;br/&gt;of important sites.&lt;br/&gt;This project will be a
pioneering study in molecular engineering in two ways. It will be the first
to&lt;br/&gt;rationally apply predictions from modeling of Förster resonance
energy transfer to identify the factors&lt;br/&gt;limiting the fluorescence
output response, and then to perform protein engineering to
comprehensively&lt;br/&gt;address those factors. Second, this project will be
the first to combine comprehensive screening with&lt;br/&gt;atomic-level
structural knowledge of sensing domains and fluorescent proteins in order to
create an&lt;br/&gt;entirely new class of allosteric voltage sensors; this
research will thus give insight on the relative&lt;br/&gt;usefulness of prior
knowledge and screening to the engineering of genetically encoded
biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Voltage sensors
developed through this project will be promptly disseminated to the
larger&lt;br/&gt;scientific community. These sensors will have a broad impact on
the field of neuroscience by enabling&lt;br/&gt;robust voltage sensing and
concurrent control and readout of neuronal activity. Our work will also
impact&lt;br/&gt;the field of bioengineering by validating concepts and
establishing strategies for how to optimize the&lt;br/&gt;design of fluorescent
protein-based sensors using energy transfer or allostery.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will provide an excellent opportunity to introduce undergraduates and
high&lt;br/&gt;school students, including students from disadvantaged
backgrounds, to research in molecular&lt;br/&gt;bioengineering. It will also
provide the opportunity to introduce educators to the use of
genetically&lt;br/&gt;encoded biosensing to create exciting laboratory lessons
that teach important basic concepts while&lt;br/&gt;demonstrating the results of
recent research in protein engineering.