* 1134427
* GOALI: A New Strategy for Biofouling Control of Water Filtration Membranes Using D-amino Acids
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Charles Liu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 351,996.00

PI: Qilin Li&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1134427&lt;br/&gt;Biofouling remains the
biggest barrier to application of membrane technology in water and wastewater
treatment despite intensive research in the past decades. Inspired by the recent
discovery that D-amino acids (D-AAs) commonly produced by bacteria can trigger
bioiflm disassembly at very low concentrations, the researchers propose a
university-industry collaborative project to develop a novel, highly effective
and environmentally friendly approach to biofouling control in membrane systems
using D-AAs. The main objective of the proposed research is to assess the
potential of and develop strategies for using D-AAs to control biofouling in
wastewater treatment membrane systems. Their central hypothesis is that D-AAs
are common interspecies signal compounds used by different bacteria to mediate
biofilm disassembly; careful manipulation of this regulation process can prevent
biofilm&lt;br/&gt;formation and remove preformed biofilms. The long term goal of
our collaboration is to develop and commercialize a highly effective,
environmentally benign membrane cleaning method for biofouling control in
membrane bioreactors (MBR) and reverse osmosis (RO) systems.&lt;br/&gt; They
will first screen all 19 D-AAs individually and in combinations for their
individual and synergistic effects on biofilm-formation and disassembly of model
bacterial single cultures as well as mixed cultures from conventional activated
sludge and MBR. Using well characterized model bactedria, they will investigate
the key mechanisms involved by probing bacterial responses to D-AAs in cell
growth, peptidoglycan synthesis, surface proteins and lipopolysaccharides, and
relating them to cell-cell and cellsurface adhesion as well as biofilm
structural integrity. The potential of bacteria developing resistance over long
term exposure will also be investigated and corresponding mitigation strategies
evaluated. Information obtained from these fundamental researches will be used
to develop practical biofouling control strategies, which will be tested in
laboratory membrane units, a small scale MBR-RO system, and a pilot MBR
system.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study explores a new paradigm of membrane
biofouling control based on a recent scientific discovery. It will determine the
commonality in bacteria?s use of D-AAs as interspecies signals for biofilm
mediation and provide a mechanistic understanding of the process at the cellular
level. This will not only advance our knowledge in biofilm formation and
regulation, but also open a window of opportunity for developing biofouling
control strategies utilizing this specific signal pathway. It is the first study
to systematically examine all 19 D-AAs, the first to assess the impact of DAAs
on multi-species biofilms, the first to investigate the connection between D-AA
induced cell physiological changes and biofilms formation/ disassembly, and the
first to seek engineering application of this new science. Industry
participation makes it possible to test the biofouling control methods using
realistic conditions and at pilot scale, facilitating industry application of
the scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;From the fundamental aspect, the project
contributes to our understanding of chemical&lt;br/&gt;signal pathways used by
bacteria to regulate biofilms, which has great impact on many scientific fields
including microbiology, biochemistry, environmental, biomedical, and chemical
engineering. From the application point of view, D-AA or D-AA analogue based
biofilm control strategies could be used in a large number of environmental,
biomedical and industrial systems, e.g., sensors, medical implants,
water/wastewater treatment and distribution systems, cooling towers and food
processing equipment, to prevent detrimental impact of biofilms. The university-
industry collaboration provides a much needed bridge from fundamental research
to technology development and implementation. The education and research
activities proposed will enrich our undergraduate and graduate curricula through
a new lab module and guest lectures, and provide research training to graduate
and undergraduate students with special effort in recruiting women and minority
students. Students will be involved in industry R&amp;D to take the state-of-
the-art academic research directly to industrial technology development, work
closely with practitioners on real engineering systems, and learn effective
communication across disciplines. The PI and the industry co-PI will also
jointly provide educational experiences to high school teachers and
environmental engineers.