* 1134780
* Automatic Detection of Cortical Networks across Frequencies in Audiovisual Speech Integration
* SBE,BCS
* 02/25/2011,09/30/2014
* Dimitrios Pantazis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 09/30/2014
* USD 553,418.00

The brain-basis of perception is complex, and recent research suggests that
neural processing depends on large-scale oscillation of neuronal units.
Oscillatory cortical networks detected with electroencephalography and
magnetoencephalography recordings often involve several frequency bands,
indicating that a multivariate (multi-frequency) analytic approach would have
better sensitivity in detecting neural effects than univariate analysis.
However, popular connectivity measures, such as coherence and phase synchrony,
typically analyze pairs of spatial locations and take into account a single
quantity from each location, such as amplitude or phase within a specified
frequency band. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Drs.
Dimitrios Pantazis, Richard Leahy, and Jintao Jiang will develop robust
multivariate statistical methods for detecting brain interactions in
electroencephalography. Given the wealth of information in
electroencephalography data, analysis using a single frequency approach requires
either prior knowledge of the frequencies at which interactions occur or,
conversely, a large number of tests, one for each possible type of interaction.
In this project, the researchers are using canonical correlation analysis, which
can find the optimal combinations of frequencies in one cortical site that best
correlate with frequencies at another cortical site. In contrast to conventional
methods of interaction analysis, this project is automating the identification
of frequency bands that contribute significantly to cortical networks. The
target application focuses on audiovisual speech integration effects. The
multivariate methods developed in this proposal are being used to detect
multisensory interaction cortical sites and account for different levels of
phase-resetting from audiovisual speech stimuli with different stimulus onset
asynchronies.

This research will facilitate the detection of oscillatory cortical networks
both in the normal and pathologic brain. Changes in oscillatory brain activity
have been reported in a wide array of neurological diseases, including epilepsy,
schizophrenia, and Alzheimer's disease, and improved methodologies to detect the
presence and differences in oscillatory activity and associated networks will in
turn advance the understanding of these diseases and facilitate the development
and assessment of therapeutic interventions. This effort brings together
engineers and neuroscientists to tackle a broad range of scientific and
technological problems, and as a result, the project offers opportunities for
integrated interdisciplinary research training of doctoral students. Research
results will be disseminated broadly to the research community through
professional meetings and journals, and the developed research tools will be
distributed to the research community through the open source software
BrainStorm.