* 1134376
* Understanding Photo-conversion Processes in Biomimetic Photoelectrochemical Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sergei Savikhin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Choi Proposal Number: 1134376

Solar cells based on photoelectrochemical conversion of sunlight to electricity
suffer from relatively narrow light absorption and cell degradation, which
reduces device performance and lifetime. In nature, photosynthesis has solved
many of these problems. Photosynthesis is a biologically-mediated
photoelectrochemical process for conversion of sunlight into electrons. Natural
photosynthesis has perfected robust molecular machineries that enhance photo-
excitation energy collection using an array of chromophores that counteract the
effect of photo-damage via self-regeneration. The current limitations of
photoelectrochemical cells can be better understood and potentially improved by
mimicking natural photosynthesis with artificial photosystems. The overall goal
of this research is to develop general design rules to build artificial
photosystems with improved overall photo-conversion efficiency and service
lifetime.

This research seeks to mimic the photo-absorption/conversion and self-
regeneration processes of natural photosynthesis with synthetic chromophore
nanomaterials through biomolecular nanofabrication techniques. Specifically,
photo-pigments and quantum wires will be reversibly assembled via programmable
DNA molecular recognition techniques, forming photoelectrochemical
nanostructures capable of panchromatic absorption and system repair. For
example, DNA-based assembly of selective porphyrin chromophores on single-walled
carbon nanotubes can interact with G-quadruplexes to facilitate charge transfer
at the nanoscale. By this approach, a variety of synthetic photo-conversion
nanostructures capable of mimicking the structure and function of natural
photosystems will be developed, and their photo absorption and conversion
processes will be studied using ultrafast pump-probe measurement of the energy
and charge transport processes. This data will be analyzed to elucidate the
thermodynamics and kinetics of photo-conversion processes, and generate design
rules for constructing artificial photosynthetic units.

Broader Impacts

The proposed activities will couple the research efforts to educational and
outreach activities designed to advance the public understanding of artificial
photosynthesis. Specifically, hands-on modules for high-school students will be
developed for Introduce a Girl to Engineering Day and Discovery Days hosted by
Purdue University, and research outcomes will also be featured on nanoHUB, an
NSF-funded, Purdue-based nanotechnology website. Female and underrepresented
undergraduate students will be recruited for participation in the research
through the Women in Engineering and Minority Engineering Programs at Purdue
University.