* 1134486
* Collaborative Research : Bandgap engineered composite oxide nanomaterials (BECONs) for solar energy conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,11/30/2015
* Vaidyanathan Subramanian, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 11/30/2015
* USD 266,373.00

1134486 Subramanian

Photocatalysis and nanomaterial fabrication are one of the keys to developing
renewable energy sources. PIs Vaidyanathan Subramanian of the University of
Nevada Reno and Muhammad Huda of University of Texas at Arlington have received
an award to test the hypothesis that a class of stable multi-functional bandgap-
engineered composite oxide nanomaterials (BECONs) can be constructed with
inexpensive, eco-friendly, and earth abundant elements. These BECONs will be
used in photocatalysis and enable new solar-driven processes for energy
generation, producing solar fuels such as hydrogen from water and methane or
methanol from CO2. The integrated theoretical and experimental research involves
studying a promising model system of photoactive BECONs from the pyrochlore
family (A2B2O7) that drive water-splitting reactions using visible light. BECON
using Bi, Ti, and Fe will be synthesized using a novel reverse micelle method.
Through the collaboration, the structure-property-relationships, multi-
functionality, and photocatalytic activity of these model materials will be
investigated. Density functional theory studies will help interpret experimental
data and drive materials design.

Several features of this proposal are unique and may offer transformative
outcomes. First, one of the limits in solar energy driven processes is the
ability to use the entire spectrum of light to produce photocatalysis and
energy. New materials with suitable bandgaps are always being sought for this
use. The PIs have already obtained some encouraging preliminary data which
supports the potential of BECONS to convert visible light and not just the
ultraviolet light to energy service. In addition the use of non-exotic elements
is in line with the current direction for the sustainable material search.
Finally the collaborative efforts marry the predictions resulting from the
modeling work with the experimental synthesis and testing work.

The educational/outreach objectives of the proposal include a new undergraduate
course that integrates content from the research program to teach
photoelectrochemistry concepts; a toolkit for screening photoactive materials
for solar energy conversion applications for undergraduate and graduate student
use; and to coordinate and continue advising the sustainable energy forum, a
popular student organization that the UNR-PI has conceived and established at
University of Nevada, Reno, that focuses on awareness about alternate energy.

The idea is interesting, the results could be significant, and this project is a
part of the Program efforts at supporting catalytic programs in renewable
energy. This proposed work will have an impact on scientific and technological
aspects of solar driven processes to facilitate efficient harvesting of visible
light to deliver photocatalytic solar energy assisted fuel production.