* 1134119
* Collaborative Research: Magnetic Directed Alignment of Injectable  Neural Stem Cell Scaffold for Regeneration After Spinal Cord Injury
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Li Sun, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 263,301.00

1134119 / 1134449&lt;br/&gt;Liu / Cao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this award is to develop a novel technique to fabricate injectable,
alignable, and bioactive scaffold that uses neural stem cells (NSCs) as building
blocks for spinal cord injury (SCI) repair. This work capitalizes on the ability
to manipulate superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) with magnetic
field remotely and noninvasively. In this approach, the NSCs are labeled with
nanoengineered cationic magnetoliposomes (CMLs) which encapsulate numerous
SPIONs, and can be injected into the injured spinal cord in colloidal
suspensions. Upon the application of a magnetic field, magnetically labeled NSCs
will spontaneously self-assemble into chain/column lattices and align along a
virtual axis that is defined by the field flux lines, thereby forming a scaffold
to guide the directional regrowth of axons. Neurotrophic factors stored in the
bilayer of the CMLs can be released by radio frequency electromagnetic
triggering to promote NSC survival and axonal growth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will transform state-of-the-art of biological scaffold
fabrication in tissue engineering, when directional guidance is desired for
cellular growth and expansion, and enhance the therapeutic strategies for
challenging issues of experimental spinal cord injury and neurodegenerative
diseases. This work will also help to greatly expand the use of SPIONs in
general clinical applications by changing their role from passive tracer (e.g.,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents) to active enabler of
biological processes. The technology developed can be conveniently translated to
clinical treatments of a diverse group of nervous system diseases, such as
traumatic brain injury (TBI) and peripheral nerve disorders. It will benefit
hundreds of thousands of Americans who are have severely limited mobility or
paralyzed incurring from these diseases. Additionally, this work investigates
the magnetic directed self-assembly of soft biological particles under
histological conditions, and the findings will advance fundamental understanding
of aggregation kinetics and phase separation in dipolar colloids, which
constitutes the basis of a variety of micro/nanofluidic applications. Through
the proposed project, an integrated interdisciplinary research and education
program will be established which creates vast opportunities for
underrepresented groups, by actively recruiting qualified minority students for
both undergraduate and graduate studies and by engaging in K-12 teacher/student
outreach activities.