* 1134331
* U.S.-Mexico Planning Visit: Investigating the Interaction of Macro-Political Change on Local Landscape and Residence through Collaborative Archaeological Research, Yucatan, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Shoshaunna Parks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2013
* USD 40,947.00

In this planning project researchers from the U.S. and Mexico will catalyze a
collaboration between archaeologists at the University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill (UNC-CH) and the Unversidad del Oriente (UNO) in Vallodolid, Yucatan,
Mexico. The collaboration is focused on an archaeological investigation of the
interaction of macro-political change with local landscape and residence. Due to
the specific occupational history of the Yucatán, this area is a promising
locale for this research. Importantly, the presence of local indigenous
communities presents an opportunity to refine methods of community-based
participatory research within archaeology. Two researchers from UNC-CH, Drs.
Patricia A. McAnany &amp; Shoshaunna Parks and two graduate students will
collaborate with Dr.Adolfo Ivan Batún Alpuche of Universidad del Oriente (UNO)
and his undergraduate students. The proposal that will result from this planning
grant will examine how the series of seismic political changes in the Yucatán
Peninsula from the Terminal Classic period (800-1000 CE) through the 19th
century affected landscape use as well as the quotidian activities of non-elite
Maya household members, particularly women and their tribute-related work of
cotton cloth production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project
include the refinement of methods within Maya Archaeology that combine cutting-
edge science with knowledge-sharing programs that engage indigenous communities
and enhancement of Maya cultural survival and of the conservation of local
heritage places. The long-term project to follow this planning grant will offer
educational opportunities to children, youth, and adults through workshops,
radio broadcasts, and performances via local NGOs and primary/secondary schools.
U.S. students and a young female faculty member will also participate in these
investigations. Involvement of junior researchers in international research is a
major goal of OISE.