* 1134721
* I/UCRC CGI: Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Intelligent Maintenance Systems Center: Five Year Renewal Phase III
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Jagannathan Sarangapani, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

IIP 1134684 &lt;br/&gt;University of Cincinnati; Lee &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP
1134676 &lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan; Ni &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP 1134721
&lt;br/&gt;Missouri University of Science and Technology; Sarangapani
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center
(I/UCRC) on Intelligent &lt;br/&gt;Maintenance Systems (IMS) was established in
2001. This proposal builds upon the accomplishments of the previous ten years
and seeks funding to continue supporting a three campus operation among the
University of Cincinnati (leading institution), the University of Michigan, and
Missouri Univ. of S&amp;T. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center addresses the
underlying issues in machine degradation modeling and prediction as well as
develops the transformational technology in advanced prognostics. Over the past
10 years, the Center has developed systematic methodology and tools that made
evident impacts to a number of member companies including Toyota, G.M., Boeing,
P&amp;G, and National Instruments, amongst others. Over the next five years, the
Center intends to advance the scientific base as well as to validate the
developed tools to further accelerate the deployment and commercialization of
the developed technologies. The center also plans to have international sites in
Singapore, Brazil and Spain. In addition, the Center plans to develop spin-off
companies with a compelling Marketing Plan in order to commercialize its tools
through its member company, National Instruments, in 2011.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMS IUCRC fills an important niche to maintain
industry global competiveness by continuous improvement of manufacturing
effectiveness and efficiency. The center educates students and its membership
through an extensive system of internship and scholar exchanges as well as
international workshops and courses. IMS has developed and continues to execute
an effective system for innovation and IP generation. The Center plans to
develop spin-off companies with a compelling Marketing Plan in order to
commercialize its tools through its member company, National Instruments, in
2011.