* 1134539
* DRRC/Collaborative Research:  Emergency Management in Rural America: Decision-Makers Use of Climate Science in Flood Planning and Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kelly Redmond, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2015
* USD 105,698.00

The objective of this Disaster Resilience for Rural Communities (DRRC)
collaborative research project is to examine the obstacles to and opportunities
for the use of seasonal climate forecasts in flood planning and management in
U.S. rural areas, focusing on the 1) characteristics that make scientific and
technical information likely to be used by rural practitioners; 2) structure and
function of networks of rural users of forecast information and; 3) influence of
group decision processes in decision making about how and whether to employ
climate forecasts in rural flood management. The approach begins with four case
studies of rural regions that have attempted to use seasonal climate
information. After that, a national-level survey of stakeholders engaged in
flood planning and emergency management in rural areas to investigate
experiences with and factors affecting the use of climate information will be
implemented. Finally, in-person simulations of local, regional, and state-level
stakeholders in two US rural regions to investigate how network features, group
biases, and decision structures influence climate forecast use in rural flood
planning and management will be conducted. The chief intellectual merit of this
project lies in enhancing understanding of the development of trust and
collaboration in weak and strong network administrative organization and in
extending the literature on emergency management decision-making in tightly-knit
urban response networks to dispersed rural pre-disaster planning and mitigation.
This work also advances approaches to capture and measure preferences related to
characteristics of uncertain information and to compare individual-based stated
preferences and group decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seasonal climate
information such as forecasts of El Ni√±o conditions months ahead of time can be
used to improve planning and management of weather-related extreme events such
as floods. Unfortunately, even when seasonal forecast information appears clear,
putting knowledge about likely climate conditions into practice to improve
planning for extreme events before they happen poses difficulties. Flood and
other emergency managers typically work in situations with tight budgets, and
they also must make decisions quickly. In addition, managers may find it
difficult to clearly communicate to the public and policymakers the range of
possible outcomes from events that are highly uncertain. This may be
particularly the case in rural areas, where geographic distances complicate
communication and technical expertise disperses more widely than in concentrated
urban areas. This project examines whether the way in which forecast information
is presented and the way in which those involved in emergency management in
rural areas interact with each other influence the ability to use seasonal
climate information to improve planning and management to reduce societal losses
from floods.