* 1134580
* IDR-Collaborative Research: The impact of green infrastructure on urban microclimate and energy use
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* W. James Steenburgh, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 757,718.00

1134580/1133590 &lt;br/&gt;Pardyjak/Willemsen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale
simulation science will be used to investigate the impact of green
infrastructure projects on urban energy use and microclimate. Green
infrastructure projects come in many forms including the development of parks,
alteration of building rooftops, and the use of novel asphalt and concrete
materials for streets and parking lots. They all share the common goals of
reducing energy usage, mitigating pollution emissions and improving the urban
microclimate. Due to difficulty in simulating the large disparity in length
scales (m to km), little is known about their impact. An interdisciplinary team
will utilize a suite of computationally based strategies to bridge these scales
and improve understanding of how green infrastructure interacts with the urban
environment at local (neighborhood), city, and meso- scales. Specifically, how
the distribution of heat, moisture and pollutants can be effected will be
investigated. The PIs hypothesize that large-scale simulation science can be
used to find optimal green infrastructure designs. The complex interaction
between urban form and green infrastructure will be investigated and strategies
to guide future projects will be developed. To adequately resolve the
fundamental transport processes that govern the distribution of heat, water
vapor and pollutants across a wide range of scales will require petascale
computing. A new urban fluid dynamics and mass transport simulation code inside
of a massively parallel computational framework (Uintah) capable of taking
advantage of the largest computing platforms will be implemented. This
simulation tool will be combined with mesoscale simulations to produce high-
resolution (on the order of 1 m) simulations of the urban core with realistic
atmospheric forcing conditions. Mesoscale simulations will also be combined with
an extremely fast-running GPU based urban microclimate and dispersion tool to
optimize the design of green infrastructure projects based on different criteria
(e.g., energy usage, space). The target simulation scenario is a full diurnal
cycle of Oklahoma City during the Joint Urban 2003 field campaign, with high
fidelity physics, resolving physical effects at length scales ranging from ~1m
to 1000?s km. This target scenario takes advantage of the extensive datasets
from Oklahoma City taken during the field experiment allowing for detailed
validation. These simulation tools will aid urban planners in developing useful
and unique strategies for the designing and implementation of green
infrastructure projects. To ensure this, work with urban planners will continue
throughout the model development process. The data from the high-resolution
simulations will be made available in an archival form to other researchers
working on urban meteorology applications. These data will span an unprecedented
range of scales and have a detailed representation of the physical processes.
The data are anticipated to be useful for a wide range of model development and
theoretical work outside the scope of this project. In addition, included is a
substantial outreach component at both collaborating universities designed to
introduce American Indians, Alaskan Natives, and other minorities to simulation
science and environmental engineering. Students will be invited to a weeklong
interactive learning symposium during each of the three years of the project. In
addition, this project will provide interdisciplinary training in the
atmospheric, engineering, computer and social sciences for graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers through collaborative research activities and from
involvement in the Global Change and Ecosystem Center at the University of Utah.