* 1134723
* CONNECTION ONE Rensselaer Research Site Renewal
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Michael Shur, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 02/28/2015
* USD 125,359.00

Program Director's Recommendation &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #1134723
&lt;br/&gt;Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI); Shur
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Connection One site at the Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute (RPI) is proposing a Phase II support (second five-year period) for
the Center, including support for central personnel, evaluation and research.
The center is currently comprised of the Arizona State University (lead), the
University of Arizona, the University of Hawaii, and the Ohio State University
as research partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Phase II RPI
proposal is to build on and continue its successful Phase I effort as part of
the "Connection One: Communications Circuits and Systems Center" (C1 Center)
already funded by the National Science Foundation Industry/University
Cooperative Research Program. The proposed program will expand the C1 research
base in advancing the understanding of advanced terahertz electronics and RF
devices, developing the principles of technologies for fast and secure
communication, and fast and efficient optical-to-electrical signal conversion in
nanoscale heterostructures. The program will also include the development of
novel device designs with dual electrical/optical control and the corresponding
circuit design concepts and methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed site
will serve as a catalyst for the next generation of communication and data
transport industries in the United States. This Research Site will serve as a
focal point for collaborative research and for the education of a diverse new
generation of students and scientists prepared to develop and lead the
deployment of such new technologies. The Center/site will facilitate the
industrial experience of students improving their job prospects and exposing
them to experts from industry. The transformative nature of the program at RPI
will be instrumental in engaging students, attracting them to REU, graduate
programs and summer internships; it will also be a key tool towards increasing
the participation of minority students in cutting edge research by
recruitingthem for REU projects and establishing joint programs with HBCUs.