* 1134231
* Quantifying Nanomaterial Dose in Drinking Water and Assessing the Environmental Risks Posed by Residual Waste Streams Rich in Manufactured Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Thomas Edgar, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

1134231 Brant This NSF award by the Environmental Health and Safety of
Nanotechnology program supports work by Professor Jonathan Brant to study the
removal of manufactured nanomaterials from drinking water. The project team will
also study the release of manufactured nanomaterials into the natural
environment from the residual waste products that are generated during the
drinking water treatment. This work is important to the general public because
it will provide the data that is necessary for determining what dose may be
expected for various manufactured nanomaterials in drinking water that has been
treated using conventional and advanced technologies. It will also help to
determine the suitability of existing approaches for disposing of treatment
residuals for preventing the release of manufactured nanomaterials into the
surrounding environment. Such information is needed in order to determine the
risk that may be associated with the continued development and commercialization
of manufactured nanomaterials, and ultimately with the products that result from
advancements in nanotechnology.

The broader significance and importance of this project will be twofold. First,
the results and insights gained from this work will provide a basis by which
engineers, scientists, and regulators can begin to assess the ability of
existing treatment schemes for effectively removing manufactured nanomaterials
from drinking water. Furthermore, it will provide a quantitative assessment of
the concentration, or dose, of these materials that may reasonably be expected
to occur in conventionally treated drinking water. These findings hold great
significance for society as it seeks to understand the risks that are associated
with nanotechnology, with which manufactured nanomaterials are intimately
related. Second, students in Wyoming, both K-12 and college level, will learn
how to treat drinking water using both conventional and advanced approaches and
be introduced to one of tomorrow?s most pressing problems ? the emergence and
subsequent removal of new drinking water contaminants.