* 1134535
* Probing the Structure-property Relationship of Core/Shell Bimetal Nanoparticles as a Model Catalyst
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Michael Wong, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 336,023.00

Abstract

Technical Impact

The combination of two metals to make a bimetallic catalyst frequently leads to
a more catalytically active material than either constituent metal. Besides
higher activities, bimetallic catalysts can have improved selectivities and
greater deactivation resistance. The catalytic chemistry that explains how
bimetallic enhancement arises is not well explained. Depending on the chemical
reaction, the enhancement can be attributed to a geometric effect, an electronic
effect, or a mixed metal site effect. The difficulties in determining the source
of catalytic enhancement are numerous: enhancement could be due to a combination
of these effects; the bimetallic nanostructure is not well-controlled at the
synthesis level; there may be a metal-support interaction; or the studied
bimetallic nanostructure can reconfigure during the chemical reaction.

So, how to develop a greater understanding of bimetallic catalysts so that they
may be exploited appropriately is a significant question. Professor Michael Wong
at William Marsh Rice University in Houston has an approach to developing more
of this understanding. Wong intends to focus on a model of a bimetallic catalyst
in which metallic nanoparticles of one metal are the support for the second
active metal. The interaction is built-in and controllable, and amenable to the
analysis of the bimetallic nanostructure using spectroscopic methods near
reaction conditions; and culminating in the quantification of their catalytic
properties under reaction conditions that do not modify the nanostructure. The
model system is based on previous studies using palladium metal supported on
gold nanoparticles, and the model test reaction is the catalysis in the water
phase of trichloroethene hydrodechlorination.

Continued innovations in catalysis technology rely on the development of novel
materials and the rigorous elucidation of reactivity dependence on catalyst
nanostructure.PdAu bimetallic catalysis has shown some promise as a new
technology for water-phase hydrodechlorination. This technology is important for
pollution control in groundwater, a source for >50% of US drinking water.

Broader Impact

This proposal describes a three-year research and teaching plan consisting of
multidisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in materials
chemistry, heterogeneous catalysis, chemical engineering fundamentals, and
colloid science. Three new educational and community outreach activities are
proposed: a yearly NanoDays demonstration at the Children's Museum of Houston, a
local-area high school teachers development program in coordination with the
NSF-sponsored RET program at Rice, and a lab module design project incorporated
into the graduate-level kinetics/reactor engineering course. This award is being
funded jointly by the CBET Catalysis and Biocatalysis Program and the CHE
Catalysis Program.