* 1134371
* Isothermal Titration Calorimeter for Bio/Nano-Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Paschalis Alexandridis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,000.00

1134371&lt;br/&gt;Tsianou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this small
equipment proposal is to acquire a high-sensitivity Isothermal Titration
Calorimeter (ITC) for the study of interactions and physical transformations in
systems containing biomolecules, macromolecules, and/or nanomaterials. This
equipment will significantly enhance current research capabilities for the PIs
and initiate new research projects. ITC can provide fundamental, thermodynamic
information on a minority component or on weak enthalpic transitions, using only
small sample volumes. Calorimetry can, thus, offer valuable insights in complex,
multicomponent and nanostructured systems. No ITC instrument is currently
available at the SUNY-Buffalo North (Amherst) campus where all the Engineering
and Natural Sciences research laboratories are located, and all undergraduate
instruction takes place. The proposed ITC will thus present a new and unique
addition to the PIs research and education capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Nanostructured products and devices
containing synthetic or biological macromolecules and/or nanoparticles
contribute significantly to the quality of life and economic growth. The
elucidation of intermolecular interactions in complex, bio/macromolecular
systems provides the fundamental underpinning of research advances that support
such technological progress. The proposed instrumentation will support high
quality scientific research. In particular, this sensitive calorimeter will
greatly enhance our current and future research efforts on thermodynamic
characterization of: (a) biomolecules in solution, with an emphasis on
understanding and optimizing protein-ligand binding; (b) self-assembled systems,
with projects ranging from interaction of bioactive molecules with lipidic
nanoparticles to structuring in ionic liquid media; and (c) nanomaterials, with
specific interests on polyelectrolyte multilayers used in the assembly of
functional films, and interactions and phenomena leading to cellulose
dissolution. The investigators work in different research areas, but all share
common interests in elucidating molecular interactions in the nanoscale and
using this knowledge to tackle fundamental research questions. It is important
to note that in complex, multi-component and nanostructured systems, calorimetry
provides valuable insights supported by quantitative data not attainable by any
other technique. At the same time, the proposed calorimeter would prove a
powerful complement to the advanced structural characterization techniques
currently available on campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
broader impacts of the proposed work will be of two types: (a) societal impacts
and improvements in quality of life due to long-term implementation of the
science and technology developed in commercial applications; and (b) education
and outreach impacts. In education and outreach, the proposed instrument is
expected to be used by several Ph.D. students and PostDocs in their research, as
well as undergraduate researchers, thereby contributing to the education and
research training of a significant number of users. The instrument will also be
used in formal science and engineering courses, and will thereby contribute to
conventional education. Faculty involved in this proposal will continue their
outreach efforts to underrepresented minority students at the high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. Finally, this instrument will aid in
outreach to local industry by making it availableto local industry and by
fostering the intellectual connections that naturally arise when these
industrial researchers interact with the engineering staff on possible joint
research projects.