* 1134013
* Multigenerational effects of nanomaterials on populations of the ecological model Daphnia magna
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Rebecca Klaper, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 274,934.00

1134013&lt;br/&gt;Klaper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to best mitigate the
potential negative environmental impacts of nanomaterials, information is needed
regarding the types of damage they may cause and the properties of nanomaterials
that make them harmful. Using this information brings the possibility of
engineering nanomaterials that have the little environmental impact.
Nanomaterial core composition and surface chemistry both have an influence on
the survival and physiology of aquatic organisms such as Daphnia. Preliminary
experiments have demonstrated a potential impact of nanomaterial exposure that
extends beyond the parent generation to subsequent unexposed generations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how exposure to nanomaterials in
one generation can impact subsequent generations and how they may cause these
multi-generational impacts. In addition, these experiments will examine how
changes in the chemistry of nanomaterials can influence intergenerational
effects. Daphnia magna will be used as a model aquatic organism as they are a
model species to determine ecological impacts and are now a recognized model
species for studies of the interaction of toxins with the genome. Using this
species, results from nanoparticle experiments can be compared to genomic and
toxicology information that has already been developed for other chemical and
environmental stressors. This approach will provide insight into how chemistry
can play a role in nanomaterial-organism interactions and will provide
hypotheses and methods with which to test with other types of particles. By
working with NIST, standardized procedures will be developed that can be used by
others in the scientific community to evaluate health and safety of other
nanomaterials. The ultimate product will be not only toxicological data on a
diverse set of nanomaterials but a tool with which to evaluate other
nanomaterials. This project will also involve cross-disciplinary training of
students in ecology, toxicology, genomics and engineering.