* 1134891
* EAGER: NESCent Ambassador Program
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Allen Rodrigo, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2014
* USD 264,515.00

This award supports a new, international outreach program, developed by the
National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent), called the NESCent Ambassador
Program. The program will provide a novel professional development opportunity
for U.S. based scientists, while promoting synthetic evolutionary research to
underserved scientific communities in developing regions throughout the world.
NESCent Ambassadors will lead short courses and workshops, provide one-on-one
and small group consulting and engage in other education and outreach activities
focusing on topics of evolutionary science and informatics. Ambassadorships will
simultaneously improve research capabilities for US scientists in areas
throughout the world that are rich in biodiversity and that could serve as key
locations for evolution research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NESCent Ambassador
program will provide novel and valuable training and professional development
opportunities for U.S. based scientists, including postdoctoral fellows, while
serving as a new model for future innovative international outreach programs.
Significantly, it will also allow U.S.-based scientists to build international
networks of collaborators, an opportunity that is particularly critical for
early career scientists. This program will widely disseminate evolutionary
informatics tools, resources and methods to an international, traditionally
underserved scientific audience. Lastly, but importantly, it will serve as a
means of introducing and promoting the concepts and practices of synthesis
research to an international audience.