* 1134968
* NEESR: Seismic Response of Shallow Underground Structures in Dense Urban Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Shideh Dashti, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2016
* USD 704,843.00

Shallow underground structures used for public transportation are a key
component of sustainable cities. In dense urban environments, underground
structures are often built near tall buildings. Although such buildings have the
potential to alter ground motions in their vicinity and transmit significant
forces to adjacent underground structures, the impact of these forces remains
uncertain. This project will study the seismic response of temporary and
permanent cut-and-cover box structures near mid- to high-rise buildings using a
combination of centrifuge testing and numerical simulations. The NEES centrifuge
facility at UC Davis will be used for these tests. The data from the tests will
serve two purposes: first, to understand seismic soil-structure-underground
structure-interaction (SSUSI), and second, to calibrate and improve numerical
models. Nonlinear numerical simulations of centrifuge tests will help assess and
improve the capabilities of existing numerical tools in capturing SSUSI and key
loading mechanisms. Parametric studies using calibrated models will be conducted
to make design recommendations. Data from this project will be archived and made
available to the public through the NEES Project Warehouse/data repository.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This endeavor will provide engineers with well-calibrated
predictive tools to more reliably characterize interactions between soil,
foundation, structure, and shallow underground structure during earthquakes. A
better understanding of these interactions will also advance research and
practice for a range of underground facilities and critical lifelines including
tunnels, pipelines, and utilities. As such, the findings of this project are an
important step toward improving the resilience of our urban centers to
earthquakes. This research project is a collaborative effort between the
University of Colorado at Boulder, the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, and ARUP San Francisco. This study will also benefit from
collaboration between researchers at NEES and Japan's E-Defense. In its outreach
program, the project will recruit outstanding students from underrepresented
groups in engineering in collaboration with NSF funded Colorado Alliance for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) and the Center for Broadening
Opportunity through Leadership and Diversity (BOLD) at CU Boulder. This award is
part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).