* 1134545
* Control of Efferent and Afferent Peripheral Nerve Activity with Intrafascicular Microstimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Richard Normann, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 213,818.00

1134545&lt;br/&gt;Normann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is focused on
electrophysiological studies of the axons in the fascicles of the pudendal nerve
of anesthetized felines. It is motivated by recently developed high-electrode-
count microelectrode arrays, such as Utah Slanted Electrode Arrays (hereafter,
?Utah arrays?). Utah arrays can be inserted intrafascicularly into the
peripheral nervous system to selectively stimulate small groups of axons within
the fascicles. The limitations of this evolving technology on the selective
control of distal musculature have not been fully explored, which provides the
motivation for the proposed work. Low frequency stimuli, delivered via
individual microelectrodes in a Utah array implanted intrafascicularly into the
feline sciatic nerve can selectively activate up to nine muscles of the animal?s
hind limb. High frequency alternating current stimulation via microelectrodes in
a Utah array can selectively block orthodromic neural activity in the sciatic
nerve, and thereby, selectively block activation of a targeted muscle. These
studies did not optimize the stimulation parameters to produce prolonged
selective excitation or blocking of distal musculature, nor did they localize
the stimulation sites to particular fascicles, or to axon subsets within
individual fascicles. Finally, the blocking of orthodromic action potentials was
associated with a transient increase in muscular contraction preceding the
block, and stimulation protocols that may reduce this transient onset
contraction were not investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
investigate these limitations of intrafascicular microelectrode stimulation in
the feline pudendal nerve using a recently developed Utah array that was
designed specifically to provide improved access to the axons of this nerve.
Compared to a conventional Utah array, this new design has electrodes spaced at
200 microns and provides a four-fold increase in the spatial density of the
electrodes implanted into the feline pudendal nerve. The proposed work is
focused on the feline pudendal nerve because it has afferent and efferent fibers
running within a single fascicle which will allow the investigation of the
feasibility of simultaneous excitation of afferent and blocking of efferent
axonal subsets within a single fascicle. Further, the consequences of activation
and blocking the axons in this single fascicle have specific motor consequences
that are readily monitored: activation of the afferent fibers evokes a reflexive
contraction of the bladder wall (the detrusor muscle), and activation of the
efferent fibers will evoke electromyograms in the external urethral sphincter.
These latter axons will be targeted for blocking of orthodromic action
potentials, thereby, producing controlled relaxation of the sphincter. The
proposed work will also take advantage of the precise geometric location of the
electrode tips in the Utah array and allow mapping of the functional
organization of this nerve, which includes neuronal pathways involved in
reflexive bladder contractions, reflex erection, and contraction of the external
urethral and anal sphincters.