* 1134811
* Peary and the Inughuit at Cape Sheridan: A Preliminary Study
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Susan Kaplan, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 04/30/2013
* USD 76,417.00

Drs. Susan Kaplan and Genevieve LeMoine, along with a student and a local guide,
will map and photo-document two historic Inughuit (Inuit from Northwest
Greenland) winter campsites at Floeberg Beach, Cape Sheridan, Ellesmere Island,
Nunavut. They will also survey the surrounding area on foot to identify
prehistoric sites in the area and relocate known historic sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inughuit families brought from Greenland by Robert E.
Peary in 1905-06 and 1908-09 to assist him in his efforts to reach the North
Pole created the campsites at Floeberg Beach. While Peary and his American and
Canadian men lived aboard his ship, the SS Roosevelt, which was frozen into the
ice just offshore, the Inughuit built homes on shore using shipping crates and
snow. During each expedition, approximately 50 Inughuit men, women and children
lived in this temporary village at Floeberg Beach for about ten months, after
which they returned to their homes in Greenland. Written descriptions and
photographs of these settlements are sketchy at best and we know little of the
living conditions of these displaced families (many of which were headed by
women while their husbands spent months on the trail with Peary).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous archaeological work by Parks Canada
archaeologists in the 1970s and early 1980s has confirmed that the sites exist,
but no more ? their visits were limited to brief superficial surveys. The
primary goal of this project is to document the sites in detail, through mapping
and photography and possibly limited test excavation. We will collect
information that will shed light on the nature of the lives of the Inughuit
families who lived there, and evaluate the condition of the sites to determine
whether more extensive research is warranted. This project offers a unique
opportunity to examine an intensive contact situation unaffected by earlier or
later occupations. Although a preliminary investigation, it has significant
potential to raise awareness of, and interest in, Inughuit roles in the work of
Peary and other explorers, as well as the impact of intense contact and
displacement on indigenous peoples. &lt;br/&gt;