* 1134873
* I/UCRC for Advanced Non-Ferrous Structural Alloys
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Peter Collins, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2016
* USD 359,769.00

1134882 Colorado School of Mines; Michael Kaufman 1134873 University of North
Texas; Peter Collins

The Center for Advanced Non-Ferrous Structural Alloys will focus on the physical
metallurgy of non-ferrous alloys (alloying and processing effects on
microstructure, properties and performance) and on the industries that develop,
manufacture, and use these alloys. Colorado School of Mines (CSM) and the
University of North Texas (UNT) are collaborating to establish the proposed
center, with CSM as the lead institution.

The proposed Center aims to establish the industrial support, operational
mechanisms, and a prospective research portfolio for a viable research Center
that will conduct critical basic and applied physical metallurgy research of
direct relevance to the industries that develop, manufacture and use advanced
non-ferrous structural alloys. The PIs are proposing the following topical
areas: high performance alloys (nickel base super alloys and titanium base
alloys), lightweight alloys including aluminum, magnesium (and their
composites), and advanced alloys and processes. The PIs will insure that
students have the opportunity to work on state-of-the-art projects and to be
mentored by both experimental and modeling experts. The management of these
focus areas is being modeled after the highly successful Advanced Steel Products
and Processing Center at CSM, namely, by having companies designate what portion
of their membership fees they wish to have distributed into the three specific
focus areas.

The proposed Center has the potential to improve sustainability and
profitability of US manufacturing by developing advanced non-ferrous alloys that
could reduce energy consumption and pollution in the manufacturing of these
alloys. The research would also improve the competitiveness of US manufacturers.
Given that the focus of the proposed center will be on the physical metallurgy
of structural non-ferrous alloys, the associated programs of study at the two
institutions will be reexamined and potentially modified in order to insure that
the undergraduate and graduate curricula are consistent with this focus. In
other words, both institutions will work to insure that the undergraduate and
graduate students receive proper education and training in order for them to be
well grounded in fundamental principles of physical metallurgy. As a center
interacting with industry, the PIs intend to reach out to local communities to
bring their attention to the issues facing this particular industry sector and
how the institutions can assist these industries as they compete in these global
markets. The center will also insure that diversity is one of the criteria in
the selection of both undergraduate and graduate students who are considered for
the industry relevant projects.