* 1134868
* PEET: Using monographs, cybertaxonomy, and phylogenetics to train a future generation of water mite systematists (Acari: Hydrachnidiae)
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Robert Wiedenmann, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 731,807.00

Water mites are among the most abundant, diverse and ecologically important
arthropod groups in freshwater habitats like streams, rivers, ponds and lakes.
Unfortunately, very little is known about water mite biology and diversity in
North America, making incorporation of water mites into research programs nearly
impossible. Additionally, very few water mite experts exist worldwide and few
experts have been trained in North America during recent decades. This project
will focus on one of the most abundant and diverse water mite families,
Torrenticolidae, and researchers at the University of Arkansas and the Canadian
National Collection will train a new generation of specialists by undertaking
the following objectives: 1) collect, identify and describe North American
species; 2) establish a modern streamlined approach to greatly speed up the time
from discovery to dissemination of data through online resources and scientific
publications; and 3) establish genealogical relationships between groups of
water mites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the project will
contribute in-depth understanding of water mite biology and evolution, modernize
the taxonomic process, disseminate results and interactive tools to a wide
audience online through a project website and train a new generation of experts.
Additionally, outreach efforts will enhance the public's understanding of a part
of the natural world few think about (mites) through workshops and presentations
held in national parks. Lastly, the comprehensive knowledge on torrenticolids of
North America will allow cross-disciplinary use of these mites in other research
programs, such as those focusing on aquatic community dynamics, biodiversity and
water quality bio-monitoring, all of which could have impacts on conservation
status and trends in freshwater habitats.