* 1134890
* International Human Dimensions Programme (IHDP):  2011-2013
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2015
* Anantha Duraiappah, United Nations University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 708,000.00

Concerns about changes in the world's environment have led scientists from many
different nations to collaborate on a broad range of research and training
activities. The International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental
Change (IHDP)is overseen by the International Council of Science (ICSU) with
cooperation from the International Social Science Council (ISSC). IHDP seeks to
provide international leadership in framing, developing, and integrating social
science research on global environmental change and to promote the application
of the key findings of this research. IHDP's activities focus on development of
themes for focused research and long-term collaborative efforts. IHDP has
developed an international research programme that enhances the involvement of
the social sciences in global change issues and contributes to a heightened
awareness of the human dimensions of global change. The IHDP Strategic Plan
2007-2015 details the main objectives of the Programme, which is currently in
the middle of Phase II of its operations. Further, the Secretariat continues to
strengthen IHDP's three core pillars of work by facilitating cutting-edge
research, developing global scientific capacity, and supporting interaction
between science and policy. IHDP aims to enhance basic understand about the
factors influencing as well as the impacts and potential responses of global
environmental change (1) by mobilizing, catalyzing and integrating social
science research into the largely natural sciences-dominated environmental
change debate; (2) by strengthening the capacities of research and policy
communities; and (3) by facilitating and strengthening dialogue between science
and policy. This award will help provide support for the IHDP Secretariat, which
coordinates IHDP at the United National University in Bonn, Germany. The IHDP
Secretariat facilitates IHDP's Programme and implements the strategic
priorities. Its core functions encompass coordination of research activities,
capacity building, organization of major events and policy dialogues, and
dissemination of outcomes and results of IHDP activities. Core support for the
IHDP and its Secretariat is provided by NSF on behalf of agencies participating
in the multi-agency U.S. Climate Change Research Program.

Through support of the IHDP, a solid investment is made in the infrastructure
that fosters broader and deeper international, interdisciplinary collaborative
networks. This further strengthens scientific inquiry across a range of topics
and projects, thereby helping to enhance fundamental knowledge about very
important topics and issues. Through its capacity-building activities,
especially support for activities that education and involve more scientists
from developing nations, the IHDP also facilitates a strengthening and
diversification of the international scientific workforce.