* 1134944
* 2011 microTAS Conference: The 15th International Conference on  Miniaturized Systems for Chemistry and Life Sciences, October 2 - 6, 2011, Seattle, WA
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Amy Herr, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

CBET 1134944 University of California-Berkeley Herr

Travel funds are requested to partially support new and junior researchers to
attend the 15th International Conference on Miniaturized Systems for Chemistry
and Life Sciences (microTAS) held from October 2nd through 6th, 2011 in Seattle,
WA USA.

The international meeting will involve participants from all research sectors
including academia, industry, and the US federal government. This conference is
considered a unique forum for exchange of ideas and offers ample opportunities
for the exchange of new ideas, presentation and discussion f breaking results,
and opportunities for new interdisciplinary collaborations among attendees.

The MicroTAS conference provides a unique intellectual experience in which
scientific researchers from different disciplines come together in a dynamic
international forum to discuss research and forge partnerships that are critical
to the health and growth of our highly multidisciplinary field. The conference
includes extended time for discussions where scientific researchers, both junior
and senior, from many disciplines can share and develop new ideas in an open and
collegial environment. We are also encouraging informal interactions (e.g.,
lunches) to foment new technical collaborations and international partnerships.

The goals and broader impacts of the 2011 microTAS Conference include:

(1) To further the understanding of the science that underpins the development
of microfluidic and nanofluidic technologies;

(2) To provide an opportunity for junior researchers to interact closely with
more established scientific researchers to broaden their scientific education
and to promote their future careers as scientific researchers;

(3) To foster and promote long-term relationships between researchers in diverse
fields including bioengineering, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering, chemistry (including separation science and analytical
chemistry), and physics; and

(4) To promote the development of multidisciplinary teams that can address
difficult problems in biological and the physical sciences using micro- and
nano-technologies.

NSF support is being requested to offset conference fees and/or travel costs for
graduate students, post-docs, and other junior academic researchers. It is
anticipated that with increased financial support, the fifteenth conference in
this series will be successful in promoting advances in the scientific
understanding and application of microfluidic technologies, and in educating the
next cadre of world-class innovators.