* 1134641
* The Ohio State University ConnectionOne Center for Radio Frequency Systems - Phase II-ConnectionOne Site at Ohio State
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* John Volakis, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,521,755.00

Full Center Proposal (Phase II) for an I/UCRC for the Connection One Center for
Radio Frequency Systems

1134641 Ohio State University (OSU); John Volakis

The Connection One site at the Ohio State University is proposing a Phase II
support (second five-year period) for the Center, including support for central
personnel, evaluation and research. The center is currently comprised of the
Arizona State University (lead), the University of Arizona, the University of
Hawaii, and the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute as research partners.

The objective of this Phase II Ohio State University proposal is to build on and
continue its successful Phase I effort as part of the "Connection One:
Communications Circuits and Systems Center" (C1 Center) already funded by the
National Science Foundation Industry/University Cooperative Research Program.
The Ohio State University adds unique capabilities to the C1 Center for two
reasons: (1) Has an established large program in Electromagnetics, RFICs and
Radio Frequency Systems with over 120 graduate students and nearly 15
undergrads; (2) Extensive experimental facilities for antennas, RFICs, systems-
on-a-chip testing and evaluation, polymer and ceramics fabrication, LTCC screen
printing, terahertz imaging up to 3THz, and remote sensing. A recent State of
Ohio $3M grant for terahertz equipment will be leveraged during Phase II as
well. Ohio State will substantially increase the visibility and activity of the
C1 NSF Center by focusing on measurements and system design activities (passive
and active component integration for multifunctional all-in-one devices for high
data rates).

The proposed site will focus on training students in a truly interdisciplinary
arena for research in integrated communications systems, critical to many U.S.
industries. The inherent aim of the Center is to integrate industry needs with
University research and provide hands-on student experiences in a well-developed
and supported laboratory setting for RFIC hardware, 4G wireless, coding and
signal processing techniques, software radios/radars and MIMO technologies,
RFIDs, new materials and metamaterials, sensors and sensor networks to mention a
few. Collaborative projects with other universities within the C1 Center are
another key aspect of the proposed site. The Ohio State University site has
maintained from 7 to 10 industry and government members over the term of its
phase I award, and has had success during its phase 1 award in the training of
students through newly developed course work and the center's research.