* 1134115
* Identification of metabolic engineering targets in C4 carbon assimilation, an efficient photosynthetic pathway in a marine diatom
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Zhongchi Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1134115&lt;br/&gt;Sriram, Ganesh
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relevance and intellectual merit. Photosynthesis converts
solar energy and atmospheric CO2 into food, fuel, renewable carbon and molecular
oxygen. A rapidly growing human population and an increasing need for renewable
fuel and carbon demand a greater increase in photosynthetic output. In this
context, understanding the metabolism of photosynthetically efficient organisms
will enable metabolic engineering for enhanced photosynthetic
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthetic carbon fixation is typically
inefficient because CO2 is sparingly soluble in water and highly diffusible,
which prevents it from accumulating at a high concentration around ribulose
bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO), the enzyme that catalyzes the
first step of photosynthesis. This reduces both the rate and yield of
photosynthetic carbon assimilation. A small number of photosynthetic organisms
overcome this problem by concentrating or pumping CO2 around RuBisCO through
biochemical or biophysical mechanisms. One such biochemical mechanism known as
the C4 pathway is found in a small number of crop plants including maize and
certain grasses. However, recent circumstantial evidence has suggested that
diatoms, a class of unicellular, marine algae, may also operate a C4 pathway.
This may explain why diatoms are responsible for 20% to 40% of global
photosynthetic output despite surviving in CO2 -depleted environments. This
project takes advantage of the availability of isotope-assisted metabolic flux
analysis (isotope MFA) and recently established genomic data and reverse genetic
tools to investigate the C4 pathway in the model diatom species Phaeodactylum
tricornutum. Specifically, the project will employ isotope MFA to measure carbon
flow through the CO2 assimilation pathways and identify whether this organism
concentrates CO2 exclusively through the C4 pathway. Furthermore, the project
will assess the effects of varying environmental conditions on the efficiency of
CO2 assimilation and finally, genetically engineer P. tricornutum by silencing
key genes in the C4 pathways and identify rate-limiting steps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The work will reveal the key metabolic
steps and the organization of the C4 pathway in diatoms, which may underlie the
high photosynthetic efficiency of these unicellular algae. Such knowledge will
help pinpoint target genes and rate-limiting steps for future metabolic
engineering towards improved photosynthetic productivity in algae and perhaps
plants. A long-term goal will be to construct CO2-sequestering devices via
synthetic biology approaches. This project will train students at the graduate,
undergraduate and high school levels in the interdisciplinary fields of
metabolic engineering, biochemistry, plant biology, and systems biology.
Additionally, this project will develop metabolic pathway teaching modules for
undergraduate and graduate courses in chemical and biomolecular engineering as
well as biology, many of which will be disseminated to BioEMB, an NSF-funded
repository for biology-intensive course materials in engineering.