* 1134509
* Superhydrophobic Veneers: Surface Coatings Inspired by Nature
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Gannon Jennings, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2014
* USD 218,239.00

1134509&lt;br/&gt;Jennings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superhydrophobic surfaces
combine intrinsic hydrophobicity with microscale roughness and have a broad
array of potential applications in self-cleaning surfaces, corrosion resistance,
water repellency, and reduced drag. Applications of superhydrophobic surfaces
could be greatly expanded into the area of coatings by the development of
simpler, less costly methods to prepare these materials from initially smooth
substrates and the development of stable surfaces that maintain the so-called
"Cassie" state where an interlayer of air exists over most of the
coating/aqueous interface and imparts remarkable properties to the surface.
While superhydrophobic surfaces are abundant in Nature, approaches to truly
replicate natural surfaces have generally produced hand-held elastomeric
materials but not surface coatings. The ability to replicate highly evolved and
functional natural surfaces onto a substrate could revolutionize the fabrication
of superhydrophobic coatings, leading to unique materials architectures and
compositions that fuse the best of the natural and synthetic
worlds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project introduces a new
approach to replicate Nature's engineered, microscopically rough, and highly
functional surfaces onto a solid substrate through surface initiated
polymerization. In this approach, the microscale features of a mold prepared
from a natural surface are filled with monomer. When the monomer-filled mold is
pressed against an initiated substrate, the microscale features of the mold
function to confine a surface-initiated polymerization so that the growing,
tethered polymer chains fill the microfeatures of the mold,thereby replicating
the natural surface. This approach offers a limitless supply of coating
topographies through Nature and a near-boundless array of materials compositions
through synthetic chemistry (well beyond those in Nature) to generate
superhydrophobic coatings with novel architectures and structures. The project
also introduces new materials compositions and structures through surface-
initiated polymerization, including the use of superhydrophobic veneers atop
initially smooth polymer films to provide multi-functional coatings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad objectives of the project are as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Investigate the growth of SH polymer films as
veneers atop smooth polymer films to provide uniquely layered
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop a novel surface-initiated method to replicate SH
coatings in Nature onto solid substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project will develop new surface coatings with varied compositions and
unique biomimetic architectures that replicate those of highly evolved natural
surfaces to impact such applications as self-cleaning windows, corrosion and
wear protection, and water collection in dry environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate research and education through
the PI's classroom activities and his mentoring of undergraduate research
students, as well as his strong commitment to outreach for K-12 students. For
undergraduate researchers, this project extends the lab into the outside world,
as Nature's unique surfaces are identified, collected, and replicated as
coatings. The PI will continue to offer an intensive week-long course on
nanotechnology to gifted rising eighth graders through the Vanderbilt Summer
Academy with a special laboratory component on the replication of natural
surfaces. The PI will continue to host a high school teacher in his laboratory
through an on-campus NSF-funded Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program.