* 1134104
* Capillary and Boiling Limits of Micropillared Thermal Wicks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Carlos Hidrovo Chavez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Carlos Hidrovo&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1134104&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to understand the governing physics behind capillary limit flow in
microstructures with phase change, with the objective of developing thermal
wicks capable of dissipating upwards of 1 kW/cm2. The transformative aspect of
the project resides in providing new insights into the effects that
microstructure geometry has on thermal-phase change capillary flow systems.
Furthermore, this understanding will lead to the development of novel wicking
structures based on vertical micropillared arrays for heat pipe and vapor
chamber applications capable of low temperature heat fluxes not seen
before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will tackle and elucidate
the governing physics behind the capillary flow within arrays of vertically
etched silicon micropillars, particularly related to phase change heat transfer
applications. The following questions will be addressed by the project: (1) How
does microstructure affect capillary flow? (2) What are the key parameters that
control capillary pumping capabilities in such wicking structures? (3) How are
heat transfer and phase change processes coupled to the capillary flow? (4) Can
MEMS technology, in the form of micropillared wicks, be implemented as a means
of exceeding current heat pipe and vapor chamber heat flux dissipation
capabilities? In order to answer these questions, the following specific tasks
have been identified: (i) Introduction of a novel experimental setup capable of
simultaneously obtaining thermal and capillary flow data for different wick
samples. This system will be used to assess the thermo-hydraulic performance of
silicon based micropillar samples. (ii) Fabrication of silicon based
micropillared wicks, with precisely controlled microstructure of varying
geometry. (iii) The experimental results will be complemented by and validated
against compact models that will capture the relevant physics associated with
the capillary flow, phase change (boiling), and thermal transport in these
systems. (iv) The coupled experimental and modeling results will be used as a
design tool towards optimization of ideal microstructure geometries for the
silicon micropillar array samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the project includes elucidating the impact that micro-geometry have on phase
change capillary systems. Since both the models developed and the experiments
conducted will be done on specially designed samples with known geometry, the
underlying physics will have a much clearer context. This will allow for better
understanding of the key parameters that affect capillary flow in thermal
systems with phase change. Lessons learned from this research will carry over to
the understanding of capillary flow with phase change on non-regular and non-
uniform structures, such as fractals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the project includes having significant relevance in the general area of
capillary flow in porous media, with major implications for fields such as
geology, hydrology and manufacturing. The problems to be tackled here present
rich engineering, physics, and materials challenges, great cross-disciplinary
projects for the graduate and undergraduate students involved. The PI is a young
leader in experimental thermal fluids, MEMS and optical diagnostics. The results
of the project will provide new classroom materials for courses that the PI
teach or is currently developing, as well as outreach activities geared towards
elementary school audiences. Importantly, the PI will initiate an undergraduate
summer internship program, aimed at underrepresented UT freshmen and sophomores
to truly prepare them as multidisciplinary leaders of future engineering
challenges.