* 1134488
* Lipid Production and Extraction for Biodiesel
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ryland Young, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 304,000.00

PI: Chu&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1134488&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas
Engineering Experiment Station&lt;br/&gt;Title: Lipid Production and Extraction
for Biodiesel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodiesel is a clean and renewable biofuel that is
compatible with existing energy infrastructure and diesel engines. However,
before the large-scale, cost-effective production of biodiesel can be fully
realized, two key challenges must be overcome. The first challenge is the
inexpensive and sustainable production of the biodiesel feedstock, and the
second challenge is an effective process for extraction for and recovery of the
intracellular lipids, the precursors to biodiesel, from the feedstock.
Oleaginous bacteria are a potentially attractive feedstock for biodiesel
production, as they accumulate high levels triacylglycerol (TAG) lipids (20-75%
of dry cell weight), grow rapidly, reach high cell densities in culture, and
utilize diverse carbon sources. The overall goal of the proposed research is to
develop and study bacterial strains that produce intracellular lipids from
biomass-derived hydrolysate crude mixtures and then release the lipids through
controlled lysis of the bacteria with bacteriophage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteriophage (phage), are well known for their ability to
proliferate on and lyse bacterial cultures. The proposed research will
characterize phages specific for the TAG-accumulating bacteria, explore the use
of these phages or their bacteriolytic genes to effect release of the
accumulated TAG, and characterize the fundamental mechanisms underlying these
processes. The proposed research has three objectives. The first objective is to
determine if TAG-accumulating bacteria can grow in the presence of common
inhibitory compounds, such as furaldehydes and lignin-derived phenolic
compounds, found in lignocellulosic hydrolysates, in addition to the biomass
carbohydrates. The second objective is to determine if phages or bacterial
strains expressing phage lysis genes can effectively lyse TAG-accumulating
bacteria and release TAGs from the host cells. The third objective is to extract
TAGs from the model TAG-accumulating bacteria by application of a phage cocktail
or expression of cloned phage lysis genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed education and outreach activities
focus on student and high school teacher training, mentoring of students from
under-represented minorities, and development of internet-based public outreach
and teaching tools. Two Ph.D. students will receive interdisciplinary training
at the interface of environmental engineering, microbiology, and virology. It is
also expected that two undergraduate students will be given research experiences
in the PIs laboratory that are coordinated with the Center for Phage Technology
at Texas A &amp; M University (TAMU). The undergraduate student research
participants will be recruited and mentored through the TAMU Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation program. The PI will also work closely with
two high school teachers during summers through the TAMU Research Experience for
Teachers (RET) program. Outcomes of this study will communicated through the PIs
web site, by podcasting through the College of Engineering's "Engineering Works"
service, and by YouTube videos.