* 1134215
* Experimental and theoretical trait-based approaches to optimizing algal biofuel polycultures
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Elena Litchman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2017
* USD 328,537.00

PI: Litchman&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1134215&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microalgae
are a promising renewable feedstock for sustainable biofuel production, and
offer several unique advantages for this purpose, including high growth rate and
photosynthetic efficiency, use of marginal land for lipid-rich biomass
production, potential use of wastewater as a nutrient source, and relatively low
energy requirements for converting its biomass (lipids) into biofuel
(biodiesel). Approaches to intensification of algal biofuel production typically
focus on identifying and growing monocultures of microalgal species shown to
produce high amounts of lipids. However, these monocultures, because of inherent
physiological trade-offs, may not utilize nutrients and light for maximum
efficiency, are susceptible to invasions by other species, and can exhibit
fluctuations in biomass and lipid productivity. In contrast, microalgal
polycultures can potentially circumvent these eco-physiological tradeoffs and
provide a more robust platform for algal biofuels production, particularly in
scalable open cultivation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
proposed research is to design multispecies microalgal communities that optimize
resource utilization, biomass production, and lipid accumulation under changing
environmental conditions while providing increased resistance to pathogens and
invasions by nuisance species. Towards this end, the diverse eco-physiological
traits of many algal species will be analyzed to deduce the trade-offs among
these traits, and from this analysis, the appropriate species for microalgal
consortia will be identified that maximize multiple goal functions under process
constraints. Mathematical models, combined with laboratory experiments for
parameter estimation and model validation, will be used to assess the dynamic
behavior of the designed polyculture communities, and identify those with best
performance characteristics relative to their respective monocultures. The most
promising microalgal communities will be further investigated for scalability
using enclosed photobioreactors and open pond cultivation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
education and outreach activities will offer K-12 student and teacher
experiences in bioenergy topics through the Kellogg Biological Station (KBS)
GK-12 Bioenergy Sustainability Project, which engages local rural schools in
ecological and sustainability research. The PI will host a high school teacher
during the summer to develop age-appropriate, hands-on educational modules on
bionergy, sustainability, and aquatic ecology. A postdoctoral associate will be
trained in interdisciplinary research combining mathematical modeling,
ecological principles, and bioenergy applications, and will interact with the
researchers from the Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center (GLBRC) to exchange
ideas on the use of polycultures for biofuel production.