* 1134596
* Salmonid behavior and hydraulics of Engineered Log Jams:  Experimental observations and field verification
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2014
* Desiree Tullos, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2014
* USD 338,535.00

1134596 (Tullos). This research will document the hydraulic interactions between
two Engineered Log Jam (ELJ) architectures and a river's flow patterns and
intensity, leading to better understanding on how ELJ characteristics influence
the locations and magnitude of forces and energy loss. The results will advance
existing research on fish ecology by making direct observation of fish behavior
using new visually-based approaches, by linking bioenergetics to the hydraulic
environment, and by improving understanding of how fish perceive the ecological
benefits of ELJs. This work will develop a novel dataset by employing state-of-
the-art techniques for observing fish and fluids and will apply innovative
analytical techniques for extracting detailed information on fish behavior and
hydraulic structure, scale, and intensity. This interdisciplinary collaboration
is supported by experience in river engineering and restoration, aquatic
ecology, fish behavior, experimental- and field-study design and measurements,
and quantitative data analysis, as well as by existing research facilities and
resources. The research targets (a) restoration practitioners designing log
jams, and (b) students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate level.
Targeting practitioners, a video on fish use of ELJs will be developed and
applied concepts (e.g. drag coefficients, force distributions around structures)
relevant to the design of ELJs will be investigated. This project will give
students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate level the opportunity
to participate in a multi-disciplinary research environment and to receive
training in advanced methods for observations of hydraulics and fish in rivers.