* 1134997
* NEESR:  Next Generation Dissipation Guidelines for New and Existing Structures using the NEES Database
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Dionisio Bernal, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2014
* USD 161,582.00

The research objective of this award is to characterize energy dissipation
capacity not associated with damage in buildings subjected to earthquakes. The
project takes a multi-prong approach to attain this objective. On the analytical
side, it examines how identified equivalent damping is affected by excitation
frequency content (since the actual mechanism is unlikely viscous) and how
sampling rate and the free parameters of various identification algorithms
affect the computed imaginary part of the poles, which determines the equivalent
damping. Because the effort is on identifying dissipation associated with non-
damaging mechanisms, the project looks at data-driven means to classify observed
responses as being quasi-linear or notably non-linear. The project includes
development of a procedure, based on the classical tracking problem from control
theory, to separate the non-damaging dissipation from the total dissipation. The
database from the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) Project Warehouse is used to validate the analytical studies
and, complemented with data measured in buildings in the field, is used to
formulate guidelines for specifying damping ratios for new and existing
structures. Data from this project will be archived and made available to the
public through the NEES Project Warehouse data repository at
http://www.nees.org.

The project is part of efforts to devise efficient means to provide structural
designs that not only provide life protection for large earthquakes but also
minimize economic losses associated with exposure to seismic events of all
sizes. Although computational capability and modeling of elastic and inelastic
behavior, including cyclic response, has improved notably in the past few
decades, little change has taken place since the 1960's on criteria for the
specification of non-damaging related dissipation, which plays an important role
for predicting response for small and moderate events. This project leverages
data that is currently available in the NEES Project Warehouse data repository
to constrain analytical research on the question of non-damage related
dissipation in seismic engineering. This award includes an educational outreach
initiative that integrates the research with education for undergraduate and
high school students. This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP).