* 1134255
* Engineering Design to Aid Aging Persons (EDAAP): Senior Capstone Design program to aid aging and other persons with disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,09/30/2017
* Byard Wood, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2017
* USD 124,902.00

PI: Hansen, Steven and Wood, Byard D.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1134255&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State University's Mechanical &amp; Aerospace
Engineering (MAE) Senior Capstone Design Course that will design and provide
innovative assistive technology solutions for the needs of persons with
disabilities related to aging and that will also benefit persons of any age with
disabilities. Four overarching goals drive the project's
activities:&lt;br/&gt;1. Engage students from engineering, business, and special
education &amp; rehabilitation in developing innovative design solutions that
provide assistive technologies to aging persons with disabilities&lt;br/&gt;2.
Provide a valuable, practical, real-world capstone design experience for senior
mechanical engineering students and students from other disciplines that
participate&lt;br/&gt;3. Give students experience with the multiple design
processes required to get a creative design solution from concept to the
marketplace (e.g., prototype levels, human interface design and usability,
manufacturability, market constraints, business plan, etc.)&lt;br/&gt;4. Develop
a sustainable capstone design project program that extends beyond grant
funding&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit EDAAP will use MAE's Capstone Design Course
to develop assistive technology devices and, ultimately, prepare them for the
market place incorporating a process cycle of three one-year (two semester)
development phases that include an Engineering Prototype Phase, a Manufacturing
Prototype Phase, and a Market-ready Prototype
Phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The EDAAP project will
focus on creative and innovative design solutions that will enable the
independence, mobility, and a level of activity to persons with the onset of
progressively disabling circumstances due to the aging process. Senior
engineering design students will design, build, evaluate, and prepare assistive
devices for market that focus on 1) enabling independence in the home, 2)
helping get people and items in/out of cars, 3) providing mobility assistance
for performing tasks outdoors and in public places, and 4) providing mobility
options for access to recreational activity. The project will begin with a list
of 12 adaptive device student design projects submitted by EDAAP
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Key to project
success will be the integration of collaboration and multidisciplinary support
from across the university as well as local and regional stakeholders including
senior centers, assisted living centers, county governments, and disabilities
outreach and support organizations. Academics, care providers, and
users/customers of such adaptive devices will consult with student design teams
and assist with both lab and in-situ testing throughout the design phases. As
design projects proceed through the three phases, students from the College of
Business and the College of Education and Human Services will join the design
teams to evaluate products, prepare market analyses and business plans, and help
ready products to proceed to the Technology Commercialization Office and
manufacturers. The commercialization process will occur by licensing the right
to use the IP in products or by spinning off small manufacturing companies owned
in part by the university and the inventors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach and
Dissemination efforts grow out of the project's larger goals and focus on
presentations to and activities with multidisciplinary student organizations and
regional schools (including those with large Native American populations) to
incorporate engineering design and assistive technologies into the classroom to
create student interest and broaden student's scientific and technical
foundation.