* 1134355
* Copper Nanoparticle Interactions with Nitrogen-Cycling Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Shaily Mahendra, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

1134355&lt;br/&gt;Mahendra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the
Environmental Health and Safety of Nanotechnology program supports work by
Professor Shaily Mahendra to examine the effects of copper nanoparticles (NPs)
on the diversity and function of bacteria involved in nitrogen cycling in
natural and engineered environmental systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Background
and Significance. We anticipate that in the next few decades, the inputs of
engineered nanomaterial-containing products to waste streams will increase, and
more plants will be required to carry out tertiary treatment of wastewater.
Transformations of nitrogen in the environment are microbially driven;
nitrification, denitrification, and nitrogen fixation are catalyzed by specific
enzymes, which are sensitive to environmental disturbances and pollution.
Additionally, nitrogen management is a significant challenge in agriculture and
in wastewater treatment. The rapid growth in production and use of nanomaterials
in commercial products has raised concerns about their potential adverse effects
on the environment. Our current understanding of the mechanisms of uptake and
toxicity towards microorganisms is limited. Furthermore, most toxicological
studies evaluate ?manufactured materials? rather than the forms attained after
undergoing environmental transformations. We will investigate the regulation of
relevant enzymes in pure cultures as well as consortia, thus, addressing issues
important to NSF missions of generating a predictive methodology of
understanding and mitigating the potential harmful effects of the interaction of
NPs with the environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits. This study
will test the hypothesis that copper NPs will selectively affect the population,
diversity, and activity of bacterial communities involved in nitrogen cycling
based on specific nature of NP-cell interactions (ionic copper uptake versus NP
uptake; external versus internal dissolution followed by reactive oxygen species
(ROS) generation and membrane/DNA/ATP damage; etc.). While there are a few
recent reports of short-term toxic effects of NPs on laboratory pure cultures,
the novel aspects of this proposal include evaluating NPs? effects on a class of
indigenous microorganisms, and the environmental roles they play, over longer
time scales. In addition, this will be the first study to explore high-
throughput screening (HTS) for evaluating dose-response characteristics as well
as mechanisms of NP toxicity. Specific objectives include: (a) to determine the
microbial impacts of copper NPs via standard physiological and HTS assays, (b)
to investigate the effect of copper NPs on functional gene expression in several
pure cultures of nitrifying, denitrifying, anammox, and nitrogen-fixing bacteria
in order to identify most susceptible microbial process in the N cycle, and (c)
to quantify and model changes in population and diversity of N-cycling bacterial
communities, including the effect of intrafloc transport resistance on
availability of ionic and particulate copper, nutrients and electron acceptors.
pure cultures and microcosms, effect of NPs on the expression of relevant genes
will be determined using enzyme-specific assays as well as RT-qPCR. Ultimately,
the methodology employed herein will serve as a template to address NP hazard
identification and risk assessment, safe design and implementation of
nanotechnology, as well as management of global carbon and nitrogen
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The broader impacts of the
proposed research extend beyond a better understanding of NP interactions with
environmentally relevant bacteria. In addition to publications and presentations
at scientific meetings, the findings will be translated into a series of
lectures to be presented in a new graduate course on Environmental Biotechnology
and a redesigned undergraduate course on Environmental Nanotechnology (both
taught by the PI). Further, the PI will collaborate with a middle school in Los
Angeles Unified School District to develop curriculum for a new environmental
science class as well as hands-on activities in the Go Green horticultural club
to describe the role of bacteria in environmental cycling of essential elements
and assessing the impacts of toxic chemicals. Finally, the PI will serve as the
faculty adviser for UCLA chapter of the Society of Women Engineers (SWE), and
participate, with the funded Ph.D. students, in meetings and outreach
activities.