* 1134012
* Collaborative Research: Fundamentals of Natural Gas Conversion to Fuels and Chemicals over Molybdenum Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 10/31/2014
* USD 299,000.00

Natural gas, or methane, is an abundant resource that is unfortunately
underutilized due to a lack of efficient technologies that enable its conversion
into easily condensable or liquid products amenable to transport. Most natural
gas reserves and the associated gas produced in the course of crude oil
production at remote locations are classified as stranded, and venting and
flaring is a typical method of disposal, resulting in a significant
environmental issue as well as a waste of hydrocarbon resource. Natural gas
conversion to liquid fuels and chemicals represents a highly desirable goal
since North America has some of the largest gas reserves in the world that can
serve as a safe and stable source of hydrocarbons.

Production of chemicals and liquid fuels from methane is currently dominated by
technologies that rely on generation of synthesis gas as the first step. These
technologies, however, have an inherent inefficiency since the breaking of all
methane C-H bonds in synthesis gas production has to be substantially reversed
in subsequent steps. There are, therefore, intense current research efforts for
development of direct methods for methane conversion. Research on catalytic
methane activation remains an area of high scientific and industrial
significance but the catalytic chemistry of methane activation is currently
poorly understood.

This situation will change with an award made to investigators Simon Podkolzin
of the Stevens Institute of Technology, New Jersey, and Israel Wachs of Lehigh
University, Pennsylvania. The objective of the proposed research is to develop a
molecular level model of catalytic methane conversion to liquid fuels and
chemicals by zeolite-supported Mo nanostructures. Methane conversion over Mo
nanostructures supported on shape selective zeolites offers a promising
alternative for selective methane activation. This chemistry was recently
reported by a group from Dalian, China. In this process of methane
dehydoaromatization, methane can be converted directly in a single step into
benzene with a selectivity of 70-80 mol % and conversions exceeding 10 mol %. In
contrast to other direct methane activation chemistries, this process has two
unique advantages since methane is converted without any additional reactants.
First, complete oxidation of methane to carbon oxides is not possible as in the
processes employing O2 or H2O addition. This is also advantageous from the
safety perspective. Second, natural gas processing can in concept be performed
at remote locations since transportation of reagents is not required.

The PIs intend to study the dynamics of active surface sites at the nanoscale
under reaction conditions. They will combine the latest developments in
molecular spectroscopic characterization techniques (Raman, IR and UV-vis) at
the nanoscale under reaction conditions at elevated temperatures with catalyst
kinetic testing, kinetic modeling, and quantum-chemical calculations. Advanced
time-resolved atomic XANES/EXAFS characterization will be performed in
collaboration with Brookhaven National Laboratory.

Results of this program will have transformative effects in nanotechnology and
energy research by developing nanomaterials for efficient conversion of natural
gas into liquid hydrocarbons and potentially making available large reserves of
stranded gas, while addressing the environmental issue of venting and burning of
associated gas at remote locations. A broad spectrum of educational outreach
projects is an integral part of the program, including research experiences as
well as university and K-12 teaching modules on energy research and
nanomaterials.