* 1134247
* A molecular "plug-and-play" platform for stabilization of proteins: revealing design principles of protein stabilization by insertion into a thermophilic protein
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jin Ryoun Kim, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2015
* USD 355,288.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT Insufficient stability of proteins is a fundamental problem
that limits their applications. Several strategies have been reported to improve
protein stability, but these approaches are specific to certain proteins or may
compromise a protein's intrinsic properties. The previous studies from the PI's
lab demonstrated that insertion into a thermophilic chaperoning protein can
improve the thermal stability of various enzymes. Importantly, stabilization of
enzymes in this manner caused no compromise in enzymatic activities and
expression levels. The objectives of this project are 1) to reveal design
principles for protein stabilization by insertion into a thermophilic
chaperoning protein, 2) to determine the optimal insertion sites for effective
protein stabilization, and 3) to further demonstrate the generality of this
approach. To achieve these objectives, the PI and his group will apply their
stabilization method to an enzyme, industrially important and highly suitable
for the mechanistic study on stabilization. Rational and combinatorial protein
engineering tools as well as experimental, theoretical and computational
characterization methods will be employed. Quantitative and comprehensive
evaluation of thermodynamic and kinetic stability will also be carried out.



BROADER IMPACT When successfully completed, outcomes from the project will offer
a foundation to establish a simple, highly effective and potentially general
"plug and play" molecular platform for stabilizing various proteins while
maintaining their intrinsic properties. Such a stabilization method would
greatly benefit many areas where insufficient stability of proteins limits their
applications. The integration of research, education and outreach will result in
the advancement of the educational and professional development of K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students as well as teachers in a multidisciplinary
area that overlaps biochemistry, biophysics, protein engineering and
computational modeling. The proposed education and outreach plans, which are
tightly integrated with the research plan, will focus on expanding the
participation of underrepresented minority students in the study of science and
engineering, and foster students' creativity and problem solving ability.