* 1134969
* Catalyzing New U.S.-Swedish Collaboration: Howard University-Karolinska Institute Planning Visit for Research on Auditory Mechanics of the Inner Ear
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Sonya Teresa Smith, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 22,178.00

Through a research planning visit, Dr. Sonya Teresa Smith of Howard University
will initiate a collaborative project with Swedish partners Drs. Anders
Fridberger and Pierre Hakizimana at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm.
Together, they intend to pursue questions related to human hearing,
specifically, auditory transduction and whether it is mediated via fluid-
structure interactions in the ear. Drawing on her expertise in engineering and
computational fluid dynamics, Dr. Smith has developed a hydrodynamic model that
accounts for the complex interactions involved in the transduction process
associated with hearing. This model studies the response to stimuli of the inner
hair cell stereococila bundle, located in the mammalian inner ear. Her Swedish
counterparts have developed high-speed confocal imaging techniques that can be
used to measure motions of inner ear structures. The preliminary data derived
using Smith's model combined with refined Karolinska experimental techniques is
expected to help the team extend their research to include a full range of
audible frequencies. If successful, results may contribute to our fundamental
understanding of the inner hair cell response to acoustic stimuli at locations
all along the cochlea spiral. To build on preliminary findings, the principal
investigator plans to submit a follow-on application to the National Science
Foundation for collaborative research in computational neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Likely broader impacts include advances in knowledge of
theoretical and practical auditory mechanics with long-term applications
foreseen in a range of interdisciplinary fields, including neuroscience and
biomedical engineering. Such new insights could have implications for future
engineering design of cochlear implants and better techniques for surgical
placement. Furthermore, because one U.S. graduate student and one U.S.
undergraduate student from Howard University will travel with Dr. Smith to
Stockholm and participate in collaborative activities at the Karolinsksa
Institute, they too will gain beneficial international research experience. This
early career access to expert Swedish experimentals and the specialized
equipment they use may inspire the students' career choices and thereby
contribute to diversity in the field of auditory mechanics research.