* 1134951
* Study of Environmental Arctic Change: Supporting goals and implementation through enhanced planning, assessment of past activities and coordination with international efforts
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Hajo Eicken, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 03/31/2016
* USD 471,220.00

The Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH) synthesizes research findings
and promotes arctic science across disciplines and among agencies, coordinates
national arctic environmental science programs and facilitates integration of
research activities across scales with stakeholder concerns incorporated from
the start of the planning process, provides information resources to arctic
stakeholders, policy-makers, and the public to help them respond to arctic
environmental change, and represents the U.S. arctic environmental change
science community in international and global change research initiatives.
Meeting these goals relies on a range of coordination, planning and assessment
activities. This project will provide these through leadership of the SEARCH
program in a time of rapid Arctic change and urgent information needs at the
agency and societal level. Under the auspices of SEARCH, this project will
support a range of activities targeting (1) strategic planning, (2) assessment
and implementation, (3) coordination and (4) communication through leadership of
the Science Steering Committee and engagement of SEARCH partner agencies, key
national and international programs and important
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the proposed activities do not comprise
any scientific research as such, they serve to advance scientific discovery and
innovation by building a framework that fosters advanced, cross-cutting research
in a range of disciplines. Assessments of past research and coordination
activities as well as communication of (unpublished) advances in
interdisciplinary, integrated Arctic science will engage the research community
and lead to new findings and insights. Synergy derived from enhanced
coordination of cross-disciplinary and international research activities will
lead to new perspectives on overarching research questions which in turn are
likely to lead to new discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
project activities help the US research community and SEARCH partner agencies in
developing a coordinated and effective response to the challenges and
opportunities associated with rapid arctic environmental and socio-economic
change. In particular, the project works to support the SEARCH effort in
providing a scientific foundation to help society understand and respond to a
rapidly changing Arctic, leading to decision-making informed by an understanding
of arctic environmental change.