* 1134249
* Chemical Reaction Activation in Microreactors Through Corona Discharge
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Alexandre Yokochi, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,582.00

Proposal Number: 1134249 PI: Yokochi, Alexandre F.

Molecules involved in chemical reactions require sufficient energy to overcome
the activation energy barrier. This is true in spontaneous reactions at room
temperature the fact that they are spontaneous merely means that the required
energy is present in the form of ambient thermal energy. In a few cases this
activation energy barrier can be lowered through the use of catalysts, and in
some the energy can be supplied in alternative forms (other than sensible heat)
such as sonochemical, photochemical, and electrical discharge. The primary
objective of this work is to examine how non-thermal plasmas generated by
electrical discharge through fluids may be used to drive chemical reactions in
microchannel reactors. The model reactions chosen are the oxidation of organic
molecules dissolved in aqueous media by dissolved atmospheric oxygen and the
partial oxidation of methane to methanol. Preliminary work has demonstrated that
the corona discharge activated oxidation takes place, and the technical
literature suggests that electrical discharge activation of the partial
oxidation of methane also occurs. The development of an efficient corona
discharge activated microchannel reactor could lead to both an efficient
approach to tertiary treatment of potable water by advanced oxidation and a
method to constructively use stranded methane that is currently too expensive to
recover, and also develop an entirely novel approach to the general activation
of chemical reactions that will open new process reaction options for various
applications. An important barrier to the implementation of electro-discharge
processes in microreactors is the high voltage required to achieve spark or
dielectric barrier discharge. The required voltages can be greatly diminished by
enhancing the emitter electrode with carbon nanotubes.

Intellectual Merit: This project will systematically explore the development and
implementation of corona discharge activated chemical reactions in microchannel
reactors through the construction and experimental evaluation of the performance
of an experimental device and the crafting of a careful model of the reactor
operation. The project will be approached in the following manner:

1. Exploratory implementation of corona discharge activated reactive systems in
microreactors: This will explore the manner in which a microchannel reactor
within which a chemical reaction can be activated by corona discharge can best
be built. In particular, the best methodology for the enhancement of the emitter
electrodes with carbon nanotubes will be evaluated.

2. Experimental evaluation of the corona discharge driven oxidation in aqueous
media: Using the CNT enabled corona discharge activated microreactor developed
in task 1, the effect of varying reaction conditions will be evaluated. Factors
to evaluate include applied potential, total power, thickness of the reactor
channel, fluid flow rate (i.e., residence time) and dissolved oxygen
concentration.

3. Partial oxidation of methane to methanol: Using the CNT enabled corona
discharge microreactor, proof of concept followed by full exploration of process
parameters will take place. Similar factors as described in 2 will be evaluated
with the addition of methane/H2O/O2 ratios in the reactor performance.

4. Development of an explanatory/predictive model for the corona activated
microreactor: Using the data collected in Tasks 2 and 3, a model of the reactor
will be developed using COMSOL in which the effects of the factors described
above will be evaluated. The particular information to be extracted from the
model includes reaction rates and the thickness of the reacting volume in the
system.

Educational Integration: The reactor system described will be used as a basis
for formal education by developing 1) an experimental module where early program
undergraduates in Chemical/Environmental Engineering can actually work with an
advanced chemical process including the ability of tweaking a few parameters, 2)
offering advanced students in the senior capstone experience sequence the
opportunity to implement chemical processes using the developed platforms and 3)
continuing to mentor undergraduate researchers through hosting Johnson scholars
(first year college) and SESEY (high school) students in the laboratory to work
on issues based on process implementation in microreactors. These students
become an integral part of the research team.

Broader Impact: This research will result in the development of a novel method
for chemical reaction activation within microchannel reactors, opening a new
area of research for researchers developing reactive processes in microchannel
reactors, hopefully enabling various future advances leading to the practical
implementation of microreactor based processes. Simultaneously, the work will be
used as a platform for informal (general public) and formal education for pre-
college, undergraduate and graduate students (and fellow faculty!) on the issues
surrounding the elimination of trace organic contaminants in potable water, and
the implementation of processes in microstructured reactors in general.