* 1134341
* High Selectivity and Capacity Bioseparations using Hybrid Displacement-Multimodal Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Steven Cramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

1134341&lt;br/&gt;Cramer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed renewal project
builds upon our significant body of prior work in displacement chromatography in
ion exchange (IEX) and hydrophobic interaction (HIC) systems as well as our new
understanding of protein interactions in multimodal (MM) systems to create a
hybrid separations technology that will produce highly selective and high
capacity protein separations. This work will is based upon recent advances in
our lab that have demonstrated that the use of selective displacers can result
in dramatically enhanced selectivity in hydroxyapatite (HA) and other multimodal
(MM) chromatographic systems. We will employ the tools of high-throughput
screening (HTS) and molecular simulation to provide fundamental insight into the
nature of this selective behavior and to address several critical issues related
to the design of selective displacers for MM systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
robotic high-throughput displacer screening technique will be employed to screen
for selective displacers in MM systems and to evaluate the effects of protein,
displacer structure, mobile phase characteristics and displacer concentration.
This work will employ protein and displacer libraries previously developed in
our group to establish model protein pairs and potential displacers for further
analysis. Multicomponent adsorption isotherms will also be generated to study
competitive binding, synergistic interactions and hysteresis effects in these
displacer-protein-MM systems. Column studies will be conducted to determine the
level of enhanced selectivity and performance that can be achieved with this
hybrid approach. A dynamic affinity plot analysis will also be carried out to
examine if the enhanced selectivity and displacement-desorption transitions can
be understood from a mass action perspective. A wide array of experimental and
theoretical techniques will be employed to examine the interactions of selective
displacers with immobilized MM ligands. Surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy
will examine kinetic effects while isothermal titration calorimetry will provide
insights into the underlying mechanisms involved in the selective displacement
process in MM systems. A series of molecular simulations will be carried out to
study the interactions of selective displacers with MM surfaces and to provide
fundamental insight into the importance of various intermolecular interactions.
Molecular simulations of multicomponent adsorption will also be carried out with
small proteins in solutions of displacers and salt counter-ions to obtain
further insights into competitive binding and the mechanism of the displacement
process in MM systems. Finally, the use of selective displacers for addressing
challenging biopharmaceutical separations in MM systems will be evaluated using
complex biological mixtures provided by an industrial collaborator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent need to develop new technologies to
meet the growing challenge for safe, low cost next generation biotherapeutics
ranging from proteins (e.g., antibodies, enzymes) to polysaccharides (e.g.,
heparin, hyaluronic acid) to cellular based technologies. The proposed project
will produce a powerful new hybrid separations technology to address this need.
The insights obtained in the proposed research will aid in the development and
implementation of improved selective displacement MM chromatographic systems for
the purification of therapeutic proteins. This will potentially eliminate the
need for expensive affinity chromatographic systems and will enable a reduction
in the number of required downstream processing steps, with a significant impact
on the costs of producing biopharmaceuticals. The fundamental studies described
in this project will also provide important insights into modification of
hydrophobicity/philicity and binding in complex multicomponent mixtures which
will establish a new platform for deeper understanding of a range of systems
where these effects are important (e.g. bioseparations, biosensors,
biomaterials). Clearly, if successful the proposal will have a significant and
broad impact on bioprocessing and a number of health related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will also have an important impact
on the education of both graduate and undergraduate chemical engineering
students as well as high school students. The Cramer laboratory has a long track
record of producing chemical engineers with a first rate training in
chromatographic bioprocessing. This training will continue with the students
involved in this project. The proposed research will be carried out in the
Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies which provides excellent
multidisciplinary training opportunities for students and exposure to a wide
range of experimental and simulation techniques. The research developed in this
project will also be incorporated into a chemical engineering senior laboratory
chromatography experiment recently developed the PI as well as a course on
Chromatographic Separation Processes. Finally, simulations performed in this
project, as well as conceptual parts of molecular interactions will motivate new
aspects of the Molecularium project, which uses animation movies to teach and
inspire students at all levels about the fascinating world of molecules.