* 1134954
* COLLABORATIVE:  Faculty Development to Support High Impact Activities That Transform Undergraduate Geoscience Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Jill Singer, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2017
* USD 249,446.00

This project is supporting digital resource development and faculty workshops
aimed at building capacity within the geosciences community to increase both the
quantity and quality of grant proposals submitted to the NSF TUES program and
other NSF education programs. This project is delivering a menu of proposal
writing workshops (at sectional and regional geoscience conferences, and stand-
alone multi-day workshops) aimed at earth, oceans, atmospheric, environmental,
and geospatial science faculty from research and comprehensive universities, and
two- and four-year colleges. The project is targeting faculty with limited or no
previous NSF education funding. An important part of this project involves
collecting survey data aimed at identifying reasons contributing to low
geoscience submission rates to the TUES program in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary outcome of this project is to
generate an increase in both the quality and quantity of TUES proposals
submitted by geoscience faculty to the TUES program. Increasing the number of
quality TUES proposals submitted may lead to greater numbers of TUES proposals
funded, but more importantly indicates a greater number of geoscience faculty
engaged at a highly creative level in improving the quality of geosciences
education for all students. This project is also increasing the awareness among
geoscience faculty of NSF education programs, and of the characteristics of
competitive proposals. Faculty attending the workshops and using the digital
resources are joining a network of geoscientists who share a common concern for
engaging students through active learning. To help build expertise and
leadership in the successful development of education-related grant proposals
within the geoscience community "facilitator-training" activities are being
integrated into several of the workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By targeting
geoscience faculty at all institutional types across the country, this project
is improving the quality of geoscience education for large numbers of
undergraduates, both STEM majors and non-majors. Project efforts targeting
faculty with no previous NSF education funding experience is broadening
participation by faculty and institutions that have had limited prior
interaction within the geoscience education community. Closed-captioned digital
resources developed by this project are facilitating information sharing among
faculty workshop participants and among faculty who are accessing these
information resources over the Internet.