* 1134879
* Catalyzing US-South Korean Collaboration on Polar Ocean-Atmosphere Research on the RV Aaron
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Saewung Kim, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2014
* USD 49,636.00

This proposed research will catalyze a long-term collaboration between U.S. and
South Korean earth system scientists. It builds upon utilizing the Korean Polar
Research Institute (KOPRI) newly launched icebreaker R/V Araon. KOPRI has
outfitted the R/V Araon with selected research grade instruments to study
atmospheric CO, NO/NO2, O3, CO2, Hg (g), and volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
along with chemical, physical and biological oceanographic parameters. The
objectives include to&lt;br/&gt;1. Visit and examine the R/V Araon for its
suitability for ocean-atmosphere research applications.&lt;br/&gt;2. Install and
operate a ship-borne turbulence and motion correction flux system and chemical
analyzers on the R/V Araon jackstaff tower and deck railing to survey and
evaluate the suitability of the vessel for ship-borne
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will develop a
long-term collaboration between Korean and US scientists in utilizing one of the
world's technologically most advanced ice breakers and research vessels, the R/V
Araon. This effort is highly interdisciplinary, bringing together scientists
with expertise in micrometeorology, biogeochemistry, atmospheric chemistry,
oceanography, and Polar Regions. U.S. scientists will gain access to a unique
observational research platform that will conduct yearly pole-to-pole cruises in
the foreseeable future. Consequently, besides providing unique opportunities for
oceanic and atmospheric research, this program will be a rare opportunity to
observe changes in global chemical climate over the remote ocean and to quantify
the processes controlling these changes. These activities are also expected to
catalyze collaboration in other disciplines such as biology, marine geology and
geophysics, cartography, and physical and chemical oceanography.