* 1134568
* Pyrite (FeS2) thin-films for photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Nathan Newman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2014
* USD 307,698.00

PI: Newman&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1134568&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pyrite is a potentially attractive and sustainable
semiconductor for photovoltaic (PV) applications because of its low cost,
abundance in the earth's crust, environmentally benign source material, and
desirable electronic properties, such as 0.95 eV bandgap, high optical
absorption coefficient, ease of n/p doping, high carrier mobility, and
relatively long carrier lifetime; however, there has been only limited progress
in producing high-quality pyrite thin films needed to explore the potential of
this material for solar PV applications. The overall goal of the proposed
research is to develop a fundamental understanding of the electronic and defect
properties of doped and undoped pyrite thin films for solar photovoltaics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop a fundamental understanding of the
thermodynamic and kinetic factors involved in producing high-quality epitaxial
pyrite thin films, and determine how growth conditions influence the structural,
chemical, electrical, and optical properties of the films. Furthermore, methods
will be developed to produce high-quality pyrite thin-films with controlled n-
and p-type doping, high carrier mobility, and long diffusion length that are
useful for PV applications. Towards this end, a Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE)
process will be developed to enable film growth at high sulfur pressures,
insuring that high quality pyrite films can be produced. A wide range of
structural, chemical and electrical measurements, defect studies, and band-
structure calculations will be used to characterize and analyze film properties.
Growth studies will measure the sticking coefficient and resonance time of the
impinging S and Fe as a function of temperature and reactant impingement rate,
and the decomposition rate of pyrite will be measured in vacuum and under growth
conditions. These experiments will be used to determine the rate-limiting steps
for the forward and reverse reactions and, their influence on achieving high
quality epitaxial pyrite films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities are designed to educate and
inspire K-12 and graduate students in solar PV topics. First, a hands-on
education module on solar PV technology will be developed and then presented to
over 10,000 Arizona K-12 students through the Arizona State University (ASU)
Science is Fun program. The module involves having students configure solar
cells with various light sources to power an electronic device. The module will
be delivered to K-12 classrooms by at least 15 undergraduate interns that are
trained by the ASU LeRoy Eyring Center for Solid State Science. At least one
third of the students that participate in the Science is Fun program will come
from underrepresented groups. Second, for each year of the project, two high-
school students will participate in the ASU Southwest Center for Education and
the Natural Environment (SCENE) high?school program, where they will spend ten
hours each week for a term in the PIs laboratory to develop a science-fair
project involving the synthesis and characterization of pyrite materials for
energy generation applications. Finally, graduate students will be trained in
the fundamental aspects of PV technology and in the synthesis and
characterization of thin films needed to be successful in the solar PV
workforce.