* 1134570
* Thermally Stable Complex Redox Materials for Hydrogen Generation in Thermochemical Water-Splitting Process
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jan Puszynski, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,975.00

PI: Shende, Rajesh V. Institution: South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
Proposal Number: 1134570 Title: Thermally Stable Complex Redox Materials for
Hydrogen Generation in Themochemical Water-Splitting Process

World future energy demands must be fulfilled, at least in part, by sustainable
energy resources. Energy from the sun can be harnessed for the production of
hydrogen such as a new high temperature thermochemical water-splitting
technology for hydrogen production, which is a promising green technology
involving a cyclic operation of a low-temperature water-splitting step and a
high temperature regeneration step using redox materials. Because of the cyclic
nature of the process, the redox materials undergo thermal fatigue leading to
decrease in surface area due to grain growth or sintering and consequently,
steady hydrogen production levels are not realized. In order for this technology
to be cost-competitive, hydrogen production from superheated steam generated in
a solar concentrator or in a nuclear plant needs to be demonstrated in hundreds
of thermochemical cycles, which poses a great challenge for the scientists and
reaction engineering professionals.

A three-year program is planned to investigate hydrogen generation by a high-
temperature water-splitting in multiple thermochemical cycles using thermally
stabilized morphologies of redox materials. These materials will be synthesized
by the sol-gel and self-propagation high temperature synthesis (SHS) methods
coupled with microwave processing leading to different morphologies, for
instance, the core-shell or segregated grain boundaries with YSZ (yttria-
stabilized zirconia). Among redox materials, as ferrites with spinel, wustite
and their combinations are known to be effective for thermochemical water-
splitting, the PIs plan to synthesize these materials with thermally stable
morphologies, which include MFe2O4, M1xM2yFe2O4, and M1xM2yM3zFe1-x-y-zO (where
M, M1, M2, and M3 can be Ni, Zn, Sn, Mn and Li) and investigate hydrogen
production in a packed-bed reactor and kinetics and transport properties in
multiple thermochemical cycles with a view to achieving steady hydrogen levels.
Both investigators have experience with the synthesis of ferrites and hydrogen
production from the thermochemical water-splitting process. The fully
instrumented reactor set-up in the investigators? laboratory is already built
and tested. All necessary characterization instruments are available at SDSM&T.

The intellectual merit of this project is in the area of hydrogen generation by
high temperature water-splitting in multiple thermochemical cycles using
thermally stabilized novel redox materials. This knowledge will be enriched by
better understanding of the microstructural stability of different morphologies
of in-house synthesized redox materials under thermal fatigue and kinetics and
transport processes for hydrogen generation. The experimental studies should
enhance the knowledge of the physical and chemical processes involved in the
thermal stabilization of redox materials? morphologies and reaction engineering
aspects leading to stable hydrogen production levels in hundreds of
thermochemical cycles without deterioration of complex ferrites.

Broader impacts: Both investigators have been actively involved in promoting
research experience for undergraduate students by supporting students from
SDSM&T and NSF-REU program. A significant effort will be on education of
graduate students in both MS and PhD programs in chemical and biological
engineering at SDSM&T. Results generated from the research will be disseminated
via publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at national and
international conferences. Students involved in this research program will have
hands-on experience in the areas of sustainable energy, high temperature redox
materials and reaction engineering aspects of hydrogen production. The
investigators plan to enhance outreach activity in this area to Native
Americans, middle and high school students and teachers.