* 1134897
* Support for Workshop at the Inverse Problems in Science and Engineering 2011, May 4-6, 2011, in Orlando, Florida
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2011
* Alain Kassab, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 10/31/2011
* USD 5,006.00

PI: Alain J. Kassab &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET - 1134897
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is on the topic of Inverse
Problems that are typically ill-posed, and where the values of some model
parameters is obtained from the observed data. Inverse problems are commonly
encountered in transport processes, structural mechanics, and medicine. Inverse
problem techniques find applications in boundary condition reconstruction in
heat transfer, parameter identification, non-destructive testing and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to support the
International Conference in Inverse Problems in Engineering (ICIPE) scheduled to
be held at the University of Central Florida in Orlando, Florida, on May 4-6,
2011. The conference will provide a forum for exchange of ideas between
researchers from different countries. Funds are requested for a keynote lecture
by an international authority and for several graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will highlight recent developments in the
area of inverse problems in transport, and engage an open discussion on these
topics with international participants to enhance dissemination of these
results. It is anticipated that the younger audience will be stimulated by the
open discussions.