* 1134575
* The Feasibility of Electrocorticogram Brain-Computer Interface for Control of Arm Prostheses
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* An Do, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2015
* USD 246,310.00

PI: Nenadic, Zoran and Do, An H.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1134575&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problem Statement. Brain-computer interface (BCI)
is a technology that enables direct brain control of external devices, without
generating any motor outputs. BCI technology's greatest potential lies in the
field of neuro-rehabilitation, with the ultimate goal of integrating BCI with
limb prostheses or functional electrical stimulation (FES) of muscles to restore
intuitive and natural movements to individuals with severe paralysis. Current
state-of-the-art BCIs use micro-electrode arrays, implanted in the cortex, to
acquire neuronal signals as the source of BCI control. However, application of
this technology to human neuro-rehabilitation has been limited by the bio-
incompatibility of the implant. Consequently, subdural electrocorticogram (ECoG)
electrodes emerged as a promising BCI signal acquisition platform. Preliminary
studies suggest that ECoG electrodes yield signals whose long-term stability
properties are superior to those of microelectrode arrays, while providing a
comparable amount of useful motor-related information. However, whether this
information is sufficient for BCI control of an upper extremity prosthesis so as
to perform goal-oriented tasks useful for human daily activities and justify the
risks of electrode implantation surgery, has not been established.
&lt;br/&gt;Research Plan. The primary goal of this pilot study is to assess the
feasibility of ECoG-based BCI for control of arm prostheses in a small
population of epilepsy patients who are undergoing ECoG electrodes implantation
for epilepsy surgery evaluation. They will perform a series of executed and
imagined elementary upper extremity movements while their ECoG, limb
trajectories, and electromyogram (EMG) data will be recorded. This data will
then be analyzed, and a predictive model to perform real-time decoding of upper
extremity trajectories from ECoG signals will be derived. This model will then
be incorporated into a BCI system, whose performance will be tested using real-
time online control of an anthropomorphic robotic arm (a stand-in for an upper
extremity prosthesis). Based on subjects? ability to achieve BCI control of the
robot to perform elementary and goal-oriented motor tasks, the feasibility of
ECoG-based BCIs for control of arm prostheses control will be assessed. Novelty:
1) The integration of an anthropomorphic robotic arm with an ECoG-based BCI has
never been realized, and so its feasibility remains untested. 2) The study will
introduce novel experimental paradigms in that ECoG will be recorded in response
to both executed and kinesthetic imagery of upper extremity movements. 3) Unlike
prior studies, our approach will record EMG of muscles involved in movements.
The ability to predict EMG parameters from ECoG will be useful in future studies
that aspire to integrate BCIs with upper extremity FES devices. 4) The study
will contribute to understanding of the incompletely understood brain plasticity
and human-computer co-adaptation processes associated with real-time online BCI
control of upper extremity prostheses. 5) The project will lead to the
development of a novel class of algorithms for statistical analysis and real-
time decoding of ECoG signals.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The proposed study
will develop novel, state-of-the-art, adaptive algorithms for analysis and real-
time decoding of ECoG signals. These methods will avoid unnecessary assumptions
and ad hoc strategies, commonly used in this field, and will therefore enable a
systematic way of analyzing highdimensional, statistically sparse, nonstationary
ECoG signals. They may also be applicable to a wide class spatio-temporal
biomedical signals, and perhaps other types of statistical data. Aside from BCI
applications, the ECoG, limb trajectory, and EMG data collected in the proposed
study will contribute significantly to development of human motor control
theory.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The activities of this study will promote the
education, scientific literacy and lifelong learning in undergraduate, graduate,
and medical students. Specifically, elements of the study will be integrated
into the teaching and mentoring curricula. Undergraduate and graduate students
will participate in the proposed research and educational plans and their
findings will be broadly disseminated. This will foster the development of their
leadership, interdisciplinary, and research skills. The proposed activities will
also broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in engineering and
science. The investigators will promote college education and the pursuit of
engineering/science careers in minority K-12 students by developing educational
activities such as presentations, demonstrations, and exhibits. Additionally,
the investigators will actively participate in the professional development of
K-12 math and science teachers in high-need school districts, with the goal of
improving their retention rates and leadership skills.