* 1134424
* Exploring New Mechanistic Models for Pool Boiling Experiments on Nano-FIns
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Debjyoti Banerjee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 268,493.00

PI Name: Debjyoti Banerjee&lt;br/&gt;CBET-1134424&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The aim
of this proposal is to develop novel mechanistic models for describing the pool
boiling phenomena on precisely defined nano-fin structures and to experimentally
validate these models. By integrating the research topics in this project with
the education plans the PI aims to add to the knowledge base and to develop
human capital with expertise in the domain of nanoscale transport phenomena as
well as multi-phase flows and heat transfer. The PI will achieve the research
goals by developing a new fundamental approach involving sensitivity analysis -
i.e. by measuring the local and global response of the boiling process to the
spatial perturbations caused by the surface nano-structures. The spatial
distribution of the micro/nanoscale local surface temperature transients will be
measured using high-speed temperature nano-sensors in a dense spatial array. The
global heat flux values will be monitored and the bubble dynamics statistics
will be explored including the growth rate, departure diameter and frequency.
The high volume of experimental data (surface temperature transients) acquired
by the large number (1000+) of high speed nano-sensors will be analyzed using
computational visualization tools (animations). Non-Equilibrium Molecular
Dynamics (NEMD) will be used to estimate the Kapitza resistance (Rk) of the
different nano-fin materials (e.g., organic, inorganic, metallic and ceramic) -
in order to design boiling surfaces (nano-fins) with better thermal
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fabrication/ testing of nano-sensors,
molecular models and pool boiling heat flux correlations expected to be
developed from this proposed study are of significance for diverse and
futuristic applications, including: thermal management (opto-electronics), oil
exploration (deep drilling), therapeutics/ biotechnology (rapid thermo-cycling
for genomics/ proteomics - amplification/ diagnostics), energy conversion and
energy efficiency (HVAC, solar-thermal, geo-thermal and nuclear thermal-
hydraulics). School teachers (RET) and minority students (REU) will be trained
for developing hands-on learning modules for subsequent use in the classes to
kindle the spirit of discovery in the students at an early age. Class-room
feedback from teachers will be used to improve the learning modules in
successive years. The experimental set-up (nano-sensors and nano-fins) and the
simulation results will be used as demonstration modules in courses taught by
the PI and the school teachers.