* 1134500
* Stability Limits for Gas-Solid Suspensions with Finite Fluid Inertia using Particle-Resolved Direct Numerical Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Shankar Subramaniam, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,497.00

1134500&lt;br/&gt;PI: Subramaniam, Shankar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technologies for
clean energy generation from fossil or bio-based fuels and the capture of
resulting CO2 emissions use fluidized bed reactors with particles of size and
density corresponding to the Geldart A and Geldart B classification. These gas-
solid systems exhibit non-uniform and heterogeneous flow structures arising from
hydrodynamic instabilities at the particle scale. While theoretical estimates
for the stability of a homogeneous gas-solid suspension exist for Stokes flow,
the regime of finite fluid inertia is yet unexplored. Design and scale-up of
industrial devices that implement clean energy technologies increasingly rely on
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations that solve yet untested averaged
conservation equations. An important validation test for averaged multiphase
flow models is their ability to accurately capture the stability limits of a
gas-solid suspension. It is difficult to obtain data from experiments because of
limited optical access, but particle-resolved direct numerical simulation (DNS)
can provide fully characterized field data to reveal flow physics and to serve
as a benchmark for comparative assessment of multiphase flow models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ a first-principles approach to
characterize the stability limits of gas-solid suspensions at finite Reynolds
number using particle-resolved DNS. The effects of volume fraction fluctuations
and granular temperature will be incorporated to develop a comprehensive
stability theory for gas-solid suspensions. The objectives of the project are
to: (i) quantify the stability limits of homogeneous gas-solid suspensions with
finite fluid inertia for Geldart B particles; (ii) quantify the competing
mechanisms of particle-fluid (hydrodynamic) and particle-particle interactions
that result in generation of volume fraction fluctuations in gas-solid
suspensions using a set-theoretic approach; and (iii) understand the stability
and characterize the base state of gas-solid suspensions with finite fluid
inertia for Geldart A particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DNS data will fill an
important gap in our knowledge regarding the stability of gas-solid suspensions
with finite fluid inertia. The improved set-theoretic stability theory
accounting for volume fraction fluctuations will give additional insight into
understanding the dynamics of both Geldart B and Geldart A suspensions, and will
remove classical assumptions of scale separation. The DNS data on suspension
stability will be made available to the multiphase flow community and will serve
as a useful benchmark for CFD codes. The DNS data and stability theory will also
be useful for developers of multiphase CFD codes, such as the popular multi-
fluid code (MFIX) at the National Energy Technology Laboratory, who may use it
to improve existing models that are used to evaluate and optimize fluidized bed
design for CO2 capture and other clean energy applications.