* 1134289
* Structure-Property Studies of Novel Multifunctionally-Doped Core-Shell-Shell Nanomaterials for Improving Efficiency and Stability in Decontamination of Environmental Pollutants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tewodros Asefa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 325,000.00

1134289&lt;br/&gt;Asefa &lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Environmental Health
and Safety of Nanotechnology program supports work by Professor Tewodros Asefa
to develop and investigate new classes of TiO2- and ZnO-based core-shell-shell
nanoparticles (particles with one ten-thousandth the diameter of a human hair in
size) capable of efficiently photo-decomposing or converting in the presence of
sunlight common organic pollutants in the environment and in waste water into
harmless or even useful substances such as CO2 and H2O. The successful
accomplishment of the proposed work will result in not only robust materials
useful for environmental decontamination but also easily recoverable and
recyclable materials for multiple uses. Such materials will be useful for
recycling waste water at a time of shortages of clean water at various locations
in the U.S. and around the world. The research findings should also inform
future research directions in synthetic approaches to novel multifunctionally-
doped efficient nanomaterials for efficient photodegradation of organic
pollutants in waste water. The project?s societal benefits include advancement
of systematic, less costly synthetic methods to create materials capable of
cleaning environmentally prevalent pollutants from waste water with the direct
use of solar energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also allow the
training of a number of post-doctoral researchers and graduate and undergraduate
students who will be involved in the research project in the PI's lab. These
students, including those from groups underrepresented in sciences and
engineering fields, will be trained in a variety of synthetic methods involving
nanomaterials synthesis, their characterization, photocatalysis, and
scientific/engineering approaches utilized in environmental remediation.
Furthermore, the PI will use results from the proposed work in his undergraduate
and graduate course offerings in nanoscience, materials chemistry and
nanotechnology at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. This project will
also enable the PI to continue to involve high school senior students in
research through Rutgers' Governor's School program during the summer semester.
In addition, the PI will use the results of the research project in
presentations to teach the potential implications of nanoscience and
nanotechnology for general audiences attending Science Fairs, as well as in
Discovery Day activities at Rutgers. The PI will further use these opportunities
to draw students' interest into science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields and to change students' (and parents') perceptions
about science and engineering disciplines.