* 1134813
* Planning Grant Proposal to Join the NSF I/UCRC Laser & Plasma for Advanced Manufacturing (LPAM)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2011,09/30/2012
* Steven Shannon, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 09/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for joining the I/UCRC for Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced
Manufacturing

1134835 University of Texas at Dallas; Matthew Goeckner 1134813 North Carolina
State University; Steven Shannon

The University of Texas at Dallas and North Carolina State University are
seeking to join the existing Industry/University Cooperative Research Center
(I/UCRC) for Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced Manufacturing. The center currently
consists of the University of Virginia (lead), with the University of Michigan-
Ann Arbor, the Southern Methodist University, and the University of Illinois at
Urbana Champaign as research partners.

The University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) and North Carolina State University
(NCSU) present a synergistic effort that combines plasma chemistry, plasma-
surface interactions, and plasma source development to enhance the scientific
understanding of these systems, formulate pathways for industrial application
that are founded in basic scientific understanding, and demonstrate the
capabilities of intelligently designed next generation plasma devices to enable
high technology precision manufacturing in the United States. This scientific
effort is complimented by the broad and substantial outreach efforts of the
investigators and their institutions. This integrated effort will compliment the
current activities of the existing I/UCRC and broaden the scope of the center to
include a class of plasma systems poised to make substantial contributions to
future manufacturing efforts.

The addition of UTD and NCSU to the existing I/UCRC will fill a void in the
capabilities of the U.S., providing a leadership role in the development of the
fundamental science of low temperature plasmas. Related educational activities
will include the traditional, and currently ongoing, outreach, educational, and
scientific endeavors that engage students from high school to graduate level at
both universities. Further, as both the Dallas and Raleigh-Durham areas have
historically been regions in which low-temperature plasmas are widely used in
industry, the consortium will be able to easily provide educational activities
for working professions. These activities will be further enhanced by the
presently established and successful outreach programs and distance education
programs at both UTD and NCSU that will accelerate the accessibility of these
programs to this broad industrial base.