* 1134940
* NEESR:  Induced Partial Saturation (LPS) Through Transport and Reactivity for Liquefaction Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Kenneth Stokoe, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,209,461.00

Devastating effects of ground failure, due to liquefaction of water saturated
sands, on the built environment has been widely observed during most moderate to
large size earthquakes. There is an urgent need to develop a cost effective
liquefaction prevention method that can be applied to new sites as well as sites
with existing structures. Researchers at Northeastern University, the University
of Texas at Austin, Boise State University, the University of California at
Santa Barbara, the University at Buffalo and the USGS will collaborate to
develop an innovative and practical field technique for liquefaction mitigation
by inducing partial saturation (IPS) in otherwise fully saturated liquefiable
sands. The goals of this research are twofold: 1) to conduct fundamental
research exploring the feasibility of inducing partial saturation under field
conditions, by injecting very low concentration of sodium percarbonate solution,
and through transport and reactivity slowly generate oxygen gas bubbles in
sands; and, 2) to demonstrate the effectiveness of IPS in preventing the
occurrence of liquefaction. The research will take advantage of unique
experimental and field facilities of NSF's Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) to acquire fundamental knowledge on the behavior of partially
saturated sands and to develop enabling technologies to verify the effectiveness
of IPS as a liquefaction prevention method. The research program will achieve
its goal by integrating small- and large-scale laboratory investigations, field
tests and numerical simulation. NEES facilities to be utilized are the 1-g
laminar box at NEES@Buffalo, the T-Rex shaker at NEES@Utexas and the wildlife
field site at NEES@UCSB. Data from this project will be archived and made
available to the public through the NEES Project Warehouse/data repository.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will have world-wide impact
on human safety and protection of property from earthquake hazards. Also, this
research will enhance oxygen delivery systems used in bioremediation of
contaminated ground. The research is a collaboration between faculty and
students in the fields of earthquake and geoenvironmental engineering. Such
collaborations will benefit undergraduate and graduate students in science and
engineering and promote interdisciplinary education and research. Educational
tools using the research facility will be developed to heighten the public's
awareness of earthquake risk and promote interest in science and engineering to
underrepresented communities. This award is part of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).