* 1134166
* Axon Guidance by Critical Cues - Engineering Nerve Growth In Vitro and Observing From Afar
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Diane Hoffman-Kim, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 305,110.00

1134166&lt;br/&gt;Hoffman-Kim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Nerves
fail to reconnect properly after injury and current medical practice is unable
to successfully control the process of nerve regeneration. The proposed research
seeks to attend to this problem by quantifying how guidance cues, both
individually and in combination, promote axon growth. This knowledge is central
to understanding nerve development and promoting nerve regeneration. The working
hypothesis is that directed axon growth requires multiple cues, which must be
well-defined and coordinated at the level of the local cellular environment. To
test this hypothesis will necessitate the fabrication of new platforms upon
which to study neuronal growth. These platforms will (1) deliver combinations of
cues in a controllable and quantifiable manner; and (2) provide a means by which
to test their hierarchical and cooperative interactions, specifically at the
level of cellular traction forces. With interdisciplinary expertise in nerve
development, regeneration, biomaterials, and microfabrication, the group has
designed a set of such platforms, and has shown with preliminary data that they
have the capability to deliver biochemical and topographical guidance cues to
neurons. These platforms make possible innovative experiments that will test how
combinations of cell-topographical and biochemical guidance cues promote neurite
growth, and how neurites exert traction forces during growth. The objective is
to correlate directed axon growth to specific quantities and ratios of cues,
thus transforming the understanding of how the precise connections of the
nervous system form as well as strategies to rewire these connections after
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigations will determine which cellular
topographical features encode critical guidance information to a navigating
neuron, and subsequently, how topographical and biochemical guidance cues
interact to influence neurite growth, testing on both cooperative and
competitive platforms. Further, neuronal traction forces will be determined
during nerve guidance by multiple cues. Neurite growth will be characterized on
patterned materials with custom designed image analysis approaches, and time-
lapse microscopy with phase contrast and laser scanning confocal optics.
Conditions will be determined by which contact with topographical features
limits the set of angles over which growing neurites can orient. The overarching
goal is to develop methods by which axons can be guided following injury to the
nervous system. The proposed multidisciplinary experiments quantify how growing
axons respond to specific topographical and biochemical stimuli, and as such
they will provide critical information with which to develop new conduits,
scaffolds, and general biomaterial-based strategies to regenerate nerve
tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will have multiple
Broader Impacts. It will provide to the larger engineering and scientific
communities, in particular the Biomedical Engineering, Neurobiology and Cell
Biology communities, a set of versatile, tailorable platforms with which to test
a wide variety of types of information of relevance to multiple cell and tissue
types, including mechanical, topographical and biochemical cues. It will also
generate new frameworks with which to conceptualize cell behaviors in the local
cellular environment, where the environment can be deconstructed and reassembled
to advance understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, the
numbers of female undergraduate and graduate students involved in Biomedical
Engineering research will be increased as the PI has a strong record of training
female biomedical engineers. Further, this project includes an Outreach Program
to enhance the exposure of middle school students in the Providence Public
Schools to biomedical engineering research. There is an urgent need to improve
middle school science performance, and this infusion of technology, engineering,
and inquiry-based learning provides an ideal strategy to address this challenge.
Video conferencing will allow large numbers of middle school students to
interact in real time with experiments in otherwise inaccessible environments,
following a series of curriculum-integrated classroom modules by trained
graduate students as well as teacher-laboratory visits. This intensive program
will augment the middle school science curriculum, train biomedical engineering
students to explain science and engineering concepts to audiences with diverse
backgrounds, provide teachers with internship opportunities, and inspire middle
school students, at critical points in their education, to consider science and
engineering careers.