* 1134669
* EAGER:  Local Control Strategies for Predicting Emergent Behavior  and Cooperative Control in Real Time under Minimal Communication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Suhada Jayasuriya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 02/28/2014
* USD 176,000.00

The objective of this Early-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to initiate exploratory work in three areas inspired by the
remarkable ability of avian species such as birds, bats and insects to
gracefully and rapidly fly through extremely cluttered and complex
environments.: (i) research the large data base on bats and other avian species
to identify a set of key experiments, (ii) use information gathered to guide the
innovation of new control principles in a few specific scenarios including
formation flying and search missions, (iii) investigate purely local control to
explain a few selected swarm behaviors studied by conservation biologists and
use the evolving ideas as a platform to (a) help better understand emergent
behavior, and (b) synthesize simple data based algorithms for controlling the
motion of collectives under realistic constraints. Specific approaches to be
followed will involve (a) treating collectives as continua, (b) homotopy methods
for collision free motion, and (c) pointwise optimization leading to finite
dimensional searches that eliminates the need for solving complex two-point
boundary value problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this
research will show that avian and other biological inspirations could lead to a
shift in paradigm in navigation and control. A key impact of this work is
expected to be a better understanding of how vision and sonar are used by
biological systems to navigate in highly complex, unstructured and cluttered
environments. The current state of the art of image processing using ideas of
machine learning is simply too difficult for real time computations and new
approaches are needed. If successful this research can answer questions such as:
How can simple error correction ideas be adopted for vision based navigation?
Can parallel algorithms be developed with guarantees of convergence time that
are based on biological principles? Additionally, a heterogeneous mobile agent
platform where bio-inspired controls are used will be developed which can be
used to inspire pre-college and undergraduate students to take up careers in
engineering. The results will be disseminated through publication of papers,
conference presentations and a workshop to be organized in bio-inspired control
design.