* 1134311
* IDR: Molecular engineering of thermal interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Avik Ghosh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 02/29/2016
* USD 560,311.00

IDR: Molecular Engineering of Thermal Interfaces
&lt;br/&gt;1134311&lt;br/&gt;Avik Ghosh, Patrick E. Hopkins &amp; Lloyd R.
Harriott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Engineering the conduction of heat in solid
materials is essential for a wide array of applications, ranging from thermal
management of electronics, to power generation, to information technology. Many
of these modern systems include materials and structures with characteristic
length scales on the order of tens to hundreds of nanometers. At these length
scales, the major thermal resistances arise at the interfaces between two
materials, leading to thermal properties of nanosystems that are strongly
dictated by these solid interfaces. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to
develop mechanisms of controlling and tuning the thermal transport across
interfaces to be able to accurately manage the thermal properties of
nanosystems. To achieve this, this project will explore thermal transport
between two solid layers, controlled by properties of organic molecules grown at
their interface. Through the interplay between the wide-band, spatially
localized molecular vibrons and the narrow-band, spatially delocalized substrate
phonons, the project will aim for the systematic and targeted engineering of the
composition, morphology and phonon bandstructures of material interfaces at the
molecular scale in order to achieve a high degree of tunability of the
interfacial thermal conductance. A combined and closely coupled theoretical and
experimental study will be launched exploring various classes of self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs) of organic molecules as thermal interfacial materials, as a
function of variables such as the SAM and substrate quality and material,
utilizing self-assembly and most importantly a rich variety of functional
chemistry. The thermal transport across the wide array of SAM-based interfaces
will be measured with time domain thermoreflectance. The experimental results
will be strongly coupled with ab initio modeling efforts utilizing
Nonequilibrium Green's Functions formalisms. The science discovered in this
project will also be widely applicable to thermal engineering of generic metal
and semiconductor interfacial systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this proposed work is in the development of a new understanding of
nanoscale interfacial thermal properties. This will prove critical for the
atomistic control of heat flow. Through the close synergy between theory and
experiment, the study will enhance the understanding of heat flow and
dissipation at their most fundamental, microscopic limits, combining atomistic
concepts behind molecular heat flow with solid state concepts of bulk heat flow.
It will bridge disciplines, materials, and ultimately the boundary between
fundamental science and technological applications. Accurate, well benchmarked
simulations will address the critical role of band-alignment and chemistry at
the solid-molecular interface. Experiments will focus on fabrication of well-
defined SAM-based interfacial structures, modifying them through molecular
chemistry, characterization and measurement of thermal boundary resistances with
a goal towards creating high quality tunable thermal boundaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include both
engineering relevance and education/outreach components. The knowledge gained
will introduce a new concept in nanoscale science: thermal interface control and
engineering via molecular chemistry. Nanoscale thermal management and control
will bring about disruptive changes to science, technology and economics,
ranging from superior quality and tailor-made thermal coatings and
thermoelectric refrigerators, to better heat management in the multi-billion
dollar semiconductor industry. Educational and outreach activities will involve
creation of a nano-curriculum at UVa, tutorial creation on the thermalHUB,
integration of research and education through thermal transport labs in courses
taught by the PIs, conference organization of session on molecular heat transfer
with undergraduate involvement, engaging minority undergraduate students for
summer projects through the REU program and training middle school teachers for
curriculum development utilizing UVA's Center for Diversity in Engineering.