* 1134698
* US-Pakistan: 36th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs: Islamabad, Pakistan 27th June - 8th July, 2011
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Talat Rahman, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2017
* USD 40,000.00

1134698 &lt;br/&gt;This is a request for support for U.S. scientists
participation in the ?36th International Nathiaghali Summer College on Physics
and Contemporary Needs, Islamabad, Pakistan, June 27-July 8, 2011. The US
organizer is Dr. Talat Rahman, Chair, Department of Physics at the University of
Central Florida in Orlando. The Pakistani organizer is Dr. Riazuddin, Director,
National Center for Physics, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad. INSC is
attended by scientists and graduate students. The speakers are generally from
the United States and Western Europe, and participants come from regional
developing countries including China, countries in South Asia, the Middle East
and North Africa as well as Pakistan. A major objective is to facilitate and
encourage collaborations between researchers in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The summer college topics
include, in addition to particle physics, two of the most current and timely
areas of science and development namely quantum information, and nanomaterials
and photovoltaics. The presentations cover experiments as well as
theory/simulation and application. The discussions of nanotechnology allow
scientists from developing countries and advanced countries to work at the
forefront of science and technology and, because it has some aspects of low
cost, also offer applications in vital areas such as renewable energy. The
School has a long track record of effectiveness in bringing high-level
scientific presentations and exchange of information on important contemporary
topics to students and scientists from Pakistan and the surrounding region. The
PI plans to maintain an environment conducive to participation by students, and
to use funds quite effectively to bring several US researchers and students to
Pakistan, and to put them in touch with Pakistani researchers. Past record
indicates that the proposed activity has been a major success story with several
collaborations having been initiated, and students exchanged between the U.S.
and Pakistan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: There is a track record of
successful interaction and collaboration between US and foreign scientists as a
result of these Summer Schools. The conference is becoming an incubator of
collaborations between US and Pakistani institutions. Several US scientists had
success stories of the conference, visiting Pakistan, interacting first-hand
with its researchers, getting to know the people and the culture and thus
changing their view of the region. They have witnessed the same transformation
in other faculty and students participating at the conference. Several past
participants have later obtained funding from NSF and from other U.S. sources
for collaborative research. The summer school is clearly valuable for students
and scientists of Pakistan and other developing countries. It brings together
scientists from the US / Western Europe and Pakistan where they can discuss the
latest developments in science and technology and exchange ideas about the
methodology of reaching out to students and trainees. The informal setting of
interaction is excellent for exchange of information and creating bridges for
cultural understanding.