* 1134849
* I/UCRC for Next Generation Photovoltaics
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Brian Korgel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,196,827.00

I/UCRC for Next Generation Photovoltaics &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1134849
University of Texas at Austin (UT-A); Brian Korgel &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Texas, Austin (UT-A) will become a new site in the existing
Industry/ University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for Next Generation
Photovoltaics. The I/UCRC for Next Generation Photovoltaics began officially on
March 1, 2010, with Colorado State University (CSU) as the only site (and the
lead) in the Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Next Generation
Photovoltaics focuses on the creation of innovative new strategies to low-cost
photovoltaic devices by developing novel precursors, materials, and
formulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biggest long-term challenge facing the
photovoltaics (PVs) industry is the development of a low-cost, scalable and
reliable manufacturing approach to produce solar cells that are cost competitive
with fossil fuels. This requires new PVs with efficiencies higher than 20% that
are suitable for use for 20 years in the field and can be manufactured at very
low cost. This I/UCRC site will target the development of multijunction thin
film PVs that are very cheap to make but can achieve very high efficiencies. New
materials, precursors, formulations and processes will be developed. This
research is at the frontier of materials science and engineering, chemistry,
chemical engineering, physics and electrical engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A solution to decrease PV costs significantly would lead
to widespread adoption of solar cell technology and a decrease in the world's
reliance on non-renewable energy resources. The research problem is also an
excellent training arena for future scientists and engineers, as it is highly
interdisciplinary and provides a training environment for students. The I/UCRC
efforts will also be interfaced with educational programs at CSU and UT-A
focused on green technology. The industrial partnerships in the I/UCRC are also
vital to the success of the program, and have the potential to catalyze
significant economic growth. The proposed site will have a team of faculty and
students that is diverse in gender, race and ethnicity and will always strive to
increase the diversity of participants in the program.