* 1134932
* Transition Costs Associated with the NCAR-Wyoming Supercomputer Center (NWSC) Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Aaron Andersen, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarah Ruth
* 12/31/2012
* USD 2,100,000.00

The Computational and Information Systems Laboratory (CISL) at NCAR will
transfer its principal supercomputing operations from the NCAR Mesa Laboratory
(ML) in Boulder, Colorado to the newly-constructed NCAR-Wyoming Supercomputer
Center (NWSC), located near Cheyenne, Wyoming. The goals of this project are to
maximize scientific productivity and efficiency during the transition,
seamlessly integrate NWSC into NCAR's existing cyberinfrastructure (CI) and the
broader NSF CI, and significantly increase the service and security of all
supercomputing operations that NCAR provides for the research community. Meeting
these goals requires careful and detailed planning by NCAR and CISL staff. To
avoid disruptions, certain services will have to be duplicated at the NWSC and
ML facilities during the transition. To hold down costs, NCAR plans to relocate
some ML equipment to NWSC, while other equipment will continue in service at ML
or be decommissioned. Activities funded under this award include staffing the
new center and relocating equipment to Cheyenne. In addition, facility
monitoring software will be purchased that would enable both the Boulder and
Cheyenne facilities to be operated by a single team in Wyoming. The remainder of
the award would fund the additional utility costs of running both systems
concurrently during the transition and the purchase of servers and related
equipment needed for the transfer of NCAR's considerable data holdings (~10s of
petabytes) to the NWSC.

A smooth, well-executed transition to the NWSC will help to ensure uninterrupted
support for the scientific community that depends upon this crucial computing
facility. The demand for NCAR's current computing facility demonstrates the
community's urgent need for petascale computers and associated
cyberinfrastructure. A seamless operational transition will support this
scientific momentum by enabling investigators to achieve dramatic improvements
in model resolution, better physical process representations, longer simulation
lengths, and better statistics for a wide range of important Earth System
science applications.