* 1134819
* CChIPS (Center for Child Injury Prevention Studies) at The Ohio State University
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2016
* John Bolte, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 326,504.00

This proposal describes the plans for The Ohio State University (OSU) to join
the Center for Child Injury Prevention Studies (CChIPS) as a NSF funded Multi-
University Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC). CChIPS is
the nations first and only I/UCRC focused on child injury prevention, with a
specific emphasis on injury due to traffic accidents. The mission of CCHIPS is
to advance the safety of children, youth, and young adults (through age 24
years) by facilitating the conduct of scientific inquiry into their injuries and
by translating these findings into commercial applications, interventions,
policies, and public education programs for prevention. The initial technical
focus of the Ohio State site will be the same standard defined by CChIPS over
the last five years, but with an emphasis on sports related injuries, including
concussion issues for children, youth, and young adults.

The broader impact of this center with the inclusion of the Ohio State
University will be the saving of lives; lives of children and young adults. By
preventing the needless loss of life, the economic benefits are also apparent
with reduced need for medical personnel in the treatment of crash injuries. This
should free up the resources and make them available for other medical
priorities. The proposed effort will educate students in this field as well as
educate the general public via the knowledge created from the work.