* 1134268
* Molecular Transport and Kinetics in Hydrogen-Fueled Cellular and Non-Cellular Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Robert Pitz, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 07/31/2015
* USD 311,342.00

1134268&lt;br/&gt;Pitz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H-atoms play a dominate role in
hydrogen (H2) and hydrocarbon (HC) combustion chemical kinetics through the
chain branching step H + O2 &gt; OH + O whose rate strongly dictates flame
speeds and overall fuel/air reaction rates. Accurate prediction of H-atom
transport is essential to give accurate flame properties for combustion of H2,
HC fuels as well as bio-fuels. However, great uncertainties in the prediction of
H-atom transport remain. More accurate H-atom transport models have been
proposed but are seldom implemented and have not been validated by flame
structure measurements. There are few quantitative H-atom measurements in flames
under realistic combustion conditions. H-atom transport is particularly
important in stretched and curved flames where preferential diffusion of the H
atoms (and other light gases such as H2) is very strong and greatly affects
flame temperature, extinction limits and the on-set of cellular flame formation.
Highly curved and stretched flame cells can survive beyond normal 1D extinction
limits and fast diffusion of H-atoms is essential to the flame survival. The
tubular burner creates a highly curved and stretched flame that is ideal for the
study of H-atom transport that will lead to advanced and validated molecular
transport models. Premixed and non-premixed flames can be studied under uniform
stretch and curvature where the overall stretch and curvature can be varied
independently. At high stretch and curvature, preferential diffusion of H-atoms
will be the strongest and the H-atom distributions can be measured in
Vanderbilt's optically accessible burner with H-atom LIF. Stretched cellular
flames can be studied with high local curvature that enhances H-atom
preferential diffusion. The flame cells formed at extreme conditions in the
tubular burner can be measured with H-atom LIF and Raman scattering and the data
compared to detailed 3D CFD models with advanced H-atom molecular transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this proposal, we will validate
advanced H-atom (and small, light-weight molecule) transport models in H2-fueled
tubular flames. H-atom profiles will be measured in hydrogen-fueled non-premixed
and premixed tubular flames to validate advanced molecular transport codes.
Quantitative 2-photon LIF measurements of H-atoms will be developed using a
Raman-shifted ArF laser. The H-atom LIF quenching will be corrected from H-atom
LIF measurements in a Hencken burner that are correlated to Raman measurements
of flame bath gases in the tubular burner. OH concentrations will be determined
with OH LIF signals that are quenching corrected with Raman scattering. The H/OH
radical ratio (found to be very sensitive to H atom transport) will be compared
between experiment and model to validate the advanced molecular transport code.
Accurate H-atom molecular transport models will be implemented into 1D and 3D
simulations by Dr. Peiyong Wang at Xiamen University in China. Cellular and non-
cellular tubular flames will be studied to validate accurate H-atom transport in
a variety of environments. The ultimate outcome will be an advanced validated
molecular transport code that can be used in a wide variety of combustion
devices (gas turbines, boilers, engines) burning H2, HC and bio-fuels to improve
reliability, safety and efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Graduate and undergraduate students including underrepresented minorities will
be exposed to the latest computer simulation and laser diagnostic facilities.
Engineers will mentor local high school students in engineering design projects
and research. Students from Xiamen University and Vanderbilt University will be
exchanged to gain global research experiences in experimental and computational
combustion and promote Asian-US interactions. Local Nashville high school
teachers will be involved in laser diagnostic and combustion research in the
summer under the Research Experience for Teachers Program at Vanderbilt
University.