* 1135479
* CI-TEAM Demo:  Collaborative Games for Bioinformatics Education
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Cecilia Aragon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2014
* USD 250,000.00

Collaborative Games for Bioinformatics Education &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Demonstration Project will leverage recent research into the socio-emotional
mechanics of online collaboration and multi-player game development, and the
existing social networking structure of BuddyPress, to create a novel
educational game that incorporates bioinformatics and cyberinfrastructure (CI)
concepts aimed at middle school and early high school students. Interest in and
participation in STEM fields and CI in the US is declining, specifically with
regard to underrepresented minorities and women. It has been shown that the loss
of interest in STEM fields often occurs as early as middle school, and
additionally, that interest in such fields must be generated early for their
appeal to continue into the undergraduate level and beyond. Given current K-12
funding constraints, it can be difficult for teachers to spend one-on-one time
with students to encourage them to learn about cyber-technology and problem
solving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many educational games have been developed in
recent years with a social networking component that have reached audiences of
varying sizes. However, few of these have been designed specifically to teach CI
concepts. Further, it is not yet clearly understood exactly what makes an
educational game compelling, nor what elements must be designed into a social
networking game to enable it to spread widely and have a long lifetime. The role
of affect or emotion in computing and in game technology is only recently coming
to the forefront. Recent studies have demonstrated that people play games
because of the way they stimulate their emotions. Researchers have identified
key areas of game-induced emotions and specified means to design game mechanics
to evoke each of these emotions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach is novel
not only because it will teach bioinformatics and CI, but because it focuses on
eliciting emotions in a multi-player environment. The PIs will utilize these
emotions to enhance peer-to-peer learning, and analyze the outcomes of the
player experience. This work will be additionally informed by the PI?s previous
research into the socio-emotional aspects of online collaboration among children
and in CI for scientific collaborations. Further, the research team will
leverage the existing social networking structure of BuddyPress
(buddypress.org), an open source social networking platform that has been
downloaded over 392,000 times, to facilitate game development. By linking
collaboration, positive emotions, and social networking to the educational
component of the game, the team will show students that cyber problem solving
can be fun and engaging. They will expose more young people to CI concepts and
generate more interest in STEM careers at a critical age where young people are
defining their self-identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This
project will make novel empirical and conceptual contributions to research in
educational social networking game development and the educational component of
eScience and CI. Empirically this project will provide an understanding of how
young people use and adopt collaborative educational games, how they become
emotionally involved in the subject matter, and how to design such games to
support multiple purposes. Conceptually this project builds on the PI's previous
research on architecting scientific CI and researching the emotional dimensions
of online collaboration. This will create a framework for understanding how
emotions can be leveraged to develop non-traditional means of CI education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The game will not only leverage social
networking to expose larger numbers of young people to CI and bioinformatics
problem solving and directly motivate students to become interested in
CI/bioinformatics careers, but it will also inform, support, and stimulate the
development of future educational games to support CI learning. By developing a
deeper understanding of what makes a game popular, and by the application of
this understanding to a social networking CI educational game, this project will
provide unique and timely insights into how to engage a broader community of
young students in STEM fields. To increase the participation of underrepresented
minorities and women in the project, the team is leveraging the services of the
Northwest Association for Biomedical Research (NWABR) to provide outreach
specifically to teachers and students in underrepresented groups. The long-term
benefits of this research to society include the uptake of concepts of cyber
problem solving specifically among young underrepresented minorities and women,
and the production of conceptual models that will give better understanding of
the larger relationships between people, educational games, and infrastructural
computational technologies more generally.