* 1135329
* EAGER: Large-Scale Equilibrium Design and Pricing under Complex Government Regulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2012
* William Morrow, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 10/31/2012
* USD 69,903.00

The objective of this EArly Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
is to address early-stage obstacles to adoption of large-scale, game-theoretic
models of engineering-economic systems in the analysis of energy policy. Game-
theoretic models of design-and-pricing have the potential to quantitatively
integrate models of consumer behavior, technology performance, engineering
design decisions, and market competition with complex regulatory policies
targeting both consumer and producer behaviors. This potential cannot be
realized, however, without understanding how to formulate and simulate realistic
game-theoretic models of large engineering-economic systems. This early-stage
research will mathematically formulate game-theoretic regulated design-and-
pricing models relevant to engineering organizations and state and federal
governments; investigate tractable, reliable, and efficient computational
methods for simulating such models; and assess the plausibility of the resulting
policy forecasts with medium- and large-scale test problems drawn from the
automotive industry. Tools from optimization and complementarity theory will be
used to allow analysis of multiple non-smooth regulatory policies such as tiered
tax credits, performance standards, and/or credit trading programs that
currently exist in our nation's energy policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory,
software, and computational experience resulting from this research will set the
stage for full-scale analysis of difficult energy policy questions in large
engineering-economics systems with policies targeting both consumer and producer
behaviors. Analysis of complex policy issues will be improved with the use of
models that can represent policies applied to both heterogeneous consumers and
strategic engineering firms. Large-scale game-theoretic models will also resolve
impacts of energy policy options on specific firms or groups of consumers, a
resolution currently missing from many quantitative analyses underlying energy
policy decisions. This EAGER award will lead directly to future research
projects addressing specific, complex policy design questions in important
engineering-economic systems such as automotive fuel economy policy and energy
efficiency of home appliances and electronics. Research results will be
disseminated through conference presentations, articles in academic journals,
and publically available software.