* 1135916
* NSF-CPS-Medium: Collaborative Research: Design and development of a cybernetic exoskeleton for hand-wrist rehabilitation through the integration of human passive properties
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,05/31/2017
* Marcia O'Malley, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2017
* USD 553,600.00

Robotic devices are excellent candidates for delivering repetitive and intensive
practice that can restore functional use of the upper limbs, even years after a
stroke. Rehabilitation of the wrist and hand in particular are critical for
recovery of function, since hands are the primary interface with the world.
However, robotic devices that focus on hand rehabilitation are limited due to
excessive cost, complexity, or limited functionality. A design and control
strategy for such devices that bridges this gap is critical. The goals of the
research effort are to analyze the properties and role of passive dynamics,
defined by joint stiffness and damping, in the human hand and wrist during
grasping and manipulation, and then mimic such properties in a wrist-hand
exoskeleton for stroke rehabilitation. The project will culminate with device
testing in collaboration with rehabilitation clinicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
significant problem in robotic rehabilitation is how to provide assisted
movement to the multiple degrees of freedom of the hand in order to restore
motor coordination and function, with a system that is practical for deployment
in a clinical environment. Armed with a clearer understanding of the mechanisms
underlying passive dynamics and control of systems exhibiting such behavior,
this project will inform the design of more effective wrist/hand rehabilitation
devices that are feasible for clinical use. In addition, the proposed project
will create a unique interdisciplinary environment enabling education, training,
and co-advising of graduate students, undergraduate research, and significant
and targeted outreach activities to underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.