* 1135141
* Characterization of Atmospheric Organic Aerosol through Integrated Analysis and  Modeling of MILAGRO-2006 Multi-platform Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2014
* Luisa Molina, Molina Center for Strategic Studies in Energy & the Environment
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2014
* USD 337,579.00

This award will support studies of organic and other aerosols and their regional
impact through the integration of modeling studies with the extensive multi-
platform ground-, aircraft- and satellite-based measurements obtained during the
2006 MILAGRO (Megacity Initiative: Local And Global Research Observations)
Campaign in the Mexico City Metropolitan Area. An updated comprehensive
measurement-based emissions inventory of gases and particulate matter (PM) will
be developed and will be used as input to chemical transport models. In turn,
the capability of the chemical transport models to reproduce the rich MILAGRO PM
and trace gas data sets will be evaluated. Chemical transport modeling studies
will be conducted using a modified version of an on-line coupled Weather
Research Forecasting Model with Chemistry (WRF-CHEM). A meteorological ensemble
technique will be used to investigate the meteorological impacts on PM
simulations. The project will address five specific objectives: i) to improve
the estimates of gaseous and PM emissions and the meteorological fields; ii) to
characterize formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) from different
emission sources; iii) to assess the impact of biomass burning and biogenic
sources on PM; iv) to quantify the relative contribution of anthropogenic vs.
natural sources of PM on the regional scale; and v) to investigate the impact of
urban aerosols on regional photochemistry and meteorology.

The project will provide support for postdoctoral researchers. The results of
this study will be of value to the scientific community, but also be used in
presentations to Mexican authorities interested in regional air quality.