* 1135365
* International: An Analysis of Speaker Diarization Systems Errors
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Nelson Morgan, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This project will support the three-month visit of a US PhD student to the Idiap
Research Institute in Switzerland, a leading international laboratory that has
developed a state-of-the-art diarization system. Speaker diarization is the task
of determining ?who spoke when? without a priori knowledge of the number of
speakers or speaker identities. The focus of the current effort is to perform
error analysis in audio-only speaker diarization for the meeting domain. There
are two main areas of interest. The first is to build a framework to analyze
speaker diarization performance on specific types of segments (e.g., speaker
changes, interruption, overlapped speech, short utterances, long utterances,
etc.). By analyzing where speaker diarization systems perform poorly, speaker
diarization researchers can focus on improving performance during those
problematic types of segments. The second area is to compare speaker diarization
performance across systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has substantial
broader impacts. Speaker diarization is a useful step in meeting analysis.
Considering the time people spend in meetings, improved speaker diarization
could be useful for a broad portion of the population. While the goal is to
characterize current speaker diarization errors, the knowledge gained from this
work will be useful for improving future speaker diarization systems. In
particular, by comparing where errors occur across multiple systems, the speaker
diarization community can gain insight into the strengths and weaknesses of the
various systems which could lead to a more novel way of combining systems to
improve speaker diarization performance. In addition, the project will support
the development of an international network of collaborators for a US graduate
student.