* 1135137
* STEM Learning in the Context of Green School Buildings: A Curriculum Planning Project for the Middle Grades
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jo Ellen Roseman, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 498,858.00

The project is an extended planning grant that leverages the growing existence
of and interest in green school buildings and uses this as an opportunity to
involve students in STEM activities relevant to their environment. The goal is
to produce an action plan for transforming the middle school science and
mathematics curriculum by rethinking the content that is taught, the ways in
which students and teachers can engage effectively with that content, and the
role that technology can play to ensure wide access to the data and to the new
curriculum. By doing so, the project could help a new generation learn to apply
STEM knowledge and practices to decisions throughout their lives.

AAAS has a unique capacity to bring together highly qualified people and
prestigious institutions to work towards a common purpose, and that ability is
fully displayed in this proposal. The project assembles experts in all related
fields (middle school teachers, university faculty in STEM and in education and
cognition, researchers, curriculum experts, and technology developers), which is
an effective strategy to surface the best ideas, ensure broad ownership, and
provide leadership. The development process moves from meetings of experts to a
prototype that undergoes limited testing. The project uses web-based
technologies for a number of purposes, including to share real time data on
green buildings and to foster collaboration and teamwork. Because of this, the
project could disseminate readily to other schools and even to informal
institutions.

The project has a number of deliverables. These include three documents: a needs
assessment related to the theme, a conceptual framework that connects
disciplines and identifies boundaries, and an instructional framework that
includes the design principles and the supporting technologies. In addition, the
products include a single prototype activity with limited field testing and a
blueprint for the use of technology and data sharing in curriculum design. The
project begins with national discipline-specific learning goals (AAAS Project
2061, the National Research Council, the College Board, and Achieve) and builds
on those goals and themes. The products include a new form of materials
development based on current research and the commonly held belief that schools
need to leverage resources and technologies in order to involve learners in more
interesting and relevant activities that focus on important ideas.