* 1135482
* Collaborative Research: CI-WATER, Cyberinfrastructure to Advance High Performance Water Resource Modeling
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Steven Corbato, Brigham Young University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,435,873.00

Proposal Number: EPS-1135482&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lead Institution: Brigham
Young University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Director: Norman
Jones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linked to: EPS-1135483 (University of
Wyoming)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: CI-WATER,
Cyberinfrastructure to Advance High Performance Water Resource
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to establish a
consortium of Utah and Wyoming researchers who will acquire and develop hardware
and software cyberinfrastructure (CI) to support the development and use of
large-scale, high-resolution computational water resources models. These models
will enable comprehensive examination of integrated system behavior through
physically-based, data-driven simulations. Successful integration requires data,
software, hardware, simulation models, and tools to visualize and disseminate
results, as well as outreach to engage stakeholders and impart science into
policy and management decisions. The project, called CI-WATER, will provide a
robust and distributed CI consisting of integrated data services, modeling and
visualization tools, and a comprehensive education and outreach program that can
revolutionize how computer models are used to support water resources research
in the Intermountain West and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The integrated data-
intensive modeling enabled by the proposed CI will lead to better understanding
of coupled natural and human water resources systems and their response and
sensitivity to changes across space-time scales. Advances in data and modeling
systems that enhance HPC usability and access by non-HPC specialists will
transform the way hydrologic knowledge is created and provide broader
informatics applicability beyond the field of water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will
provide CI that improves access to data and sophisticated models, enable
scientists to populate models with readily accessible data, harness HPC
resources to perform multi-decadal simulations over large spatial areas with
space-time resolution, and transform the way hydrologic knowledge is used in
water resource planning and management. The CI enhancements will be integrated
into a robust education program focused on improving cyber-literacy throughout
the region