* 1135467
* CI-TEAM Demo: Project-based, Collaborative Learning with Google Earth and Wikis (GooWi)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Heather Almquist, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2014
* USD 249,995.00

This two-year demonstration project brings together University of Montana
researchers, K-12 teachers of the Montana Geographic Alliance, and a Montana
small business to develop and test a framework for supporting authentic, user-
centered, project-based, collaborative learning in middle school classrooms. The
overarching theme of the activity is cultural and environmental change in North
America over the past several centuries, using initial European contact as a
temporal baseline for student-driven projects. These explorations covered
virtually all coastal and interior portions of the U.S. and represent the first
written histories of landscapes, natural history, climatic conditions, and
Native American culture. Although not all left behind written accounts that
survive today, paleoecological, paleoclimate, and archeological records,
together with Native American oral histories, can be used to develop a rich
picture of past conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using these data, students may
compare and contrast information from independent proxies and various cultural
perspectives to develop deep and robust understandings of natural and human
induced changes on the landscape over historic time, and their implications for
modern society.&lt;br/&gt;A goal of the project is to introduce students to a
specific suite of transferrable 21st century cyber-enabled workforce skills as
early as possible in their academic careers. Students will learn to use cyber-
based tools to conduct scholarly research, collaborate effectively with peers,
and communicate professionally with their intended
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project addresses a
significant need in cyberinfrastructure education for our 21st century workforce
by providing an expandable and sustainable way to introduce students to cyber-
based skills that typically are not employed until the college level, despite
the fact that a number of studies illustrate that younger students are very
capable of acquiring them. The idea is that an earlier introduction to the
appropriate, ethical and professional use of cyber-based research and
communication tools will help students develop habits of mind that will increase
their success in future endeavors. Learning to work effectively in groups,
including conducting peer review in a mutually respectful manner, is also an
important 21st century workforce skill that requires training and practice.
Learning to successfully employ a variety of techniques including content
organization, writing, layout, and graphic design in web-based presentations, as
well as using virtual globes to analyze and display geospatial and geo-temporal
data, should be both challenging and empowering for students. The project should
reveal to students the power of cyber-based tools and resources for constructing
new knowledge, and help them view themselves as creators, rather than simply
consumers, of information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Through its
connection to the national Geographic Alliance Network, the project will pave
the way for a national and even international effort in geographic
education.&lt;br/&gt;This effort would be realized by individual teachers in
place-based, user-centered projects of local or cultural significance, covering
a broad array of content domains. The open architecture of the learning activity
and its exclusive dependence on free, online tools and resources will make it
accessible by virtually any teacher. The four case studies developed through
this project will be used to encourage new teachers to participate and to inform
them of best practices for various situations. Our vision is to create a self-
sustaining community of practice in which teachers and students experiment,
inspire, and inform their peers.