* 1135068
* Novel X-ray Imaging of Carotid Plaque Microstructure
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Mark Anastasio, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 04/30/2013
* USD 172,382.00

0854430 Anastasio

There is an urgent need for the development of improved techniques for imaging
carotid plaques in vivo. Plaque instability is a precursor of acute
thromboembolic events that lead to strokes, and this instability is related to
the microstructural characteristics of the plaque. However, none of the
available noninvasive imaging techniques can provide comprehensive information
regarding plaque microstructure in vivo. The broad research objective of this
proposal is to develop and quantitatively evaluate a novel X-ray imaging method,
called multiple-image radiography (MIR), for characterizing carotid plaque
microstructure. Unlike conventional radiographic methods that simply measure
X-ray absorption, MIR produces two additional images that measure the refractive
and ultra-small-angle scattering (USAXS) properties of tissue. The effectiveness
of the multiple contrast mechanisms employed by MIR for identifying vulnerable
plaques will be rigorously established. This will be the first work to develop
and systematically investigate a non-interferometric X-ray phase-contrast
modality for imaging carotid plaque microstructure. This innovative imaging
method could greatly facilitate identification of high-risk plaques, which is a
timely problem with extremely high scientific and clinical significance.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research arises from the development and
refinement of image formation algorithms for a new X-ray imaging modality and
their application to the important problem of plaque imaging. Additionally,
novel X-ray contrast mechanisms that can effectively characterize plaque
microstructure are systematically investigated. To accomplish this research, a
combination of physics and fundamental principles of biomedical engineering and
imaging science are employed by their interdisciplinary research team. There are
several broad impacts of the project that will yield important benefits to both
biomedical science and society. The development of a noninvasive imaging method
that could reveal plaque microstructure, which is the broad scientific goal of
this proposal, would have tremendous value for both clinical and basic science
studies. Patients who are prone to plaque rupture could be identified
prospectively. This would permit tailoring of treatments to avoid thromboembolic
events. Additionally, the ability to characterize plaque microstructure would
facilitate an understanding of pathophysiological mechanisms that underlie the
progression of the disease, which would accelerate the development of various
therapies for plaque stabilization. The integration of this research with the
proposed educational activities will help attract students to the increasingly
important fields of biomedical engineering and biomedical imaging and enhance
greatly their educational opportunities.