* 1135548
* Collaborative Research: CI-TEAM Demo: Harnessing Cyberinfrastructure for K-12 STEM Education
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* W Richards Adrion, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2013
* USD 195,992.00

The Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center (MGHPCC) is being
constructed in Holyoke, an old mill town on the Connecticut River that enjoyed a
thriving industrial past and that has experienced a difficult recent past due to
the decline of manufacturing. Attracted by Holyoke?s abundant and low-cost
hydroelectric power, a consortium of five major universities - Boston
University, Harvard University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Northeastern University and University of Massachusetts, in partnership with
EMC, Cisco and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts - are constructing the MGHPCC,
a $168M state-of-the-art high performance computing center. The MGHPCC
Consortium and the State are strongly committed to having the center anchor an
"Innovation District" that will revitalize the economy of Holyoke and create
educational opportunities for the community. At the same time, UMass and the
City formed a Springfield Initiative to address education and economic issues.

Using the opportunity to leverage these events and partnerships, UMass Amherst
and MIT execute this demonstration project to harness the cloud computing
capabilities of the new center in service of K-12 STEM education in the
Holyoke/Springfield area - providing a model for the state, region and the
nation.

This effort is developing an easy-to-use student interface allows students to
easily access the MGHPCC cloud in STEM curricula. MIT developed the Virtual
Interactive Textbook (VIT) - a new educational tool that provides support for
students running computational experiments in order to study natural phenomena
such as weather and climate change. VITs allow students to set up simulation
experiment parameters on small scale devices that can then be run "in the
cloud", returning the results for the students to assess and incorporate into
broader project assignments. Several groups at UMass Amherst have collaborated
on the development of a technology called the Electronic Integrated Book (EIB),
which evolved from a successful online homework system. A major goal of this
project is to combine the power of the VIT, which is an interactive,
experimental paradigm providing access to the computational power of the cloud,
with the assessment-driven paradigm of the EIB, which engages students as they
read the text in the incremental practice of new concepts. Within the EIB
framework they invoke VIT-style experiments, and have the EIB capture and store
the results of these activities for the teacher to examine.

Team members have critical expertise in cognition and learning with technology
in science education settings, in the development of digital learning
environments, and in integrating technology, language and literacy practices of
culturally and linguistically diverse urban adolescents (particularly African
Americans). Close ties to the Holyoke/Springfield schools will enhance the
effort to refine existing STEM curricular support materials being developed by
MIT atmospheric scientists that will use the new technology platforms. As a
team, we will deploy and evaluate this application in classrooms, assess
learning outcomes and evaluate the overall project. In year 2 we will host
workshops for teachers throughout the region to disseminate the results and
recruit new users.

Intellectual Merit. HPC data centers are capable of sophisticated scientific
simulations, but these are not easily accessible to K-12 students and teachers.
Exploiting cloud computing embedded in an assessment platform represents a new
approach to teaching science. Many scientific phenomena are not easy to
reproduce in a classroom experiment so experiments in the classroom only
approximate the real world. Students can carry out computational experiments (in
a pedagogically-sound context) using modeling tools that can closely approximate
both real world processes and their classroom experiment counterparts. This work
will result in an innovative teaching platform that moves beyond present
textbooks and eBooks.

Broader Impacts. The technology and educational modules can be applied in many
scenarios in many areas of science. This team will focus on developing modules
that can be included in regular high/middle school curricula that will help
students make the connection between principles and relations in science. This
should lead to increased interest in science and an increase intake in science
majors in higher education. The systems can also be used in informal settings
such as museums and libraries to raise public awareness of weather and climate
issues. This is providing an opportunity to bring the Holyoke (77% Latino/a) and
Springfield (22% African-American and 31% Hispanic) K12 student population into
the computing and STEM education pipeline.