* 1135419
* EAGER: A Surface Acoustic Wave Device for High-Resolution Atherosclerotic Plaque Inspection
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Rasim Guldiken, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 199,908.00

1135419&lt;br/&gt;Guldiken&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this EArly-concept Grants for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) proposal, we aim to investigate a low power,
biocompatible surface acoustic wave (SAW) device for detailed interrogation of
plaque composition to quantify its vulnerability to rupture. This information is
vital in fundamental understanding of coronary heart disease, the leading cause
of mortality in developed countries. In this interdisciplinary pilot study, an
interdigital transducer and sensor array platform will be explored that will
make contact with the arterial wall for inspection. As the micro-device is in
contact with the arterial wall, any boundary condition change (such as existence
of vulnerable plaque) will alter the phase and amplitude of the received wave.
This response change will be used to quantify the ?health? of the arterial wall.
The proposed research in nature is "high risk-high reward" with research outcome
benefiting millions of people not only in U.S., but also worldwide including
medically underserved geographical areas and people at high risk for developing
coronary heart disease. Also, this work may have significant impact on patient
care, potentially reducing the morbidity and mortality; and may affect the U.S.
economy by decreasing healthcare costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research program will advance the
fundamental knowledge on atherosclerotic plaque characterization by
fundamentally investigating a low power, biocompatible surface acoustic wave
(SAW) device for detailed interrogation of plaque composition to quantify its
vulnerability to rupture. If successful, this work will lead to an integrated,
compact, efficient and simple SAW device that is capable of accurately
identifying vulnerable plaques as well as other significant applications. The
significant novel items in the proposed work are 1) first time demonstration of
surface acoustic wave based atherosclerotic plaque characterization; 2) a
platform addressing limitations of the current state-of-the-art costly
vulnerable plaque detection systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The concepts contained in this proposal are not only
applicable for vulnerable plaque detection, but also for ultra-sensitive sensor
technology for wide variety of applications and in mixing applications. The
proposed SAW device platform may find use in new generation of high-density
devices in various fields including targeted drug delivery; medical, chemical
and environmental monitoring systems; medical diagnostics applications; cooling
of microelectronic devices and micro-propulsion for space applications. The
proposed interdisciplinary technique may also solve wide variety of important
clinical problems, for instance via establishing a low powered, fully-integrated
(with mixers, sensors, valves, pumps, separators, etc.) lab-on-a-chip device for
disease detection in low-resource settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An unrestricted
access research website explaining fundamentals and broad impact of acoustic
based medical devices and documenting our research progress will be established
in a language suitable for broad non-technical audience. The successful graduate
training grant programs in USF (NSF IGERT, NSF Bridge to the Doctorate I, II,
III and Alfred P. Sloan Minority PhD) will be leveraged for bright student
recruitment within minorities and females. Education will focus on a
graduate/undergraduate level course "Fundamental acoustic concepts and acoustic
transducers" that will be developed attracting students from several
departments. Information sessions and separate PI's lab tours demonstrating
basic acoustic experiments during the frequent visit from local high-schools to
the state of the art Nanotechnology Research and Education Center (NREC) will
enable further motivation of students to pursue higher education in STEM fields.
K-12 students will also be given opportunity to gain hands-on experience in the
PI's lab as a part of outreach efforts.