* 1135562
* CI-TEAM Demo: Collaborative Research:  An Online Community to Broaden Access to the Computational Research Enterprise
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Laura Bartolo, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 10/31/2014
* USD 119,996.00

The aim of this CI-TEAM Demonstration Project, leveraging a CDI project, is to
build an online community for computational research, by coupling a long-term
vision with a focused strategy for growing that community. The long-term vision
is an online community in which undergraduate researchers become a key part of
the workforce for carrying out computational projects. As a demonstration, this
team is implementing a prototype bridging a scientific gateway with a
workflow/provenance management system to support computation, project
management, and data management. The online community includes an expanding
group of universities and supercomputing centers, in which undergraduates,
recruited from HBCUs and other diverse sites, work remotely with research
groups. The project will begin with students from Carnegie Mellon University and
add research groups from other universities in the second year. The community
will be hosted by the Materials Digital Library (MatDL) at Kent State
University, an online space for community-based computational projects. The
long-term vision enabled by this demonstration project uses cyberinfrastructure
to restructure the scientific research enterprise in a way that both broadens
participation and advances fundamental scientific research. The structure
broadens access for students by making high quality research experiences
available to undergraduates nationwide. It also broadens participation for
others, including especially PhDs in positions at institutions where research is
valued, but where high teaching or administrative loads serve as a barrier to
research productivity. The current structure of the research enterprise highly
favors individuals who can spend nearly full time on research and so take an
idea from inception to publication at a competitive pace. The proposed online
research community allows individuals to make meaningful contributions with the
time they have available. The current structure of the research enterprise also
favors individuals in highly research active environments where collaborations
with local colleagues can help keep an individual?s research current and vital.
The proposed community provides more inclusive mechanisms for establishing such
collaborations. Finally, the current structure favors those in institutions with
ready access to a work force of talented graduate and undergraduate students.
The proposed community partially addresses this by allowing all experts to
recruit undergraduates or other novices to participate in research projects.
Lowering these barriers has the potential to substantially broaden the audience
of both experts and novices who can participate in computational research. This
expands the workforce for fundamental scientific research, both by pooling
undergraduate work for the projects occurring in the community and by helping
train future computational scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;In this demonstration project, cyberinfrastructure will enable
both the technical and social constructs needed to support interdisciplinary
teams in which experts and novices collaborate remotely on computational
research projects. The efficient functioning of such virtual project teams is
the key enabler for a long-term vision that restructures the scientific research
enterprise to broaden access and participation across experts, novices, and
institutions. This long-term vision extends the demonstration&lt;br/&gt;project
to support an inclusive process for the continual creation of online project
teams: experimentalists post problems which require computations; computational
experts select problems of interest and either perform the calculations
themselves or agree to serve as mentors for undergraduates and other novices;
and novices sign on to complete specified research tasks under the guidance of
expert mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This demonstration
project targets undergraduates who do not currently have opportunities to
participate in computational research projects, including especially students
from under-represented groups. The PIs expect that the virtual character of this
project, which reduces geographic and time barriers while increasing access to
resources and facilities, will be inviting to students who do not participate in
more traditional Undergraduate Research experience programs, such as NSF's
Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REUs), because of needs to work locally
during the summer.