* 1135328
* Bridging the Gap Between Engineers and Society: Learning to Listen
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Yanna Lambrinidou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 09/30/2015
* USD 349,820.00

This Ethics Education in Science and Engineering project, Bridging the Gap
Between Engineers and Society: Learning to Listen, will combine research and
education to explore the relationships between engineering, science, and
society. The project will develop a theoretical framework, a graduate-level
engineering ethics course, and four freestanding multimedia modules that draw on
empirical social science theory and research methods to bridge the relational
gap between engineers and their clients. Goals of engineering ethics education
will be promoted by teaching engineers to acknowledge and listen to the voices
of the communities they serve. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the
following objectives: &lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Develop a theoretical framework
for an expanded pedagogical approach to engineering ethics that grounds ethical
dilemmas in the unfolding realities, uncertainties, diverse perspectives, and
multiple levels of technical expertise of the publics affected by engineering
and science decisions, research, and products. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Build a
multidisciplinary, multimedia, empirical engineering ethics graduate course that
teaches ethical and scientific inquiry best practices, with explicit
consideration of stakeholder needs, values, observations, and knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Partner with the engineering, science, and public health
graduate students who take the course to create four teaching modules:
Listening, Responsible Conduct of Research, Responsible Conduct of Practice, and
Witnessing Wrongdoing and the Obligation to Prevent Harm. &lt;br/&gt;Objective
4: Assess the effectiveness of the course and modules in helping students
understand their role as vital actors in a larger social fabric, and recognize
that consideration of the public is an essential resource for their research and
a critical component of their practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed
research and education plan will advance understanding of a highly promising and
currently underutilized method of teaching engineering ethics. Faculty at four
universities with diverse audiences have committed to teaching the project's
principles and materials. As project collaborator, the Association of
Environmental Engineering and Science Professors will aid in the development and
dissemination of the work products. The project team and participating students
include underrepresented groups in engineering and science, in a variety of
contributing roles.