* 1135316
* INNOVATIONS IN DATA-INTENSIVE ASTRONOMY WORKSHOP
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Karen ONeil, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 03/31/2013
* USD 49,977.00

The Innovations in Data-Intensive Astronomy workshop, to be held in Green Bank,
WV, will be a cross disciplinary meeting to bring together computer science
experts in data intensive computing and infrastructure, and leading astronomy
researchers motivated by the need to analyze and curate massive astronomical
data sets. The workshop will focus on discussions devoted to the development and
deployment of next generation data intensive software applications and
infrastructure to satisfy the science goals of the 2010 Astronomy and
Astrophysics Decadal Survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will facilitate
discussion and foster the establishment of collaborations for data intensive
scientific computing across a number of disciplines, including all branches of
astronomy as well as computer science. The workshop is timely with regard to the
topic of data curation. There is much discussion and debate surrounding the
decision of what data to archive long term. Complimentarily, the idea of
software as an instrument is gaining popularity and shows promise for enabling
science to a wider audience. That is, by retaining unreduced data indefinitely,
we enable future reuse and reanalysis of the data in new, unanticipated ways,
perhaps even by researchers outside the field of astronomy.