* 1135853
* CPS:Medium:Hardware/Software Co-Design for the Life Sciences: Towards a Programmable and Reconfigurable Lab-on-Chip
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Richard Fair, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,600,000.00

This project integrates digital microfluidics with thin-film photodetectors and
control software to realize DNA target sensing using fluorescence. This
cyberphysical vision is being realized through tight coupling between physical
components?the microfluidic platform and miniaturized sensors, and cyber
components?software for control, decision-making, and adaptation. Such a level
of integration, decision, and controlled reconfigurability is a significant step
forward in clinical diagnostics using digital microfluidic biochips. Topics
being investigated include: (i) silicon-based digital microfluidics and
integration of optical sensors; (ii) closed-loop operation and run-time
optimization under software control; (iii) decision-tree architectures, adaptive
reconfiguration, and error recovery. A complete testbed is being developed for
nucleic acid identification on a fabricated chip with detection
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyberphysical system integration will
transform biochip use, in the same way as compilers and operating systems
revolutionized computing, and design automation revolutionized chip design.
Benefits to society include the potential to transform personalized medicine,
home diagnostics, and portable diagnostics. Integration of digital
microfluidics, optical sensing, and software control has the potential to create
systems that can be used by any person, regardless of sample preparation skill.
One example is the identification of bacterial DNA associated with bacterial
blood infection (sepsis), which results in death if not diagnosed early (this is
in the top 10 causes of death in the US). Students are being trained through a
Senior Design course to understand the design