* 1135598
* CPS:Medium:Collaborative Research: Smart Power Systems of the Future: Foundations for Understanding Volatility and Improving Operational Reliability
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Sean Meyn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2012
* USD 700,000.00

This project addresses the impact of the integration of renewable intermittent
generation in a power grid. This includes the consideration of sophisticated
sensing, communication, and actuation capabilities on the system's reliability,
price volatility, and economic and environmental efficiency. Without careful
crafting of its architecture, the future smart grid may suffer from a decrease
in reliability. Volatility of prices may increase, and the source of high prices
may be more difficult to identify because of undetectable strategic policies.
This project addresses these challenges by relying on the following components:
(a) the development of tractable cross-layer models; physical, cyber, and
economic, that capture the fundamental tradeoffs between reliability, price
volatility, and economic and environmental efficiency, (b) the development of
computational tools for quantifying the value of information on decision making
at various levels, (c) the development of tools for performing distributed
robust control design at the distribution level in the presence of information
constraints, (d) the development of dynamic economic models that can address the
real-time impact of consumer's feedback on future electricity markets, and
finally (e) the development of cross-layer design principles and metrics that
address critical architectural issues of the future
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes modernization of the grid by
reducing the system-level barriers for integration of new technologies,
including the integration of new renewable energy resources. Understanding
fundamental limits of performance is indispensable to policymakers that are
currently engaged in revamping the infrastructure of our energy system. It is
critical that we ensure that the transition to a smarter electricity
infrastructure does not jeopardize the reliability of our electricity supply
twenty years down the road. The educational efforts and outreach activities will
provide multidisciplinary training for students in engineering, economics, and
mathematics, and will raise awareness about the exciting research challenges
required to create a sustainable energy future.