* 1135555
* CI-TEAM Implementation Project: Cyberinfrastructure for Quality Understanding and Engagement for Students and Teachers (CyberQUEST)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Youwen Ouyang, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 12/31/2016
* USD 999,930.00

This CI-TEAM Implementation Project, Cyberinfrastructure for Quality
Understanding and Engagement for Students and Teachers (CyberQUEST) is
implementing the successful strategies of a previous CI-TEAM Demonstration
Project: San Diego CyberTEAM (OCI #0753422, 05/2008 - 10/2010) for broadening
participation in cyber-activities through both teacher cyberinfrastructure (CI)
expertise development and student CI-supported geosciences learning experiences
at the middle school level. The CyberQUEST project is engaging 16 science
teachers in a two-year program that includes week-long summer academies,
Collaborative Lesson Study (CLS) rotations, ongoing mentoring and classroom
support. The project nurtures a cadre of Lead Teachers who will be tasked with
teaching future teachers in the CyberQUEST workshops. These Lead Teachers will
also contribute to the iterative development and refinement of an innovative CI-
enhanced geosciences curriculum for middle school. The curriculum units,
referred to as TechQuest Lessons, provide technology (Tech) supported inquiries
and investigations of concepts (Quests). Computer Science and Information
Systems (CSIS) students at California State University San Marcos (CSUSM) will
work with education, geosciences, and computing experts to develop resources
that leverage existing CI-investments and provide customized access to CI-tools
for TechQuest Lessons. The CyberQUEST project has partnered with education
leaders within California (Riverside, Los Angeles and Sacramento) as well as in
Arizona and New Mexico, to disseminate TechQuests through CyberQUEST Workshops.
The CyberQUEST Workshops target eleven cohorts of 16 science teachers, referred
to as Quest Teachers, from respective local schools identified by the partner
education leaders. All teacher participants implement TechQuest Lessons in their
classrooms, thus extending the project and impact. TechQuests focus on inquiry-
based problem-solving science activities to enhance students? learning of
abstract science concepts. In this way the CyberQUEST project engages middle
school students from diverse populations in innovative use of emerging CI-tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The CyberQUEST leadership and partners
comprise a highly qualified team of educational, technology, and science experts
with proven successes spanning over five years in designing and implementing CI-
enhanced classroom activities that impact science learning and prepare students
and teachers as a cyber-ready workforce. Reinforcing STEM topics, these
TechQuest lessons enhance CI skills for students and teachers and are developed,
field tested, reviewed by experts, and refined over the project duration and
sustained through partnerships. The integration of research and learning is
incorporated into key components of the project. Innovative aspects of the
project include: (1) customized units of instruction that engage students in
scientific investigations using real-time data accessed over
cyberinfrastructure, (2) collaboration among university, research institutions,
national and state parks, and middle schools, to leverage CI investments, (3)
quality controlled development and dissemination of classroom ready, CI-
enhanced, teacher-created geosciences curriculum, (4) use of the open source
Learning Management System, Moodle, to provide social networking elements that
support collaborative learning communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The CyberQUEST project directly provides professional development for
more than 192 science teachers in California, Arizona, and New Mexico from
middle schools that serve high percentages of students from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM careers. More than 10,000 middle school students will
be engaged in CI-enhanced science learning activities and develop 21st century
workforce skills as their teachers adopt the instructional strategies and CI
skills gained from their professional development into classroom activities.
Teachers will continue to impact workforce preparedness for additional students
beyond the project duration and will further disseminate resources to teachers
at their sites. TechQuest Lessons will be field-tested and refined in classrooms
that serve populations of approximately 50% females and 50% minority students
contributing to NSF?s initiatives of advancing understanding of how students
from underrepresented groups learn science and are prepared to pursue STEM
careers. The broad dissemination of the TechQuest Lessons through workshops and
the project Web portal provide access to CI resources that enhance understanding
of science concepts for adolescence far into the future. The project serves as a
model for strong partnerships that supports integrated research and learning
among multi-disciplinary groups of people and organizations.