* 1135625
* Conference: Financial Support of the First Joint FOCAPO/CPC Conference, Savannah, Georgia, January 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2012
* B. Wayne Bequette, Cache Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2012
* USD 40,425.00

Proposal Number: 1135625&lt;br/&gt;PI: B. Wayne
Bequette&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first joint conference on the Foundations of
Computer-Aided Process Operations (FOCAPO) and Chemical Process Control (CPC)
will be held in Savannah, Georgia during the second week of January, 2012. The
conferences will be held sequentially, with FOCAPO beginning on Sunday evening
and ending on Wednesday evening. CPC begins on Tuesday evening and ends on
Friday evening. Joint, single-track sessions will be held on Tuesday evening,
and Wednesday, with a joint conference dinner on Wednesday evening. Financial
support is to cover the registration expenses for 15 young faculty members and
30 graduate students to participate in both
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FOCAPO
and CPC have individually been the premier conferences in their respective areas
of computer-aided process operations and chemical process control. Recognizing
that, particularly from an industrial manufacturing perspective, these areas
have a tremendous overlap, a goal of this proposed joint conference is to
increase the participation in each individual conference. Ideally, there will be
a substantial number of participants that will register for both conferences,
sparking interesting interactions and
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funds will be used to support 15 young faculty members, and 30 graduate
students, who will be encouraged to participate in both conferences. Most of the
graduate students attending will be involved as co-authors in the contributed
papers session. The organizers will also encourage participation by women and
minority graduate students, and will contact U.S. faculty who are active in the
area of process operations and control and encourage them to have their more
advanced students attend this conference.