* 1135327
* Graduate Pedagogy for Ethical Dimensions of Coupled Natural and Human Systems Research
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Nancy Tuana, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 07/31/2015
* USD 296,736.00

Scientific research on interactions between humans and their environments
requires a robust understanding of the ethical issues relevant to such
interactions. This project is designed to ensure that graduate students in
science and engineering have the knowledge and skills needed to address ethical
issues in their research. The goals of the project are to create, pilot, and
assess seven curricular modules on topics involving human-environment
interactions such as biofuels, water quality, genetic modification,
environmental toxicity, climate prediction, industrial choices of raw materials,
and renewable energy sources. The research will also include the development and
assessment of faculty capacity building strategies; this will include training
science and engineering faculty to effectively teach these topics, as well as
training ethics faculty to partner with science and engineering faculty to
implement such curriculum and develop new or revised modules. The curriculum and
pedagogy will be piloted, assessed, and implemented at Penn State University, a
major research university with top graduate programs in science and engineering,
and North Carolina A&amp;T, a premier historically black university and the #1
producer of minority graduates in science and engineering in the U.S. The
curriculum will be included within an online research ethics course that will be
available to graduate students across the country through Penn State World
Campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance discovery of emerging
ethical issues in research concerning human-environment interactions and will
contribute to the implementation of high quality and topically relevant ethics
training for graduate students in the sciences and engineering. The study is
also designed to determine how to effectively provide science and engineering
faculty with the knowledge and skills needed to incorporate ethics training in
their classes. The products of this study will be widely disseminated through
faculty workshops, conference presentations, publications, and online
distribution.