* 1135260
* Families, Organizations &amp; Classrooms Understanding Science, Sustainability, &amp; Service (FOCUSSS)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Stacy Wenzel, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,508.00

The goal of the FOCUSSS project is to engage high school students in a need-to-
know pursuit for learning science that leads to the discovery of sustainable
resources and practices for use in their communities. The project is a
collaboration among Loyola University Chicago, Adler Planetarium, the Chicago
Museum of Science and Industry, and four local, urban high schools to construct
student and family activities involving essential science concepts and tools
within a sustainability context. Through this project, high school students
engage in school and family activities around specific themes related to
sustainable resources and practices in their communities, such as the
availability and access to nutritious food, the quality of air or availability
of clean water resources, the effective use of energy resources, or similar
topics. The project intends to help students develop as informed and responsible
citizens who utilize the principles and tools of basic science for their
decisions and actions. The blended instructional model that deeply involves
family and community will be studied for its potential to make formal learning
relevant to the lives of children and to the health of the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an exploratory project, the project tests a
curriculum design that bridges formal and informal education and draws upon the
resources in the community. Students interact with online learning communities
that include their teachers, their families, fellow students, and sustainability
organizations. Participating teachers are involved in intensive workshops that
focus on developing sustainability principles within inquiry-based science
curricula and lessons plans. Service projects provide opportunities for students
to invite their families to participate and be supported in family workshops at
local museums and in site visits to organizations involved in related
initiatives. Data collection includes surveys administered to students and
participating family members, observations, interviews, classroom assessments,
and other open-ended instruments intended to surface themes and related
variables. These will inform the design of the materials and activities as well
as the assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project deliverables include fully
implemented classroom lessons supported by family projects and online
sustainability courses for students and families. The project fosters students
and families connecting to their communities, resources and organizations in
order to improve the quality of their neighborhoods and to promote individual,
family, and public health.