* 1135850
* CPS: Medium: Dense Networks of Bacteria Propelled Micro-Robotic Swarms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Radu Marculescu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project aims to develop a computational framework and a physical platform
for enabling dense networks of micro-robotic swarms for medical applications.
The approach relies on a new stochastic framework for design and analysis of
dense networks, as well as new fabrication and characterization methods for
building and understanding bacteria propelled micro-robotic swarms. This project
enhances the CPS science beyond passive networks of millimeter-scale bio-
implantable devices with active networks of micro-robotic swarms that could be
more effective in combating various critical diseases with minimal impact on the
human body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three major research objectives are proposed in
this project: 1) Statistical physics inspired approach to the modeling and
analysis of dense networks of swarms: The theory envisioned for characterizing
the dynamics of dense networks of swarms aims at achieving ?beyond Turing?
computation via dense networks, designing autonomous reliable communication
protocols for dense networks, and estimating and controlling their performance;
2) Fabrication and steering of swarms of bacteria propelled swimming micro-
robots: Large numbers of both chemotactic and magnetotactic bacteria integrated
micro-robotic bodies will be fabricated using self-assembly and micro/nano-
fabrication methods. Chemotaxis and magnetotaxis will be respectively used as
passive and active steering mechanisms for navigating the swarms of micro-robots
in small spaces to perform specified tasks; 3) Characterization of the behavior
and control of bacteria propelled micro-robotic swarms: To validate and fine
tune the proposed computational models, the motion and behavior of single and
large numbers of bacteria propelled micro-robots will be characterized using
optical and other microscopy methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;The research breakthrough proposed herein consists of building a new
physical platform for micro-robotic swarms by using attached bacteria as on-
board actuators and chemotaxis and magnetotaxis as passive and active steering
control methods, and developing a new computational dense network framework for
designing and analyzing such stochastic micro-robotic swarms. The statistical
computational framework to be developed in this study will improve understanding
of swarming behavior and control of large numbers of bacteria propelled micro-
robots. This framework offers an integrated approach towards CPS design that is
meant to operate under uncertainty conditions, yet be able to succeed in
performing a specified task through self-organization and collective behavior.
This bottom-top approach is meant to improve the theoretical foundations of the
current computational models of CPS. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The resulting computational framework and the physical platform could
be adapted to a wide range of different stochastic dense network systems ranging
from migration of cancer cell populations or dynamics of virus populations to
immune system support and modeling. The proposed swarms of bacteria integrated
micro-robots have potential future applications in health-care for the diagnosis
of diseases and targeted drug delivery inside the stagnant or low velocity
fluids of the human body or the medical diagnosis inside lab-on-a-chip
microfluidic devices. Such health-care applications could improve the welfare of
our society. To foster learning and training of next generation CPS workforce,
the PIs plan to emphasize a cross-disciplinary approach to teaching topics that
are usually offered in disjoint tracks. The PIs will integrate the CPS research
activities in this study into their newly developed courses, and they will also
teach one of these courses jointly. As a joint international educational
activity, a three-day Summer School will be held alternately in US and Europe
every year on various CPS topics related to our project. This will help building
a strong international CPS community and training US and European students in
CPS topics. The PIs will present the research results of this project to
children, K-12 students, K-12 teachers, IEEE and ACM student members, and
college students inside and outside of USA through public lectures. This project
and the Sloan Foundation will support underrepresented and minority graduate
students in the project. Moreover, underrepresented minority undergraduate
students will be trained through the CMU ICES summer outreach program called The
SURE Thing and the NSF REU program.