* 1135455
* FESD Type I: Earthquake Fault System Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* David Oglesby, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 4,650,001.00

Great earthquakes occur at the boundaries of the world's tectonic plates where
an increasing fraction of the population is exposed to high seismic risk. This
project develops and uses large-scale computer simulations to investigate fault
system interactions that control the occurrence and characteristics of
earthquakes occurring along plate boundary fault systems. The project will
develop computer models of the North American plate boundary, which consists of
the subduction zone of Southern British Columbia, Washington, Oregon, and
Northern California; and the San Andreas fault system of Northern and Southern
California. This research addresses the short-term (minutes to years)
predictibilty of earthquakes, and long-term processes (100-1000 years) that
condition fault systems to fail in great earthquakes. To better characterize the
magnitude and variability of ground shaking in damaging earthquakes, which is
needed for increasing our resilience to earthquake disasters, the fault system
models will be integrated with advanced ground motion
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly concentrated deformation of the
brittle crust at plate boundaries largely occurs through the integrated slip of
faults in geometrically complex fractal-like fault systems. Fault slip
phenomena, including earthquakes, continuous fault creep, slow slip events,
earthquake afterslip, and earthquake repeaters, with their exceptionally wide
range of temporal and spatial scales, are products of the rich array of
interactions that operate in these systems. The simulations of plate boundary
fault systems developed by this project will span &gt;10,000yrs of plate motion
and consist of up to106 discrete events. Simulations on this scale are now
possible due to advances in our understanding of fault constitutive properties
and the interactions that give rise to the different modes of fault slip; growth
of knowledge to define the 3D geometry of plate boundary fault systems; and
development of numerical methods that permit highly efficient simulations across
a very wide range of spatial and temporal scales. System-level simulations
provide an experimental capability to probe these very complex systems to better
understand the interactions that give rise to observable effects, and to advance
predictive capabilities. In addition, simulations provide the means to integrate
a wide range of observations from seismology, tectonic geodesy, and earthquake
geology into a common framework. Probabilistic seismic hazard analysis (PSHA),
the main tool used by earthquake scientists and engineers to ensure seismic
safety in the built environment, requires long-term forecasting of ground
motions of all potentially damaging earthquakes. This research will integrate
the fault system models with advanced fault rupture and ground motion
simulations to investigate the statistical nature of strong ground motions
needed for reliable PSHA.