* 1135768
* RAPID:  Reconnaissance of the 11 March 2011 Tohoku, Japan Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Costas Synolakis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2012
* USD 90,100.00

The 11 March 2011 magnitude 9.0 earthquake off Tohoku in Japan triggered a
transpacific tsunami that had basin-wide impact of varying severity. Both the
earthquake and tsunami magnitudes are unprecedented in Japan's long historical
records of over 1,000 years. This award supports a reconnaissance survey team to
investigate the effects of this tsunami along coastlines in Japan, the Pacific
Islands, and the western United States. The team will conduct the reconnaissance
with Japanese researchers from Tohoku University in Sendai, the University of
Tokyo, and the Port and Airport Research Institute, and coordinate with the
UNESCO-organized International Tsunami Survey Team. The 2011 event in Japan
presents a unique research opportunity since there are now three historic
tsunamis with significant impact on the same Sanriku coastline, which may allow
differentiating between tectonic and potentially superimposed landslide tsunami
sources. The tsunami sources and magnitudes of historic and geologic events
inferred from tsunami deposits such as the 869 event need to be revisited. The
tsunami survey team supported on this award will collect high quality inundation
measurements that will allow the research community to infer the predictive
capability of different tsunami models. Tsunami eyewitness videos will be
calibrated in situ to extract time series of flow depth and velocity. The
obtained field data will be analyzed closely with the existing laboratory data
collected by past experimental projects. The primary project deliverable will be
a comprehensive multi-scale, geo-referenced database of tsunami damage and flood
zone characteristics combined with numerical model results. Education and
outreach lectures and briefings will be given at villages surveyed and to
eyewitnesses interviewed. The reconnaissance team will coordinate with the
UNESCO-led International Tsunami Survey Team.

Tsunami reconnaissance of an estimated 1,000-year event will transform tsunami
modeling and mitigation with broad implications beyond engineering. Post-
disaster reconnaissance following major natural events has yielded significant
new insights into both the characteristics of the events as well as the behavior
of landforms and performance of infrastructure subjected to these catastrophic
events. Through such research into the Tohoku tsunami, researchers may be able
to understand the causes of the significant death toll that resulted from this
disaster. The measurements and observations will also provide important
information that will be used to influence both evacuation and building
procedures for the prevention of loss of life and property damage in Japan and
in other areas of the world susceptible to tsunamis, such as the impact of a
tsunami generated on the Cascadia subduction zone on communities along the U.S.
Pacific Northwest and northern California coastlines.