* 1135429
* 2011 MSU Biofuels Conference: The Bridge Between Fundamental Research and Generation of Biofuels and Bioproducts, Mississippi State, MS, October 6-7, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Rafael Hernandez, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

1135429-Hernandez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2011 MSU Biofuels Conference will be
held at the Mississippi State University (MSU) Colvard Union on October 5-7.
Presentations will be on the latest achievements in biofuels in terms of
research and and current and future opportunities in advancing biofuels. The
first day (Wednesday, October 5th) will focus on the education and training of
selected middle school science teachers and students in the generation of
biofuels from microbial oils. MSU currently has state of the art fermentation
facilities that will be used to teach and illustrate the bioprocessing steps
involved in microbial oil generation. Furthermore, MSU will have a 1000 L pilot
facility for the production of microbial oils. Middle school
teachers&lt;br/&gt;and students will have the opportunity to connect
observations at the laboratory scale with the functioning and operation of the
pilot scale facility. Experience indicates that many students begin to get
attracted to specific careers at the 7th-8th grade levels. It is the intention
to contribute to this process by exposiong selected students to the science and
engineering of biofuels, and to highlight the importance of this area to their
daily lives. Another major feature will be the connection of several groups of
scientists from around the world (Puerto Rico, Germany, and Mexico) via Skype
and/or webcast. Their interaction with the audience at MSU will provide useful
information on the specific regulatory framework and the science and engineering
infrastructure in place in these countries. The conference will provide an
excellent environment for students to defend/debate research findings in front
of internationally recognized experts in biofuels. A student poster contest will
give students the chance, to not only showcase their research projects, but also
to network with potential employers for job opportunities in both industry and
academia. The conference will highlight two new biofuel pilot facilities. One of
the pilot facilities is for the generation of microbial oils using municipal and
industrial wastewaters as the growth media, and the other is for production
pyrolysis oil using biomass. Both of these renewable oils can be used to produce
biofuels (renewable diesel, biodiesel, or BioJetFuel). Tours to demonstrate the
operation of these facilities will be included as part of the conference.