* 1135042
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Agricultural Intensification and Sustainable Practice under Empire at Dhiban, Jordan: A Reconstruction from Paleoethnobotanical Evidence
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Alan Farahani, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 19,839.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Mr. Alan Farahani will
collaborate with an international team for one season of archaeological
excavation on the Dhiban Plateau, located in west-central Jordan, and ten months
of laboratory analysis. The research effort comprises specialists in archaeology
and environmental studies drawn from universities in the United Kingdom, the
United States, and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, to explore the long-term
sustainability of agricultural intensification under shifting political
interventions at Dhiban. The settlement receives less rainfall than is required
for stable rain-fed farming, and lies at least 6km from stable water sources.
Nevertheless, large fortification walls, cisterns, irrigation structures, and
agricultural terrace walls indicate that communities have flourished despite
these environmental challenges for over 1,000 years. This project will
empirically track evolving trends in agricultural strategies in this semi-arid
zone by contrasting the Roman and Byzantine (ca 100 - 650 CE) and Middle Islamic
(ca 1250 - 1500 CE) periods.

The results of this research will provide insight into human-environment
interactions for historical cycles greater than those obtainable by direct
obvervation techniques. The study will also contribute to broader knowledge
concerning sustainability in challenging environments in the Middle East and
Mediterranean.

Roman and Byzantine political intervention in this area has been argued to usher
in explosive settlement growth, unprecedented exploitation of natural resources,
and industrial production of tradable goods such as ceramic vessels; yet most
research has relied on documentary sources or regional-scale archaeological
survey. Using the methods of paleoethnobotany, Alan Farahani will collect and
examine the botanical residues of past agricultural practices to procure a high-
resolution dataset which will reveal the long-term maintenance of community-
level subsistence systems that supported this critical shift in the economic and
social organization of society. Several paleoenvironmental indicators will be
utilized to assess whether the sustained intensification of agricultural
production may have also spurred environmental change as a result of increasing
exploitation of local vegetative and soil resources. Comparison with data
already collected for the later Middle Islamic period will highlight the long-
term viability of these strategies in the same resource-landscape but by two
distinct political entities separated in time.

The excavation season and subsequent laboratory work has several goals: 1)
Expand excavation of Roman / Byzantine cultural levels identified in prior
research seasons; 2) Extensive sampling of all deposits on-site for
archaeological botanical remains; and 3) Laboratory analysis of the collected
samples over a period of ten months using multiple techniques. Combining this
information with additional faunal, geological, architectural, and artifactual
evidence collected by specialist colleagues will provide a data-rich and nuanced
understanding of economic, social, and agricultural changes through time at
Dhiban.

Likewise, the study builds upon current analytical procedures in environmental
archaeology. Finally, the project trains US students in field and laboratory
methods, and fosters international collaboration in a scientific setting.