* 1135710
* CAREER:  Engineering Regulatory Protein Effector Specificity to Facilitate Combinatorial Library Analyses
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Patrick Cirino, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 01/31/2012
* USD 127,623.00

0644678&lt;br/&gt;Cirino&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses
the need for improved technologies for engineering custom-designed enzymes and
microbial factories by demonstrating a general approach to developing genetic
selections or fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) based screens to
facilitate the rapid isolation of improved enzyme or metabolic pathway variants
from diverse combinatorial libraries. Two-step approach was proposed, where a
dual selection system is first used to engineer a regulatory protein such that
the product/metabolite of interest inimitably acts as inducer of transcriptional
activation. In the second step, the dual selection system incorporating the
modified regulator serves as a highly specific reporter, correlating product
formation with a selectable cellular phenotype. This approach will be
demonstrated using the AraC regulator and its cognate promoter ("PBAD") as a
model system. The proposed research will demonstrate the integration of protein
engineering and directed evolution with metabolic engineering, yielding novel or
improved synthesis of bioproducts. The broader impacts of this plan lie in the
development of a technology generally enabling advances in biocatalysis.
Importantly, the demonstrated method is readily extrapolated to microorganisms
other than E. coli. The integrated education plan will strengthen the
biochemical engineering curriculum and provide invaluable research experiences
to students, preparing them for careers in biotechnology. Planned outreach
efforts will promote enthusiasm in science and engineering to a broader
community by providing research opportunities to underrepresented and
educationally or economically disadvantaged
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;