* 1135005
* NEESR: Near Collapse Performance of Existing Reinforced Concrete Frame Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Mehrdad Sasani, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2015
* USD 549,595.00

Column shear-axial failure in existing vulnerable reinforced concrete (RC) frame
buildings constructed before the mid 1970's is a major seismic risk. The
challenges associated with spatial response and system load redistribution
capability at the onset of collapse has not been resolved yet. The acceptance
criteria in current seismic rehabilitation provisions are defined at the element
level with no due consideration for the system robustness. Four sets of three-
dimensional, geographically distributed hybrid simulations (HS) will be
conducted using the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) facility at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to
obtain the response up to collapse of a representative three-dimensional
structural system subjected to one-directional and tri-axial seismic ground
motions. This research will investigate, characterize, model, and derive
practical procedures for the consequences of column shear-axial failure on the
collapse of existing vulnerable RC structures. The project will develop system-
level acceptance criteria and analytical tools for near collapse seismic
performance of existing non-ductile RC frame structures. Data from this project
will be archived and made available to the public through the NEES Project
Warehouse/data repository at http://www.nees.org. This project is a
collaborative effort between researchers from Northeastern University and
Western Michigan University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes the
unique HS capability provided by the NEES facility to simulate near collapse
response of existing vulnerable RC buildings through the integration of large
scale physical experiments and numerical models. If successful, this research
project will shift the philosophy of structural assessment of vulnerable
buildings from component-level to system-level evaluation. The application of
system-level evaluation methods developed in this project can lead to more
efficient and cost-effective rehabilitation methods for existing non-ductile RC
buildings against collapse by identifying and prioritizing buildings susceptible
to partial/total collapse. Thus, optimal use of limited resources can be made. A
multi-level education and outreach program will provide students from K-12,
college, and underrepresented groups, as well as high school physics teachers,
with the opportunity to participate in project activities. This will include
development of three teaching modules suitable for elementary, middle, and high
school students covering the basics of earthquake engineering and topics
relevant to collapse analysis. This award is part of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).