* 1135110
* Proposal to NSF to Support the 5th International Symposium on Nanotechnology, Occupational and Environmental Health, Boston, MA, August 9-12, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Michael Ellenbecker, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 06/30/2012
* USD 36,391.00

Ellenbecker -1135110&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs plan to host the 5th International Symposium on Nanotechnology, Occupational
and Environmental Health to take place August 9-12, 2011 in Boston,
Massachusetts. The University of Massachusetts Lowell (UML) will co-host the
event along with the Center for High-rate Nanomanufacturing (CHN), and the
Toxics Use Reduction Institute (TURI). This Symposium is the fifth in a series
of international symposia, which have been held over the past decade to address
concerns about the toxicity and potentially adverse environmental impacts
associated with the rapidly increasing development and use of engineered
nanoparticles (ENPs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This series of symposia has evolved
into the premier international gathering to discuss the toxicity and potentially
adverse environmental aspects of ENP use. The very latest research on this new
and emerging technology field will be presented and discussed by leading
international scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Symposium will be organized
around three themes: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Nanoparticle exposure assessment
and control &lt;br/&gt;(2) Engineered nanoparticle toxicology and adverse health
effects &lt;br/&gt;(3) Policy and regulatory aspects of nanotechnology health
and safety&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Symposium will identify crucial knowledge gaps, research accomplishments, and
future needs in the field. Key findings from the Symposium will be published in
a special issue of the Journal of Nanoparticle Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
special effort will be made to ensure the involvement of women, minorities, and
persons with disabilities. The conference co-chair is a woman, the first female
co-chair in this symposium series.