* 1135486
* CI-TEAM Demo: Scientific Exploration through Simulation (SETS): Cloud-Enabled in silico Design and Discovery of Energy Materials in STEM Education
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Steve Chapin, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2014
* USD 249,940.00

This project aims to enable breakthroughs and innovations in education models,
concepts and processes to enhance training through the integration of state-of-
the-art computer simulations into STEM curricula. These computational tools will
help to cultivate a new crop of innovators who will face global challenges in
energy and the environment. Syracuse University Scientific Exploration through
Simulation (SETS) project is an important first step in the development of cyber
infrastructure that will enable the implementation of novel and unique
mechanisms and help create and train a workforce well-equipped to use computer
simulations as a means of scientific discovery. In this demonstration phase of
the SETS project, the team is focusing on the development and implementation of
a sustainable and scalable mechanism to allow for the infusion of state-of-the-
art computational tools into K-12 STEM education at multiple schools in the
Syracuse area. This is focused upon in silico (computer) design and discovery of
energy materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
project stems from mating advances in interface generation, cloud computing, and
open source computational simulation with sound curricular principles to train a
new generation of scientists and teachers to reinforce classroom learning,
promote after school project-oriented explorations and engage students in
hypothesis-driven research and discovery, and to, ultimately, tackle the
formidable challenges in the renewable energy arena. To support the achievement
of the overall goal, the following project objectives have been established:
&lt;br/&gt;1. The training of highly qualified STEM teachers &lt;br/&gt;2. The
design of use cases that will allow for multiple-levels of student engagement,
ranging from in class demonstrations and homework exercise to longer-term
hypothesis driven research &lt;br/&gt;3. The creation of necessary cyber
infrastructure components, by developing consistent easy-to-use user interfaces,
an online repository of completed simulations and distributed location service
and cloud man-agement &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 4. The implementation of the
developed in silico learning mechanism in K-12 STEM education through a limited
number of pilot projects &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will
allow for broader participation among diverse groups of students and teachers
within the Syracuse area. In addition, transformative broader impacts are
anticipated based on the synergies among the component features in the
cyberinfrastructure tools to be developed in this project. First, the
simulations are based on free open source software that can be customizable by
other groups. Second, the user interface will be accessible to users with basic
computer proficiency. From a curricular point of view, the interface-driven
simulations unveil the concepts, relationships, processes, mechanisms, models,
and applications which are otherwise hidden in the methodological/algorithmic
complexities. Third, the potential for expansion of the cloud-enabled approach
is limitless. A natural extension of the demonstration project is to make the
use cases accessible to a large number of schools in the I-90 corridor of
Upstate NY State. Nationwide implementation can also be achieved by other groups
emulating the approach and software tools. Such efforts will continuously enrich
the library of curricular materials, which can be disseminated via the National
Science Digital Library or through ftp sites. Cloud-enabled simulations will
also be beneficial to user communities such as R&amp;D scientists in the many
small technology startups focused on the development of functional
nanomaterials, efficient photovoltaics and photocatalytic processes.