* 1135452
* FESD Proposal, Type II: " CIDER-II synthesis center: Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research"
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,554,465.00

The PIs propose to develop CIDER-II, (Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth
Research) as an "Institute without Walls" enabling Earth Scientists of all
disciplines to share their knowledge in studying the fundamental processes
responsible for plate tectonics and associated natural hazards, in particular
earthquakes. CIDER II will facilitate concerted multi-disciplinary
investigations involving leading researchers across a broad range of Earth
Science disciplines. It will: &lt;br/&gt; * Foster synergies between individuals
and small groups of interdisciplinary researchers in &lt;br/&gt;tackling the
most important and difficult unsolved problems in solid earth science;
&lt;br/&gt; * Provide an environment for the development of new ideas that will
help identify the next generation of critical experiments and observations, and
to build appreciation and support for them;&lt;br/&gt; * Provide a venue for
cross-disciplinary education of scientists at all career
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIDER's goals are to help improve fundamental
understanding of the Earth's evolution and present dynamics through a multi-
disciplinary approach. It has been 40 years since the acceptance of plate
tectonics theory, but no definitive agreement has yet been reached among
geoscientists on the fundamental nature of the global dynamic processes that
drive plate motions. The indication that a transformative approach is needed and
is likely to be successful comes from new interpretation of global seismic
tomographic models, indicating the existence of multiple depth domains in the
Earth that show different properties of heterogeneity as a function of
wavelength and depth. This suggests each depth domain has its own dynamics, but
with some degree of coupling among them. Generally, a much more complex problem
than has been considered until now. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meanwhile, a new
generation of disciplinary tools is becoming available that are providing
unprecedented views of the Earth's interior. Major infrastructure efforts are
currently under way: Earthscope's USArray (http://www.earthscope.org) provides
seismologists with a high resolution "window" into the lithosphere, deep mantle
and core over the North American continent; COMPRES (http://compres.us) allows
mineral physicists to perform advanced measurements on mineral properties at the
high P-T conditions relevant to the Earth's deep interior, and to compare them
with results of "first principles" calculations. CIG
(http://www.geodynamics.org) provides geodynamicists and seismologists with a
unified, state of the art framework for computations of mantle and core
convection and seismic wave propagation. Extensive GPS networks and satellite
observations are revolutionizing the fields of geodesy and geomagnetism (e.g.
EarthScope's Plate Boundary Observatory, Oersted, Champ, GRACE and Swarm).
Paleomagnetic data are being assembled into the MagIC database
(earthref.org/MAGIC/). In geochemistry, the enormous volumes of high quality
chemical and isotopic data gathered over the past 25 years are now part of
systematic and broadly accessible databases (PETDB:www.petdb.org, GEOROC
georoc.mpch-mainz.gwdg.de/georoc), and ever-improving analytical techniques are
providing new perspectives on mantle processes at scales from micrometers to
thousands of kilometers. Given the enormous amount and diversity of observations
becoming available, a significant leap in the understanding of the constitution
and evolution of our planet can be expected, if we can identify and focus on the
key issues that necessarily span across disciplines, and build effective inter-
disciplinary bridges to solve them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of CIDER-II
will be to provide mechanisms for community evaluation, validation, problem
reconciliation and consensus building. In each year, the activities of this
"Center without walls" will be organized around a principal multi-disciplinary
theme. The kick-off for each CIDER-II "theme" will be a 6-week summer program
aimed at bringing together in one place researchers across disciplines, and
across career levels, to define key questions that are ripe for synthesis and/or
for a concerted multi-disciplinary research effort. CIDER-II will also provide
support for working groups formed to address particular practical issues
identified as ripe for synthesis. CIDER is inherently a broad impact program: it
facilitates cross-education of earth scientists at any level in their career; it
aims at educating a new generation of Earth scientists with a breadth of
competence across disciplines required to make progress in understanding the
dynamic earth. CIDER's web resources, including posting and webcasting of
lectures given during the summer programs, as well as planned web forums and
open publications, is designed to reach the entire community of earth
scientists. CIDER will impact undergraduate education by producing a more
broadly knowledgeable faculty cohort.