* 1135037
* NEESR: Ultra-Low Forced Vibration Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Cole McDaniel, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2014
* USD 58,345.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the feasibility of
extremely low amplitude forced vibration testing (FVT) to determine the
structural dynamic properties of a low-rise building. To achieve this objective,
the researchers will use a very small, 30-pound harmonic load to shake a full-
scale, five-story building test specimen, constructed as part of NSF award
CMMI-0936505, on the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) outdoor shake table at the University of California, San
Diego. The results of the ultra-low (UL) forced vibration testing (UL-FVT),
namely, the natural frequencies, mode shapes, and damping ratios, will be
compared to shake table test results and FVT using much larger shakers. The
comparison will be made at multiple stages of the specimen testing. This
research is potentially transformative in that it will for the first time define
the limits and applicability of the UL-FVT. Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES Project
Warehouse/data repository at http://www.nees.org.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
award will impact earthquake engineering education of K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students and practicing engineers. Verification of the UL-FVT will
provide proof of the concept and will serve as a stepping stone to introducing
the UL-FVT into university classrooms nationwide. The UL-FVT method will improve
structural dynamics education by allowing faculty and students to explore the
dynamics of full-scale, real-world structures at a fraction of the time and cost
associated with typical FVT. Learning modules will be developed for K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students and archived in the NEESacademy at
http://www.nees.org. This work will also advance discovery in the field of
earthquake engineering by enabling practicing engineers to verify their linear
computational models for both new designs and retrofit applications. This award
is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).