* 1135506
* Collaborative Research: CI-TEAM Demo: Adventure Learning through Water and MOSS
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* George Veletsianos, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2013
* USD 77,888.00

The project "CI-TEAM Demo: Adventure Learning through Water and MOSS" is
engaging K-12 students throughout Idaho with meaningful inquiries into water
resource issues through outdoor data-collection expeditions supported via a
novel online learning environment. Students collect authentic data related to an
inquiry-based curriculum and this data is shared within the online environment.
Students, teachers, and content experts from throughout Idaho then communicate
and collaborate in meaningful ways around data using the latest in low cost,
high tech instrumentation. The McCall Outdoor Science School (MOSS) is serving
as an informal science education provider and cornerstone to the project mission
by serving as the base camp for water expeditions. Water expeditions are
inquiry-driven and focus on various aspects of water resources inherent in the
four seasons. MOSS also serves as the cyberlearning host for which online
environment development is taking place. Seed funding through EPSCoR has
provided the means to design initial web interface components
(http://mossi.tfhsbruins.com/index/index/). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
online learning environment is being redesigned, in part, using the Adventure
Learning (AL) framework as defined by the work of the collaborating PI at the
University of Texas, Austin. AL is an approach to hybrid and online education
that provides students with opportunities to investigate real-world issues
through authentic learning experiences within collaborative learning
environments. The AL framework consists of nine carefully integrated components,
which, taken together, enable the development of an inquiry-based online
learning environment. The online learning environment complements the
curriculum, and together the two foster an organic learning experience that
capitalizes on both the affordances of social technologies as well as on the
opportunities provided by the outdoors for authentic learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum supporting these endeavors will be made
available for free online. Additionally, access to the online learning
environment will be provided free of charge to interested teachers throughout
Idaho. Furthermore, the AL water expeditions will be designed to enable teachers
from throughout Idaho the ability to conduct their own AL water expeditions in
conjunction with the AL water expeditions being conducted at MOSS. While
teachers and learners in other locations study the same topic, the online
learning environment provides opportunities for collaboration and interaction
between geographically dispersed participants. These locations are then enabled
to conduct their own local exploration of the issue, share data and use the data
from MOSS and other classes to support localized inquiries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Participating students in this project
are developing and exercising key 21st century workforce skills. Authentic
scientific inquiry leading to scientific literacy, as well as scientific skills
will be developed in students. These skills include data collection, posing
questions, making observations, inferring, and classifying. Students are also
securing invaluable skills through their participation in the online learning
environment, such as the ability to manage digital information and data,
collaborate with others, and participate in virtual networks of practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Many of the student groups participating
in MOSS activities are underrepresented (e.g. American Indian, female, and
rural). In addition, through the online environment many of the barriers to
participation are eliminated for underrepresented students. Interest in this
project has also been expressed by funded and potential projects. These
expressions highlight the ripe potential for synergy around an online learning
environment replete with social affordances that provide users with the
opportunity to upload/input data and interact in meaningful ways around the
data.