* 1135727
* GSE/RES: Trends in the Determinants of Gender Segregation Across STEM Majors, 1976 - 2006
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Jerry Jacobs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2015
* USD 525,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The University of California Los Angeles is conducting a
study using national data on entering college students over the past three
decades to advance understanding of the characteristics of women and men who
pursue specific STEM majors and how those characteristics vary across STEM
fields and over time. This study uses data from the Cooperative Institutional
Research Program (CIRP) Freshman Survey, a national longitudinal study of
entering college students conducted by UCLA's Higher Education Research
Institute. The instrument includes dozens of relevant measures, including: self-
ratings of academic and mathematical abilities, high school academic achievement
and preparation, major choice, academic and career goals, life goals, value
orientations, and demographic background. This study takes a unique approach by:
(a) disaggregating results by gender and STEM field; (b) incorporating data from
over three decades; and (c) using regression decomposition, a statistical method
used primarily in economics and sociology, to understand the nature of such
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Knowledge about the
characteristics of who chooses particular STEM majors and how those
characteristics have changed over time is critical to inform and improve efforts
to recruit a diverse population of women and men into the STEM workforce. Prior
research has identified key factors affecting college women's persistent
underrepresentation in STEM fields including preparation, values, psychological
factors, and structural barriers. What remains unknown is whether the
determinants of STEM interest have changed over time and in different ways for
women and men. Further, there is limited understanding of how determinants of
participation differ by specific STEM field, a question of particular importance
given that the gender gap in participation ranges from severe (engineering and
computer science) to minimal (biological sciences). Project visibility will be
enhanced through the production of a professional-quality executive summary,
final report, and five discipline-specific reports, available on two high-
traffic websites: the Higher Education Research Institute and the Sudikoff
Family Institute for Education &amp; New Media.