* 1135877
* 2011  Polar Marine Sciences GRC
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2011,11/30/2011
* Patricia Yager, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This award provided by the Antarctic Integrated System Science and Arctic
Natural Sciences programs in the Office of Polar Programs at NSF will support
travel and registration costs for graduate students and early career scientists
as outlined in the proposal "2011 Polar Marine Sciences GRC". All Gordon
Research Conferences (GRC) bring together an international group of scientists
from all different career levels to a common venue for a one-week period to
allow frank and open discussion of unpublished results. For the first time this
year the Polar Marine Sciences GRC will be combined with a Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS) to bring early career scientists together with mentors for a two
day mini-meeting prior to the main meeting to allow for more intensive training
for the students and early career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The 2011 Gordon Research Conference on Polar Marine Sciences brings
together Arctic and Antarctic scientists to discuss their not-yet published
results in an informal atmosphere with the goal of improving the interpretation
of current work and laying the groundwork for truly integrated projects in the
future. In addition the conference will make a concerted effort to include some
non-polar presentations at the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Gordon Research Conferences make a very strong effort to entrain young
scientists including graduate students and post-docs, and the Polar Marine
Sciences GRC will also hold a GRS (Graduate Research Seminar) series in
conjunction with the more standard Gordon Research Conference for the first
time. In additional there is always a strong international turnout at the
meeting so it is a good venue for fostering international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds provided by the NSF will be used to
support graduate students and early-career scientists affiliated with US
institutions. Inclusion of early career scientists and students in the mini-
meeting and main meeting of a necessarily multi/ interdisciplinary field of
research focused on both the Antarctic and Arctic will be extremely valuable in
training the next generation of polar researchers.