* 1135667
* US-South Africa Workshop: Mathematical Methods in Systems Biology and Population Dynamics, AIMS, Cape Town, South Africa
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Heinz Schaettler, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 47,000.00

"Mathematical Methods in Systems Biology and Population Dynamics" is a workshop
organized at the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS) in Cape
Town, South Africa, in 2012, to facilitate new collaborations between researcher
in the United States and Africa. This workshop brings together applied
mathematicians with researchers working in various biological and medical fields
in order to exchange ideas and advances the knowledge of research globally by
initiating and promoting collaborations motivated by challenging problems. These
include the spread of infectious diseases (epidemiology) or the growing need for
robust and reliable models in ecology, both of special importance in the host
country of South Africa where research naturally has focused on fighting disease
and epidemics. In the United States, on the other hand, a strong emphasis exists
on Systems Biology and especially on its aspects related to other diseases,
including cancer. Therefore a second focus area of the workshop includes
improved and more realistic models for the dynamic progression and treatment for
various types of cancer, a truly global challenging problem. There exist various
mathematical methods and techniques (e.g., dynamical systems, optimal control)
that apply to both major areas, while often only one or the other is being used
by researchers in a specific field. In this workshop these groups are brought
together together to initiate new and nurture existing collaborations while at
the same time bringing new mathematicians and scientists into this exciting
interdisciplinary field. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The organizing committee
believes that mathematics has much to offer to the medical and biological
communities and that methods and techniques from mathematics can deepen the
understanding of many problems in systems biology, epidemiology and population
dynamics. The workshop is expected to have an exceptional educational impact
because of the unique character of AIMS, which is a center for graduate studies
in the mathematical sciences in Africa with emphasis on mathematical biology.
Thus the participation of researchers and students from various African
countries is guaranteed. Special efforts are made to recruit as participants
U.S. graduate students and postdoctoral researchers and enable interactions that
will catalyze collaborations between these groups. The presence of both senior
and junior researchers and students from both U.S. and Africa will provide a
great opportunity for mentoring activities within the workshop. The results of
the workshop will be disseminated through published proceedings and further
research contacts.