* 1135863
* Implementation Grant: Computational Biology and NanoBiotechnology Undergraduate Research and Education (CNURE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Carl Pettis, Alabama State University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,747,055.00

The Alabama State University HBCU-UP project, Computational Biology and
NanoBiotechnology Undergraduate Research and Education (CNURE) program has a
central intent to implement new teaching and research programs in computational
biology and nanobiotechnology for undergraduates. The project expects to achieve
this through implementation of five components: 1) reforming STEM curricula; 2)
providing research experience to undergraduates through academic and summer
research opportunities at major institutions, private companies, international
institutions and federal laboratories; 3) engaging faculty in research and
professional development; 4) infusing technology in educational and research
programs; and 5) enhancing recruitment, retention and transition of STEM
students through high school to graduate school. The upper level STEM curriculum
will be the focus of the curricula redesign to provide STEM majors with up-to-
date education and training in computer science, computational biology,
bioinformatics, biochemistry, and nanoscience. Faculty development opportunities
will be provided to assist faculty in developing innovative teaching practices,
improving research skills, and initiating research collaborations. The CNURE
project specifically will provide to STEM students the unique and specialized
education and research training needed for computational biology and
bioinformatics. The project is anchored on the infrastructure built from the
previous HBCU-UP award and is integrated with a current CREST award (Center for
NanoBiotechnology Infrastructure).