* 1135345
* Modeling Effective Research Ethics Education in Graduate International Collaborations:  A Learning Outcomes Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Robert Sowell, Council of Graduate Schools
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2015
* USD 397,985.00

The Council of Graduate Schools (CGS) proposes a collaborative, three-year
education project to coordinate, develop, and evaluate research ethics education
programs that respond to research integrity issues that arise in international
collaborations in science and engineering (S&amp;E). The project addresses two
specific national needs: the preparation of S&amp;E researchers at U.S.
institutions to face the ethical challenges of international research
collaborations, and the need for effective methods of assessing and improving
the preparation of U.S. graduate students to conduct collaborative research in
an international context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Council of Graduate Schools
will address these needs through the following activities: (1) convene an
international, interdisciplinary team of experts in research ethics education,
S&amp;E collaboration, and learning assessment together with graduate education
leaders to identify core research ethics skills needed in graduate international
collaborations; (2) publish a framework paper and a preliminary learning
outcomes rubric for graduate international collaborations; (3) develop and issue
a request for proposals for pilot projects that develop and assess research
ethics education programs in existing international collaborations; (4) convene
an external selection committee to nominate five institutions to receive awards
of $24,000 each to develop pilot projects in the development of coordinated
research ethics curricula; (5) begin to assess curricular and institutional
innovations in this area and develop an infrastructure for ongoing common
assessment of their impact over time through a multi-tiered assessment strategy;
(6) develop CGS electronic resources to feature project outcomes from the five
pilot projects, including a Learning Outcomes Repository; (7) synthesize project
results in CGS hardcopy and electronic publications that will reach nearly every
U.S. university in S&amp;E graduate education; and (8) further disseminate best
practices and findings through technical workshops and sessions at national and
international meetings on research ethics and/or international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;