* 1135588
* CI-TEAM Impl: Dynamic Interdisciplinary Research Environment to Engage and Develop a Cyber-Ready Workforce in the Geosciences, Social Sciences, and Computer Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2016
* Louise Kellogg, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 11/30/2016
* USD 999,992.00

This CI-TEAM Implementation Project is developing an interdisciplinary research
environment for preparing a cyber-enabled workforce in the geosciences, computer
science, science and technology studies, anthropology, and physics. The project
engages students in interdisciplinary teams to jointly develop, use, and
disseminate cyber-infrastructure (CI) tools and techniques using virtual reality
(VR) and scientific visualization for research and education across three
interdisciplinary themes. The project builds on knowledge and experience that
the team has gained over six years of interdisciplinary collaboration at the
Keck Center for Active Visualization in the Earth Sciences (KeckCAVES).
KeckCAVES provides both a fertile environment for interdisciplinary research and
uniquely interactive, immersive virtual reality environments that allow users to
visualize and analyze large and complex datasets.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed project enables both students and more advanced
researchers to contribute to the frontiers of knowledge in geosciences, computer
science, anthropology, humanities, and physical sciences through the use of VR.
It extends the technological and scientific frontiers in three new, innovative,
yet intersecting directions: - Remote collaboration via tele-immersion: Teams
are developing innovative methods of tele-immersion technology to enable remote
interaction between teams of people at different locations with datasets, to
facilitate research and teaching collaboration. In the process of this
development, students are gaining knowledge and insight into the behavior of VR
and immersive visualization. - Rapid Scientific Response (RSR) to natural
disasters: Teams are developing CI capacity for rapidly collecting, visualizing,
and interpreting data collected after major geologic events. This capacity will
contribute to our knowledge of the geologic processes driving earthquakes,
volcanoes, landslides and other catastrophic events. - 3d Compare: Teams are
developing the capacity to manipulate and quantitatively compare digitally
represented objects using interactive CI methods for use in diverse applications
including 3D digital scans of buildings, cultural heritage sites, and
archeological, geological, and paleontological samples.

Broader Impacts: This CI-TEAM project contributes to the development of a
diverse, cyber-enabled workforce by engaging undergraduates and graduate
students in the use of virtual-reality-based technology for discovery-based
scientific research. The team is engaging students and postdocs across
disciplines to co-develop CI tools for their own research and that of their
peers, and to develop a cohort of cyber-enabled scientists and software
developers with experience working on interdisciplinary teams. Participants in
this project will have the opportunity to participate in collaborations with US
and international partner institutions.

They are developing with students and postdocs, innovative, high-quality
learning technologies and instructional materials that are broadly adoptable by
multiple disciplines and institutions. They will disseminate these technologies
and methods by providing software under the GNU General Public License;
disseminating software tools and documentation, and publishing educational
modules, documentation, and research and educational outcomes to facilitate the
use of the tools. They will provide visualization experiences to established,
effective STEM outreach programs that effectively target K-12 students.

The CI tools developed in this program will enable research and teaching
advances in three critical areas: study of virtual objects, remote collaboration
between various groups and agencies, and rapid scientific response to natural
disasters. The development of these technologies could become vitally important
in assisting multinational agencies to make sound decisions based on complex
data.