* 1135155
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Transition to Agriculture in Southern Scandinavia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Kurt Gron, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 18,000.00

With National Science Foundation support Mr. Kurt Gron will analyze late
Mesolithic and early Neolithic animal remains from several sites of the northern
European Ertebølle (5400-4000 B.C.) and Trichterbecher (4000-3500 B.C.) cultures
of Southern Scandinavia. Analyses will be performed under the supervision of Dr.
T. Douglas Price and involve materials from a cluster of excavated sites located
in northwest Zealand, Denmark, as well as a transitional shell midden in eastern
Jutland, Denmark, and will include previously published data. The fundamental
goal of the research is to gain insight into the factors which, in traditional
societies, either promote change or resistance to it. Southern Scandinavia,
appears to illustrate the latter and the proposed research hopefully will
increase scientific understanding of the inhibitory factors involved. The
adoption of domesticated animals and plants in Scandinavia was one of the last
transitions to agriculture in Europe, around 4000 B.C. For nearly a millennium
prior, farming was present in Europe but not southern Scandinavia, and there was
contact between foraging and farming groups without an adoption of farming by
Ertebølle foragers. After this delay, agriculture began, but in an idiosyncratic
fashion. This was characterized by the rapid introduction of domesticated
animals and plants but their low importance subsequently for nearly half a
millennium, large-scale environmental changes, and culture change in the form of
new types of ceramic and settlement system concurrent with some evidence of
cultural continuity. Despite the long history of archaeological inquiry into the
origins of agriculture in southern Scandinavia, a consensus view of the causes,
timeline, and the people involved remains elusive. Questions as complicated as
explaining the origins of agriculture require robust data sets of not only the
transitional era, but also antecedent periods. Due to the scant archaeological
record of the earliest farmers in Denmark, a clear understanding of the
transition may be best understood by studying the Ertebølle culture and their
faunal economies. By applying several methods and integrating this data with
other scholarship, Mr. Gron will tie together past and present research,
introducing new types of analysis and models of variability which will inform
future research. These analyses will focus on geographical and regional
variability in Ertebølle animal use just prior to the onset of farming in the
region, and will build and test a model of variability within such animal
economies. The study of animal bones is particularly important in Stone-Age
research, as faunal remains are one of the most robust data sets available for
study of such cultures. Gron will use multiple approaches, including traditional
zooarchaeological, chemical, and statistical methods to understand the build-up,
and transition to, agriculture in Denmark through the lens of faunal use.
Methods applied here will inform and be applicable for understanding
agricultural origins and transitions worldwide, one of the key questions of
human history. This research will provide high-level and unique training for Mr.
Gron and will foster long-term transatlantic Stone-Age research and scholarly
cooperation, as this project relies on collaboration with a number of Danish and
other European scholars and students. Publication will be submitted for peer-
review, and results will be presented at scholarly conferences as well as to the
general public. As the relationship of humans with animals is a key trait our
kind, further understanding the interaction between people and their natural
environment is perpetually relevant.