* 1135176
* EAGER: Exploiting Electrochemically-induced Phase Transformations in Mg-Li Thin Film Electrodes for Ultra-high Capacity Energy Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* K. S. Ravi Chandran, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2013
* USD 91,385.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Research is proposed to understand the mechanism of
reversible phase transformations in Mg-Li phase-changing anodes during
electrochemical insertion/removal of Li in Mg thin films during the
charging/discharging processes. The key concept of this research is that
starting with a pure Mg anode, a phase change from HCP Mg to BCC Li-Mg can be
induced in the anode during Li charging (and the reverse during discharging).
The key question is how the thin film microstructural variables affect the
reversibility of the electrochemically-induced phase transformations. The size
and intercolumnar spacing of the columnar grains, as well as the grain
orientation, are the primary variables affecting the phase transformation. The
hypothesis is that there could be an optimum grain size and intercolumnar
spacing that accommodates the volume change of the phase transition, fully
allowing maximization of Li storage and removal without the destruction of the
electrode. This is a high-risk research, because it is not certain that the
reversibility of phase transformation and volume change accommodation is
repeatable over the sufficient number of cycles required in batteries.
Specifically, the research involves making Mg films of various thicknesses with
ultrafine and columnar grain structures, either by sputtering or PVD,
micromachining using MEMS fabrication techniques to extend the intercolumnar
spacing, testing electrochemical cells to understand the nature of the
reversible phase change from HCP Mg to BCC Li-Mg and vice-versa during
charging/discharging and experimental determination of the capacity, cyclability
and stability of the performance during the charge/discharge
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Next-generation electric
vehicles, as well as effective utilization of renewable energy from solar cells
and windmills, will require major technological breakthroughs in electrical
energy storage and retrieval. A high-risk and high-payoff research poject is
proposed to exploit phase transformations in lithium-magnesium alloy anodes to
help develop ultra-high-capacity energy storage batteries with capacities much
larger than those currently under consideration for electric vehicles. The
research could potentially lead to new electrode materials and structures for a
new generation of reliable and high-capacity batteries, which could in turn
accelerate the development of low-cost plug-in electric vehicles. The project
will employ a graduate student and one or more undergraduate students, provide
education and training in the area of battery materials science research, and
develop outreach/recruitment presentations aimed at senior high school students.
The research will be integrated into class lectures on battery materials science
for a graduate course on Energy Science and Engineering. Public outreach
presentations, under the theme of "energy materials science", to high school
students and parents during University Science Day recruitment events, will also
be made.