* 1135815
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Co-Design of Multimodal CPS Architectures and Adaptive Controllers
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Anuradha Annaswamy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2016
* USD 753,000.00

The focus of this project is the efficient implementation of multiple control
and non-control automotive applications in a distributed embedded system (DES)
with a goal of developing safe, dependable, and secure Automotive CPS. DES are
highly attractive due to the fact that they radically enhance the capabilities
of the underlying system by linking a range of devices and sensors and allowing
information to be processed in unprecedented ways. Deploying control and non-
control applications on a modern DES, which uses advanced processor and
communication technology, introduces a host of challenges in their analysis and
synthesis, and leads to a large semantic gap between models and their
implementation. This gap will be filled via the development of a novel CPS
architecture by stitching together common fundamental principles of
multimodality from real-time systems and related notions of switching in control
theory and integrating them into a co-design of real-time platforms and adaptive
controllers. This architecture will be validated at the Toyota Technical Center
in the context of engine control and diagnostics.

The results of this project will provide the science and technology for a
foundation in any and all infrastructure systems ranging from finance and energy
to telecommunication and transportation where distributed embedded systems are
present. In addition to training the graduate and undergraduate students, and
mentoring a post-doctoral associate who will gain multi-domain expertise in
advanced control, real-time computation and communication, and performance
analysis, an inter-school graduate and an integrated summer course will be
developed on control in embedded systems and combined with on-going outreach
programs at MIT and UPenn for minority and women undergraduate students and K-12
students.