* 1135628
* Travel Support for Scientists to Participate ACS Symposium "Next-Generation Renewable Polymers", San Diego, CA March 25-29, 2012
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Chuanbing Tang, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 10/31/2012
* USD 4,265.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of renewable polymers is driven
by the economic and strategic need to reduce the nation's dependence on
petroleum based products. It is also driven by the environmental goal of
reducing the carbon footprint. This symposium is being organized to cover the
latest progress in developing next generation polymers from renewable biomass.
Stemming from the biomass starting point, the program will include new monomer
development, synthesis and polymerization, the chemical modification of natural
polymers, structure property relationships, and new concepts on the synthesis
and characterization of materials with new molecular architectures,
functionalities and compositions. The request for funding is to cover
travel/registration costs of invited speakers which include graduate students
and postdocs. The symposium, "Next-Generation Renewable Polymers", will be held
at the ACS American Chemical Society Meeting in San Diego CA, March 25-29,
2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of renewable polymers is driven by the economic and strategic need
to reduce the nation's dependence on petroleum based products such as the vast
array of synthetic polymers (e.g. polyethylene, polypropylene) in widespread
usage today. It is also driven by the environmental objective of reducing the
carbon footprint. The pursuit of these goals has led with increasing effort to
the development of new renewable monomers (building blocks) from the biomass,
and their polymerizations (chain-like end to end attachments) to yield polymers
with desirable end properties, which after usage, can in turn be broken down
into the reusable (renewable) materials. Examples of naturally occurring
(biomass) sources are vegetable oils, sugars, cellulose derivatives. This
symposium is being organized to cover the latest progress in developing next
generation polymers from renewable biomass. The request for funding is to cover
travel/registration costs of invited speakers which include graduate students
and postdocs. The symposium, "Next-Generation Renewable Polymers", will be held
at the ACS American Chemical Society Meeting in San Diego CA, March 25-29, 2012.