* 1135664
* Gravitational Wave Physics Simulations on the AFRL CONDOR Supercomputer
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Gaurav Khanna, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2013
* USD 48,798.00

This award supports a research program to understand and to address the
challenges associated to scaling specific gravitational wave physics
applications from a prototype cluster of 16 Sony PlayStation 3 (PS3) gaming
consoles to the largest system now available, that built by the Air Force
Research Laboratory (AFRL) in Rome, NY. This system, named AFRL CONDOR, makes
use of 1,716 PS3s alongside traditional servers and Nvidia CUDA GPUs to achieve
500 TFLOPS of computing power. The PI has unrestricted access to this large
system through a recently established CRADA agreement with AFRL. One of the
specific gravitational wave physics applications that will be targeted in this
work is one that models the process of the capture of a small (say, solar-mass)
black hole by a supermassive black hole, an important problem in the area of
theoretical gravitational wave physics, and a potential source of gravitational
waves for space-based detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is considerable
current interest in harnessing the power of video gaming technology for
scientific high-performance computing. The PI's prototype cluster was used
successfully for scientific computation and demonstrated order-of-magnitude
gains in metrics such as performance-per-dollar and performance-per-Watt as
compared with traditional CPU-based clusters. Successful scaling up of the
applications used for this project will immediately impact the gravitational
wave science that these applications enable. In addition, the lessons learned
and the experience gained associated to achieving good scaling on a large system
like AFRL CONDOR will be extremely valuable and likely applicable to other
problems and systems. Parallelism or optimization approaches that may be
developed through this project may also find applicability in other problems and
areas. The outcomes and results will be published in research journals and
conferences and also made openly available though the PI's research website. In
addition, this is a project that would be very attractive to both physics and
engineering students. The supported graduate student will learn about various
aspects of supercomputing, including how to approach and address challenges
related to scaling on large supercomputers like AFRL CONDOR.