* 1135895
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: The CyberPhyscial Challenges of Transient Stability and Security in Power Grids
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Bruno Sinopoli, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

The national transmission networks that deliver high voltage electric power
underpin our society and are central to the ongoing transformation of the
American energy infrastructure. Transmission networks are very large and
complicated engineering systems, and "keeping the lights on" as the
transformation of the American energy infrastructure proceeds is a fundamental
engineering challenge involving both the physical aspects of the equipment and
the cyber aspects of the controls, communications, and computers that run the
system. The project develops new principles of cyber-physical engineering by
focusing on instabilities of electric power networks that can cause blackouts.
It proposes novel approaches to analyze these instabilities and to design cyber-
physical control methods to monitor, detect, and mitigate them. The controls
must perform robustly in the presence of variability and uncertainty in electric
generation, loads, communications, and equipment status, and during abnormal
states caused by natural faults or malicious attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research produces cyber-physical engineering methodologies that specifically
help to mitigate power system blackouts and more generally show the way forward
in designing robust cyber-physical systems in environments characterized by rich
dynamics and uncertainty. Education and outreach efforts involve students at
high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels, as well as dissemination of
results to the public and the engineering and applied science communities in
industry, government and universities.