* 1135572
* CI-TEAM Demonstration Project: Enhancing Stakeholder Participation in Environmental Planning with Visualization Tools that Support Complex Systems Learning and Spatial Thinking
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Joshua Radinsky, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 12/31/2016
* USD 265,953.00

This proposal brings together urban planners and environmental scientists,
experts in complexity modeling and spatial analyses for science and policy
applications, learning scientists studying how technology enhances cognitive and
decision-making processes, and computer scientists concerned with visualizations
and visual analytics. The aim is to enhance existing visualization tools and the
social processes in which they are embedded to better support participatory
planning addressing complex environmental problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
complexity of such problems makes it hard to trace causal impacts through the
web of interactions, including the effects of individual decisions on the
quality of shared natural resources. While visualization tools have been
designed to assist stakeholders to plan for these problems, they are usually
very elaborate, requiring trained facilitators to manage their inputs and
interpret their outputs. Similarly, an increasing amount of relevant sensor and
simulation data exists, but in a form that is not accessible or usable for this
community. As a result, stakeholders are insulated from the very information
they need for their decisions, basing them instead on invalid knowledge and
unexamined assumptions. This study will allow us to design tools that bring
forward the spatial relationships and interactions that are hidden in the
complexity of environmental problems, yet making them accessible to stakeholders
for routine use in the planning decisions shaping the environmental future of
places across the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these aims this team is
working with existing agent-based modeling and geographic information systems
software, applying Design-Based Research and Participatory Design methods to
create software and evolve the collaborative learning structures needed for its
use in this context. They are distilling stakeholder needs and preferences to
propose and test alternate user interfaces to support stakeholders? input of
specialized knowledge and values, interpretation of outputs, and collaborative
use of the tools in the social context of participatory planning. They are also
exploring ways to capitalize on the data- and opinion-sharing potential of
social networking technology to enhance stakeholders? collective learning and
planning with these tools. Engaging actual stakeholders in the design process
thus greatly increases the chance that the software and learning structures will
be ultimately adopted by the target demographic upon deployment. A by-product of
this research includes the assessment materials to examine how each one of these
tools supports different aspects of visual thinking about complex environmental
problems, and how they inform planning judgments to address them. This is of
interest to researchers evaluating similar processes. Approaching environmental
issues from across these fields provides the appropriate scope for creating
infrastructure for the public and for planning practitioners in a way formerly
limited to specialists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The
main goal is to train citizens with the ability to engage in spatial and complex
systems conceptualization of the environmental issues they face, and empower
them to chart their own future with a fuller understanding of the impacts of
their decisions. By definition, participatory planning seeks different voices to
be heard in defining a problem and in suggesting solutions. This work is
developing guidelines for effective participatory visualization software and
learning activities so that stakeholders are active constructors and engaged
users of the tools needed for critical deliberation around complex environmental
problems. By empowering diverse representatives to take part in the production
of relevant information and recommendations, the project aims to counteract the
power imbalances that tend to plague policy and plan making, where only a few
have access to key information. A second goal is to develop the curricular and
pedagogical materials to train Computer Science students to create effective
visualization software and interfaces for this purpose, and Urban Planning
students to conduct participatory processes with these tools. A future
implementation stage will build on this work to deploy the software,
accompanying social practices and supporting cyber-infrastructure in other
stakeholder communities dealing with a variety of complex environmental
problems, and to incorporate the training modules in the Urban Planning and
Computer Science curricula at UIC, which serves one of the most diverse student
bodies in the US