* 1135071
* Support for Attendance by Early Career Geochemists and Petrologists to the Mineralogical Society of America Short Course on Sulfur in Magmas and Melts in August 2011
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* James Webster, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2012
* USD 9,990.00

This award will provide partial financial support for travel and meeting
registration expenses of six early career U.S. geochemists and petrologists to
participate in the 74th Mineralogical Society of America (MSA)- and Geochemical
Society (GS)-sponsored Short Course on 'Sulfur in Magmas and Melts and Its
Importance for Natural and Technical Processes' and its associated two-day
summer school activities to be held in Germany. Funding will facilitate the
participation by early career U.S. investigators (graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers) in geochemistry and petrology who might not otherwise
attend given the expense of air travel to Europe in the summer months. This
short course brings together experts in diverse fields to discuss recent
research findings as well as strategies for future collaborative research on
topics related to the role of the volatile component sulfur in a wide variety of
natural processes bearing on magmas, mineralization, and volcanism and on
processes of manufacturing glasses and steels for industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the 74th MSA/GS Short Course will
foster research collaboration and sharing of information between investigators
of natural processes involving magmatic sulfur, processes of producing synthetic
glasses that involve sulfur, and those involved in steel production and the
importance and behavior of sulfur. Students and postdocs will be required to
submit an abstract and share their scientific results in a poster session, and
they will also have numerous opportunities to interact with senior researchers
in the crossover fields of petrology, geochemistry (melts, minerals, and
fluids), mineral deposits, stable isotope systematics, experimental petrology,
glass production, and steel production. The participants will also have the
unique opportunity to receive training in two, one-day summer school,
laboratory-based activities to be held at universities in Germany (which have
been designed by a co-organizer of the short course). These activities are
focused on experimental and analytical techniques involving sulfur in
aluminosilicate melts and glasses. This summer school will serve to broaden the
impact of the short course for early career scientists.