* 1135545
* CI-TEAM Demo: Cyber-Infrastructure Digital Education and Research (CIDER)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Annette Schloss, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2014
* USD 249,974.00

The Complex Systems Research Center (CSRC) at the University of New Hampshire
(UNH) is creating a cyber-enabled center of learning for Earth System Science
(ESS). The project builds on many years of research in global biogeochemical
cycles and extending the research for geospatial teaching and community
engagement. The project is developing the central map-based CIDER portal by
joining together existing data systems with new Web2.0 technologies to examine
the effectiveness of cyber-based learning environments (Wikis, VoiceThread,
Camtasia, Jing, Screencast, Concept Mapping) and handheld mobile applications as
scientific research tools for teaching ESS concepts in classrooms. The project
will engage undergraduate technology students in the portal design and
development process. These CI resources will be used by a Working Group of
middle and high school teachers who will develop and carry out field-based pilot
projects with their students in collaboration with a CSRC researcher who is
studying conditions such as phenology (the study of biological phenomena
interacting with climate), forest cover, and understory that promote the
occurrence of Lyme disease in the Northeast. Pilot projects will involve taking
repeat digital photographs of the landscape based on their Digital Earth Watch
and Picture Post protocols, and collecting and analyzing data and satellite
imagery. The primary learning goals are to help students connect their
understanding of technology as social media to its function as a research tool;
understand the role that future technologies and applications will play in Earth
System Sciences; understand the relationship between scientific data and visual
images; and that data collected by a network of participants at many different
locations can be used to understand the "big picture".&lt;br/&gt;The project's
focus is on capturing digital technologies as a means of helping people connect
with and learn about their environment. Although the center is enabled by
cyberinfrastructure, the center activities are aimed at getting young people
outdoors to use handheld devices as scientific research tools for monitoring the
natural environment around them, and to provide opportunities for student-
scientist partnerships and service-learning, ultimately leading to an informed
citizenry empowered through their experience to become local experts and
community leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The CIDER learning
center is an outgrowth of the PI's experiences in teacher professional
development, creating and maintaining a robust cyberinfrastructure within the
mission of a research university to both teach and support research, and in
extending otheir research to the community-at-large. CIDER will provide a
dynamic learning environment in which a wide range of learners can pursue their
own interests by accessing resources such as data and visualizations from a
controlled source. The project addresses the affective aspects of cyberlearning
using technology to increase participant access to, and comfort with, science,
to make communication between and among participants and program staff more
fluid, and to expand participant understanding of how contemporary science is
conducted. Results from the demonstration project will help position the CIDER
learning center as a bridge between technology, place-based education, service
learning, and scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;Engaging students in the CIDER learning center brings scientists,
students, educators and professionals into a partnership that they likely would
not participate in otherwise. CIDER will expand the workforce potential in
geospatial technologies by engaging students in technologically enabled
monitoring of local environmental conditions, and connecting their knowledge to
an understanding of regional and global change. Job sectors that depend on
geospatial data include urban planning, natural resource management,
transportation, agriculture, health and energy. Results of the pilot projects
will be disseminated at regional and national science teacher association
meetings and science professional societies and CIDER will become a part of a
larger UNH teacher professional development program within the new UNH Center
for Excellence in Geosciences Education.