* 1135169
* String Phenomenology 2011: The Tenth Annual Meeting on String Phenomenology at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, August 22-26, 2011
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Gary Shiu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides partial support for the String Phenomenology 2011 conference
to be held at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA on August 22-26,
2011. The funds will be used to subsidize the costs for young researchers in the
field and to mitigate the cost of conference planning and facilities. String
Phenomenology 2011 is the tenth annual meeting of the highly successful String
Phenomenology conference series, which was launched in 2002 at Oxford
University. The String Phenomenology annual conferences have become the hallmark
venue for the presentation and dissemination of research progress and results in
the growing field of string phenomenology, which focuses on the fundamental
question of how to connect observable particle physics and cosmology with the
domain of fundamental theory. Young researchers are particularly encouraged to
attend the conference to present their work and interact with established
leaders in the field. In selecting the invited speakers and advertising the
opportunity to present talks in the parallel sessions to the community, it is a
high priority to recruit qualified women and underrepresented minorities. Topics
covered include advances in string compactifications and the resulting effective
theories, moduli stabilization and supersymmetry breaking, formal theory and
mathematical techniques, string cosmology, and connections to present and
forthcoming experimental results in particle physics and
cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String phenomenology is a dynamic and ever-
growing field that is of particular interest in this data-dominated era
characterized by Large Hadron Collider at CERN and a wealth of cosmological
data. The scientific program includes plenary talks by leading researchers in
the field. The String Phenomenology conferences are diverse, international
meetings that emphasize the connections between formal theory and observations,
and as such have impact on the intellectual progress in both areas. The emphasis
on including young researchers allows for a broad audience and promotes young
researchers in the field. This conference series provides the only large-scale
annual meetings dedicated to this subfield of theoretical high energy physics,
and thus they are of great importance to the advancement of the field.The
conference website will be developed and advertised to disseminate the material
presented at the meeting, including all plenary talk slides.