* 1135694
* Akeakamai I Ka La Hiki Ola: Scientific Exploration Beneath The Life-Bringing Sun (NSF ATST Mitigation Plan)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2023
* Hokulani Holt-Padilla, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000,000.00

Description of the Project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the construction of
the Advanced Technology Solar Telescope (ATST) near the summit of Haleakala on
Maui, Hawaii began in FY 2010. Since it is funded with Federal funds, ATST
construction is a Federal undertaking that must comply with a number of
environmental and historic preservation statutes. The impacts of the ATST
construction on the environmental, historical, and cultural assets atop
Haleakala were the subject of a nearly five-year study that culminated in a
Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS) that was completed in August 2009.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the summit of Haleakala is a ?traditional cultural
place? that has cultural and spiritual significance to native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders, the FEIS stipulates that the construction of the ATST
will have impacts on the spiritual and cultural assets there. A number of
mitigation activities designed to minimize or mitigate such impacts are
described in the compliance documents and are memorialized in the Record of
Decision signed by former NSF Director, Arden L. Bement, Jr. in December 2009.
One of these designed to mitigate the direct, major, adverse, and long-term
impacts to the summit as a TCP is through education and workforce development.
This award provides funding for a ten-year program at the University of Hawaii
Maui College that will address the intersection between traditional Native
Hawaiian culture and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will employ STEM
educational strategies informed by traditional Native Hawaiian approaches to
learning. AIK will create a ?pipeline? of Native Hawaiian STEM students from
Maui County secondary schools by identifying and preparing students early in
their education, with the support of secondary school math and science teachers
and staff. The plan includes development of STEM curricula in the Hawaiian
language, STEM faculty development at both secondary and postsecondary levels,
and also seeks to engage parents, families, prospective employers, and community
members, as well as various Native Hawaiian student networks, through a variety
of community partner programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts and
Importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating science with Native Hawaiian
culture, this plan offers an innovative design for helping native peoples access
21st century economic opportunities. This plan also seeks to demonstrate to the
Native Hawaiian and broader community that there exists space within the STEM
community for native knowledge, experiences, and ways of learning to make
significant contribution. Programs that are developed in this plan will benefit
both Native Hawaiian and other Maui County and UHMC students. Finally, the
complex social and environmental issues that confront the Hawaiian Islands
require that the next generation of leaders be conversant in both science and
culture. This plan addresses this need, by bringing together existing STEM
scientific, Native Hawaiian cultural, and secondary and post-secondary
educational resources to create a cohort of future leaders from an underserved
population.