* 1135029
* NEESR: Seismically Isolated Unibody Residential Buildings for Enhanced Life-Cycle Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Benjamin Fell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,311,999.00

The research objective of this award is to explore, simulate, and validate new
seismic design concepts for light-frame residential construction that will
dramatically improve its life-cycle seismic performance with minimal impact on
construction costs. New strength and stiffness enhanced unibody framing systems
and low-cost seismic isolation systems will be investigated to achieve cost-
efficient resistance to earthquakes. In contrast to conventional seismic design
practice, where large structural ductility demands can result in extensive
damage to architectural and mechanical building systems, the considered systems
will achieve reduced deformations and damage by integrating structural and
architectural building components in a lateral system with high strength and
stiffness. High-fidelity simulation models will be implemented to accurately
assess the seismic performance, including models for seismic isolation and the
unibody space-frame systems. Physical and computational simulations will provide
the basis for new seismic design criteria for light-frame residential
construction to meet appropriate collapse safety goals and incorporate life-
cycle concepts to control damage and loss of building function. The research is
organized around an integrated plan of quasi-static testing, shake table
testing, and computational simulations of structural fasteners, subassemblies,
and systems. The research team from Stanford University and California State
University, Sacramento, will use the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) facilities at the University of California,
Berkeley, and the University of California, San Diego. Data from this project
will be archived and made available to the public through the NEES Project
Warehouse data repository at http://www.nees.org.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Much in
the same way that automotive construction advanced from "body-on-frame" to
"unibody" construction in the 1970's, this research has the promise to help
revolutionize light-frame residential construction by integrating structural and
architectural components into a unibody building system. When combined with
seismic base isolation, the resulting integrated system will substantially
reduce the damage and repairs due to earthquakes. Building owners, communities,
and other stakeholders will benefit by the economies achieved through optimized
design approaches and integrated building systems. By reducing earthquake
damage, the new framing systems have the potential to dramatically improve the
resilience of communities by allowing residents to "shelter-in-place" and
quickly recover from large earthquakes. The project has a natural educational
component through the research participation of graduate and undergraduate
students and strong participation of industry through an advisory group to
promote technology transfer to building codes and professional practice. This
award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).