* 1135022
* Webshop 3.0: Technology-Mediated Social Participation
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Marc Smith, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2012
* USD 47,076.00

This is funding to support a workshop for 20 promising graduate students from
the United States whose research covers aspects of Technology-Mediated Social
Participation (TMSP). Technology-mediated social participation is generated when
social networking tools, blogs and microblogs, user-generated content sites,
discussion groups, problem reporting, recommendation systems, and other social
media are applied to national priorities such as health, energy, education,
disaster response, environmental protection, business innovation, or community
safety. Although social media are transforming society, many universities have
been slow to integrate these novel technologies and social structures into their
curricula and research. Two previous NSF-supported TMSP Workshops have outlined
an agenda for research and education in this area, which was published in a
serious of journal articles appearing in a special issue of IEEE Computer. To
increase research and education in TMSP, this workshop brings together an
interdisciplinary group of graduate students to listen to presentations by
leaders in the field, learn new research skills, and learn from each other by
sharing the diverse research streams that focus on social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TMSP "webshop" will include 20 graduate students
from such fields as sociology, anthropology, communications, psychology,
journalism and humanities as well as from information studies, information
systems, human-computer interaction and computer science. Effort will be taken
to ensure gender balance, strong representation from ethnic minority groups, and
cross-disciplinarity. Students will apply by submitting a one page statement of
why they wish to attend the workshop along with their curriculum vitae. During
the three-day workshop, students will attend presentations from an
interdisciplinary group of distinguished leaders in the field and engage in
other research and community-building activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There is a growing recognition that
social media technologies can bring profound benefits for national priorities
such as disaster response, community safety, health/wellness, energy
sustainability, and environmental protection. However substantial research is
needed to scale up participation, raise motivation, control malicious attacks,
limit misguided rumors, and protect privacy. The TMSP workshop will foster new
ideas, tools and theories in this area through intense multidisciplinary
discussion. Topics to be covered share (1) a close linkage to compelling
national priorities; (2) a scientific foundation based on established theories
and well-defined research questions (privacy, reciprocity, trust, motivation,
recognition, etc.); and (3) computer science research challenges (security,
privacy protection, scalability, visualization, end-user development,
distributed data handling, network analysis of community evolution, cross
network comparison, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The workshop
will raise awareness of the importance of technology-mediated social
participation as a distinct area of study, foster new interdisciplinary
projects, raise the prominence of researchers and educators who are invited to
speak, and promote greater understanding of the discipline among leading
graduate students across the United States. The workshop will also help new
researchers develop relationships with peers and experienced researchers and
practitioners. Specific outcomes will include resources such as bibliographies,
links to websites, video and slides sets from speakers and carefully crafted
lists of courses, conferences, and journals. These resources will be helpful to
researchers and educators who seek to expand their work in Technology-Mediated
Social Participation.