* 1135469
* Collaborative Proposal: CI-TEAM DIFFUSION: PORTAL, Pedagogical Open-access Research-based Tools for Advancing Learning in Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 03/31/2015
* USD 350,086.00

Peer Instruction (PI) is a robust, research-based pedagogy (RBP) that has
leveraged the power of&lt;br/&gt;cyberinfrastructure to advance learning in SE
(S &amp; E) education in unprecedented ways. It is a technology-driven pedagogy
that has spread throughout each of the STEM disciplines, and into the social
sciences and humanities. More than 400 known instructors, who have taught more
than 50,000 students, use PI in classrooms all over the world and it is a
evidence-based method supported by more than 15 years of research. Evidence
indicates that effective implementation of PI correlates with statistically
significant positive learning outcomes in STEM, most importantly -- addressing
persistence issues pertaining to the educational experience of underrepresented
minorities. These outcomes are encouraging, but RBPs such as PI require
effective implementation in order to achieve actual improvements in the way SE
students learn. Recent RBP implementation research indicates that instructors
vary in how they use PI, often rendering it ineffective. Present RBP
dissemination methods do not adequately train instructors to effectively
incorporate RBPs into their classrooms and achieve desired outcomes. A
centralized RBP diffusion mechanism should prevent such
misapplications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CI-TEAM Diffusion project is a
collaboration between Harvard University and the University of Texas, Austin.
The developers of PI and the management of an extant UT-Austin $3.5 million
initiative to integrate RBPs into an additional extant multi-million dollar UT
cyberlearning initiative in the sciences called Quest, are developing a
centralized, open-source RBP diffusion cyberhub: PORTAL, Pedagogical Open-access
Research-based Tools for Advancing Learning in Science and Engineering. PORTAL
is building the Quest framework, which was written using open source tools
(Ruby). The vision of this project is to offer a centralized and free cyberhub
for the diffusion of RBPs through 10 Computer-Based Trainings (CBTs) grounded in
cognitive science and human-computer interaction theory, and three Summer
Institutes targeting faculty and faculty developers at Harvard University, UT-
Austin, the entire UT System, and then on a national and international scale.
PORTAL leverages established partnerships and prior NSF investments to achieve
the following outcomes: 1) a new, highly-diverse generation of cyber-ready
science, computational science, and engineering workers expertly trained to use
and innovate cyberresources and tools; 2) Broadened participation among
underrepresented minorities in high technology careers; 3) novel cyber-
innovations, developed by the full pool of national talent, that transform how
we live in the world; and ultimately 4) increased national science and
engineering competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT:The key
objective of PORTAL is to broaden participation in SE and as such, to open
pathways for the next generation of our high-technology workforce, with an eye
toward ensuring that the full talent pool of computational science students and
engineers are cyberready when they hit the job market. By achieving proposed
benchmarks, the project will nurture greater diversity in science -related
programs and careers using instructional methods proven to improve engagement in
subject-matter and academic performance, retention, and subject-matter knowledge
in STEM among all students, including women and racial minorities. Towards
meeting this goal, this team has included a broadening participation specialist
on the project management team and has developed a deployment site at the
largest public institution in the United States with one of the highest-
underrepresented minority-serving profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: This is unique as a project seeking to transform educational experiences
for SE students by leveraging the cyberinfrastructure to diffuse RBPs to a
broad, diverse, large-scale population through CBTs. PORTAL provides a novel,
low-cost alternative for institutions striving to implement effective teaching
and learning reform in SE education, but unable to commit the personnel or
institutional restructuring required for higher-threshold initiatives. Moreover,
PORTAL harnesses an established educational transformation initiative and
cyberinfrastructure at UT-Austin and two decades of experiences by leading RBP
developers who have engaged in some of the most widespread pedagogical
dissemination efforts in the national STEM education reform movement. Finally,
all project efforts are managed by an experienced educational researcher and
grounded in research on effective dissemination,&lt;br/&gt;interactive teaching,
human-computer interaction theory, cognitive science, and learning theory.