* 1135374
* Supporting Students Attending the User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization 2011 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Peter Brusilovsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2012
* USD 15,396.00

This is funding to support travel by 6-8 students currently enrolled in PhD
programs in the United States to present their accepted papers and posters
and/or to take part in the Doctoral Consortium at the 2011 International
Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization (UMAP) to be held
in Girona, Spain, on July 11-15, 2011. UMAP, the premier user modeling
conference in the world, was formed in 2009 as a merger of the long-running and
successful biennial conference series on User Modeling (UM, 1986-2007) and the
Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based Systems (AH, 2000-2008); the former
provided a forum where academic and industrial researchers from the many fields
involved in user modeling research (artificial intelligence, human-computer
interaction, education, linguistics, psychology, and information science) could
exchange their complementary insights on user modeling issues, while the latter
provided a forum for dissemination of adaptive technology for hypermedia and
other web-based systems. User modeling has been found to significantly enhance
the effectiveness and usability of software systems in a variety of areas. A
user model is an explicit representation of properties of a particular user; a
system that constructs and consults user models can adapt diverse aspects of its
performance to individual users. Applications for user modeling range from
electronic commerce and intelligent learning environments to health care and
assistive technologies. Relevant platforms for user modeling include mobile and
wearable systems, and smart environments, as well as individual desktop systems,
groupware, adaptive hypermedia, and other web-based systems. More information
about the conference is available at http://www.umap2011.org.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UMAP 2011 Doctoral Consortium will provide a unique
opportunity for PhD students partway through their dissertation research to
receive valuable feedback from top researchers in the field. The event will be
held in a special session that is open to all students, not only those accepted
to present, as well as to regular conference attendees, and which is designed so
as to provide a great educational opportunity for all attending students, a
unique event where a community as a whole can engage in a discussion with
students about emerging topics, expected rigor, evaluation approaches, etc. Each
student participant will be allotted 15 minutes in which to present his/her work
(including a short demo if appropriate), with an additional 15 minutes allocated
to questions and for discussion. Both during the question/discussion period and
in subsequent informal interactions, committee members and other conference
participants will provide constructive comments on the student's work and
attempt to address any aspects of the work on which s/he has requested advice.
Student papers will be published in the main proceedings of the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Bringing young and creative researchers
to UMAP 2011 will help advance an important and socially valuable research
field. NSF funding will significantly impact the careers of the next generation
of User Modeling researchers, by enabling a number of them to take part in an
important event they would otherwise have to miss. The students will have an
opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work,
and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community. Participation will help foster a sense of community among these young
researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior investigators at a critical stage in their professional
development. In allocating NSF funds to participants, the organizers will give
preference to students who are placed at a disadvantage due to the conference's
location in Europe; they will strive for diversity among the selected students
across a number of dimensions (gender, racial, ethnic, disabilities,
institutional, etc.), and they will also take special steps to promote
participation from institutions with relatively large numbers of students from
under-represented groups.