* 1135564
* CI-TEAM Demonstration Project: TRENDS: Training the next generation workforce in Real-time Data and Simulation Technologies
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Mitchell Neilsen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2015
* USD 249,999.00

Advances in sensor and communication technologies and increased cyber-
connectivity are enabling access to a vast amount of varied datasets. This
access is interactive in that one can control what is being collected, how often
it is sampled and the granularity at which it is being collected. Such cyber-
enabled infrastructures are poised to revolutionize the way the physical world
is monitored and field experiments are performed -- with automated, remote,
real-time data collection and feedback replacing traditional manual, and time-
consuming methods. Although web accessible information is being used in our
daily decision making and has enabled exciting new research possibilities, it is
very under-utilized in learning and classroom environments. It is not enough for
the next generation workforce to be simply trained to view or utilize online
data, rather they must be able to synthesize new solutions to emerging
challenges by leveraging diverse cyber-infrastructure enabled data sources. The
premise of this work is that training such a cyber-infrastructure literate
citizen must start at the K-12 level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
project is to increase the exposure of K-12 teachers and student populations to
sensor network and simulation based cyber-infrastructure tools. Research has
shown that experiments and hands-on activities are an important part of the
curriculum as they re-enforce textbook knowledge and lead to better retention.
Currently, these activities often are restricted to in-class experiments subject
to the available space (the classroom), instruments and resources, and are of
limited duration (the span of a single class). Point data is used (e.g., holding
temperature to a fixed value for the duration of the experiment) rather than
time-varying input (which better models real-world systems). Further, for new,
emerging areas of science and technology, students often have to rely on reading
in textbooks. For example, a new Kansas Standards for Agricultural Education
requires students to learn about sustainable agriculture practices, use of
GPS/GIS, and the impact of fertilizers/pesticides on yield. However, due to lack
of resources, students mainly rely on reading about sustainable agriculture from
textbooks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed project
include developing sensor infrastructure for field experiments, simulation
software, and curriculum and training material for K-12 education. These efforts
include the following: (a) Developing software and training modules for sensor
network based data collection technologies: The aim is that teachers will
eventually be able to replace "in-class observing" with "real-time data" for
experiments in any of their science and technology classes, and include
interactive aspects involving reactions to real-time input, (b) Developing a
"smart farm" simulation package in which students will manage the day-to-day
operations of a virtual farm, and link it to diverse data sources including
real-time data, (c) Promoting inquiry based education by developing lesson plans
based on field experiments and simulation software, integrating them into
curriculum and training teachers/students based on these lesson plans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include reaching out to
a diverse pool of students to broaden participation. The project builds upon
past successful projects in real-time embedded sensor systems design funded by
NSF RET (Research Experience for Teachers) and NSF CRCD (Combined Research-
Curriculum Development) programs, and the NSF GK-12 STEM Fellows program. These
have resulted in strong relationships with both rural and urban Kansas schools.
This project leverages these connections to train a diverse population set. The
project is reaching out to rural under-served school districts in Kansas and
those with significant Hispanic population. The focus on agricultural
applications via Smart Farm simulations enables the project to reach student
populations that have historically been underserved. By making the software web-
accessible, the project is working to minimize the "Technology Gap" between
those students who have broadband access and state-of-the-art computing hardware
in their homes, and those who have outdated or no equipment. The team is
continuing to work with existing programs at Kansas State University such as
GROW and EXCITE which bring middle and high school girls to campus, and with the
Kan-Ed program whose purpose is to provide state-wide collaboration and
information exchange opportunities among educational institutions in Kansas.