* 1135426
* Infinite Possibilities Conference 2012
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Tanya Moore, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2012
* USD 45,000.00

In March of 2012 the 4th Infinite Possibilities Conference (IPC) will be held at
the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC). This conference which is the
only such national meeting to focus on issues related to educating, encouraging
and supporting minority women interested in mathematics and statistics will be
jointly sponsored by UMBC and the non-profit organization Building Diversity in
Science. Building on the last three successful Infinite Possibilities
Conferences, the program will include components from past meetings as well as
new features designed to broaden the groups able to benefit from the conference.
As in past conferences, there will be plenary research talks by established
mathematicians as well as shorter research presentations and posters presented
by more junior mathematicians. These presentations provide a forum for
dissemination of new mathematical ideas at all levels and in all areas of
mathematics as well as a way for junior mathematicians to receive feedback on
their work and their method of presentation in a supportive environment.
Workshops and panel discussions at the conference will include information on
acquiring the necessary skills for graduate school; tools for professional
development; information on career options in mathematics; and awareness of
resources and organizations that are supportive of minority and/or women
mathematicians. We also plan to incorporate a workshop on a mathematical "hot
topic" which will be presented by a visiting math institute on the day prior to
the IPC meeting. Past IPC conferences have included a one-day set of activities
geared specifically to high school students. A new addition to the program for
IPC 2012 will be a workshop for mathematics teachers for which they can receive
accreditation. Teachers will be encouraged to bring their students and
activities will be developed to interest both groups during the
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African-American, Hispanic/Latina, and Native
American women have been historically underrepresented in mathematics. In 2007,
less than 2% of the doctoral degrees in the mathematical sciences were awarded
to American women from underrepresented minority groups. The IPC conference
provides students at the high school, undergraduate and graduate levels an
opportunity to interact with peers and more established women mathematicians in
a supportive and collegial atmosphere that is unique for a professional
conference. One of the main goals of IPC is to establish connections between
mentors and mentees and to provide role models for junior women mathematicians
seeking to enter the field but concerned about the differences they see between
themselves and traditional mathematicians. The aim of the conference is to
provide a supportive environment in which minority women mathematicians can both
learn about the possible career paths available to them should they continue to
pursue their options as a professional mathematician and to counteract the
pervasive sense of isolation that accompanies anyone seeking to enter a
predominantly male scientific field such as mathematics. The Infinite
Possibilities Conference seeks to accomplish these goals by making participants
aware of the many ways in which mathematicians and statisticians can make
valuable contributions to society at large (the importance of mathematics) and
by building networks and providing resources for junior women mathematicians to
encourage and support their aspirations towards such a career.