* 1135814
* CPS:Medium:Collaborative Research:Information and Computation Hierarchy for Smart Grids
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* WenZhan Song, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 246,453.00

The electric grid in the United States has evolved over the past century from a
series of small independent community-based systems to one of the largest and
most complex cyber-physical systems today. However, the established conditions
that made the electric grid an engineering marvel are being challenged by major
changes, the most important being a worldwide effort to mitigate climate change
by reducing carbon emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates
key aspects of a computation and information foundation for future cyber-
physical energy systems?the smart grids. The overall project objective is to
support high penetrations of renewable energy sources, community based micro-
grids, and the widespread use of electric cars and smart
appliances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three interconnected
components that, collectively, address issues of computation architecture,
information hierarchy, and experimental modeling and validation. On computation
architecture, the framework based on cloud computing is investigated for the
scalable, consistent, and secure operations of smart grids. The research aims to
quantify fundamental design tradeoffs among scalability, data consistency,
security, and trustworthiness for emerging applications of smart grids. On
information hierarchy, temporal and spatial characteristics of information
hierarchy are investigated with the goal of gaining a foundational understanding
on how information should be partitioned, collected, distributed, compressed,
and aggregated. The research also develops an open and scalable experimental
platform (SmartGridLab) for empirical investigations and testing of algorithms
and concepts developed in this project. SmartGridLab integrates the hardware
testbed with a software simulator so that software virtual nodes can interact
with physical nodes in the testbed. This research also includes a significant
education component aimed at integrating frontier research with undergraduate
and graduate curricula.