* 1135120
* Educating the Imagination: A Studio Design for Transformative Science Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Beth Warren, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 09/30/2014
* USD 499,981.00

TERC, in collaboration with the Boston Arts Academy is developing an innovative
studio learning environment for students in grades 7-9. This pilot project
focuses on object-centered inquiry about water and water-related problems of
local and global significance. The project promotes student learning through
multi-faceted studies involving hydrology, history, health, digital media, web-
based artifact generation, real world data collection, interactions with
scientists and artists, and community exhibitions of student work. The primary
goal of the Educating the Imagination project is to develop a more effective
model for engaging and improving the science learning and achievement of
underrepresented urban students.

Studio learning intentionally integrates experimentation with practices of
analysis, interpretation, critique of work and conceptual development. During a
four week summer studio program, students, guided by teachers and scientists,
will produce research-based projects about water and create plans to exhibit
their work in the Boston area during the school year. Students will be assessed
along multiple dimensions ranging from the depth of their understanding of water
science ideas, their ability to make claims and arguments, their use of multiple
tools and modes of representation, and the quality of their presentations. Over
a two year period researchers will collect data on the studio design model and
student learning to determine which aspects of the studio are effective in
engaging students in object-oriented inquiry related to important water science
ideas and problems.

Educating the Imagination will provide valuable insights about the studio design
model and its application to promote science learning. In addition, this project
directly addresses the problem of inequality in opportunities to learn and
participate in science by developing and testing an innovative, non-traditional
learning model with underrepresented urban students. The results of this project
could significantly change how we think about and structure STEM learning
environments in urban settings.