* 1135389
* NSF EAGER: Data-Driven Framework for Analyzing User Interactions in Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Divyakant Agrawal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2015
* USD 199,934.00

With hundreds of millions of users worldwide, social networks provide incredible
opportunities for social&lt;br/&gt;interactions, entertainment, learning, and
political and social change. Hence, there is a growing interest in understanding
information diffusion over online social networks. Because many social
interactions currently take place in online networks, social scientists have
access to unprecedented amounts of information about social interaction. Prior
to the advent of such online networks, these investigations required resource-
intensive activities such as random trials, surveys, and manual data collection
to gather even small data sets. Now, massive amounts of information about social
networks and social interactions are recorded. This wealth of data can allow
social scientists to study social interactions on a scale and at a level of
detail that has never before been possible. However, Social scientists are not
traditionally trained in techniques to deal with the massive amounts of data
produced by online social networks. Computer scientists that specialize in
databases and knowledge discovery have experience with querying and analyzing
enormous amounts of data in a scalable fashion, but they may not be aware of the
types of information that are most relevant to understanding social processes.
Moreover, it is often necessary to alter theories and models developed in
research of traditional social networks to incorporate new features of
interactions in online networks, or even develop entirely new models of social
processes. To create and validate these new models requires familiarity with
social science techniques for modeling of social interactions, as well as
knowledge of techniques for modeling and analysis of complex networks that can
scale to the size of millions or even billions of
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together an interdisciplinary
team consisting of computer scientists with expertise in databases and data
mining, network modeling and analysis, and social media led by Dr. Divyakant
Agrawal at the University of California-Santa Barbara to develop computational
approaches to model and predict a number of important phenomena in social
networks: information diffusion, opinion formation, etc. The team is developing
new algorithms and analytical and computational tools that can effectively cope
with the massive size of social networks and the data produced within such
networks. These tools are being designed account for the complex nature of human
behavior by incorporating the spatial, temporal, and relationship-based aspects
of social interactions. The long-term goals of this project are to develop tools
that help better understand social interactions in online networks, to develop
reliable and scalable models to predict the outcomes of such social processes,
and to create applications that can shape such outcomes. The project advances
the current state of the art in: Querying and analysis of massive datasets,
Modeling and analysis of complex networks, and Analysis of social media and
social interactions, including in particular, the interplay between multiple
simultaneous information diffusion processes. This is a high-risk, potentially
high payoff research effort due in part to the challenges associated with
obtaining and analyzing data from social networks and social media. In order to
model social network entities and interactions, the research team needs access
to datasets from online social networks to build, verify and validate models.
Similarly, discovering information, knowledge, and user behavior in online
social networks require access to social network datasets. In general, acquiring
such datasets is a significant challenge due to privacy issues and the
proprietary nature of many social network sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project provides a rich set
of data repository and evaluation metrics for conducting large-scale
investigations involving social networks and social media. The project addresses
the data challenge by assembling large data sets from weblog postings and
Twitter messages from millions of users, as well as appropriately anonymized
data that capture the interactions between participants in social networks such
as Facebook. The broad dissemination of the resulting datasets and tools will
lower the barrier to (and reduce the risk associated with) entry into Social
Informatics and Computational Social Sciences for researchers with diverse
backgrounds and expertise. The resulting datasets and tools are likely to
stimulate fundamental advances in several subdisciplines within Computer Science
including algorithm design, network modeling and analysis, and data mining and
knowledge discovery (among others). The project provides unique opportunities
for broadening the participation of underrepresented minorities and women in
Computer and Information Sciences, and especially those motivated by real-world
applications in social sciences (e.g., understanding social interactions). The
results of the project will be disseminated through the project web pages at
http://cs.ucsb.edu/~dsl/?q=content/data-driven-framework-analyzing-user-
interactions-social-media.