* 1135149
* EAGER: Mobile Interfaces and Cognitive Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Clayton Lewis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2013
* USD 80,949.00

This research, which involves collaboration between scientists from two
institutions, will explore the intersection of interface design approaches for
mobile users and users with cognitive disabilities, with the goal of identifying
ways that best practices in each community can help the other create better
interfaces. Initial investigation by the PIs, who possess individual expertise
in the two fields, has identified similarities in the interface concerns between
the two communities (e.g., the number and size of buttons, the use of icons and
graphics to communicate, and the need for multiple paths to information
collection). The PIs will create and study interfaces that use and expand the
interface design guidelines for both communities, bringing together domain
experts to launch a new generation of interfaces that are less cognitively
demanding and more widely usable by important user populations. To these ends,
the team will employ two types of interventions: a prototype driven development
effort and an analytic evaluation effort. The prototype driven development
effort will seek to address needs of mobile communities and communities of users
with cognitive disabilities through user focused interface design. The analytic
evaluation effort will draw upon the opinions of experts in the fields of
cognitive disabilities, mobile interfaces, cognitive science, human
interruption, and health and wellness, to identify the most promising avenues
for research and development. The PIs expect that this work will connect two
fields with promise for mutual benefit through continued research and teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project connects two fields that are
not generally considered to be related, and has the potential to transform key
principles for interface design by increasing cross-domain intellectual output
between the mobile interfaces and cognitive disabilities communities. This
research will result in the creation and distribution of interfaces to members
of an under-represented group, and in so doing will draw attention to the issues
faced by people with cognitive disabilities and focus efforts to address them by
providing avenues toward non-litigious, scientific approaches to deal with all
people's needs and desires to communicate on the go with mobile interfaces.. The
project will enhance partnerships between researchers at the University of
Colorado and Virginia Tech, with benefits extending across the United States and
the world through publications and workshops at top venues in the fields of
mobile interfaces and cognitive disabilities.