* 1135848
* RAPID: Sendai Earthquake and Tsunami-  Remote Assessment Using Land, Sea and Aerial Unmanned Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Robin Murphy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2012
* USD 88,827.00

Proposal #: 11-35848&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Murphy, Robin&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas
A&amp;M University&lt;br/&gt;Title: RAPID: Sendai Earthquake and Tsunami- Remote
Assessment Using Land, Sea &lt;br/&gt;and Aerial Unmanned
Systems&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project proposal,
consisting of participatory research with land, sea, and aerial unmanned systems
for remote assessment and situation awareness for critical life saving and
recovery operations in the aftermath of the Sendai earthquake and tsunami, will
capture and analyze valuable data on the effectiveness of various robots for
recovery and inspection as well as user interface paradigms. The researchers
will be engaged in some of the following activities: &lt;br/&gt;- Participate in
the ongoing recovery efforts in the Sendai region and northward&lt;br/&gt;-
Gather data on the effectiveness of various robots in various real-world
scenarios&lt;br/&gt;- Gather data on the effectiveness of various user
interfaces for remote devices during the recovery process&lt;br/&gt;- Deploy the
RESPOND-R mobile instrument (NSF MRI grant CNS-0923203) to inspect critical
infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;The PI has secured invitations from Japanese
researchers and responders, including the International Rescue Systems
Institute, to bring robots to the north of Japan to assist in the inspection of
critical infrastructure and other recovery operations as well as perform
research on the efficacy of emergency response methods and practices. (The
search and rescue phase has been terminated.) US and Japanese response teams
will be deployed for victim and economic recovery decision-making while
simultaneously collecting never-before-possible, ephemeral data. The Sendai
disaster is unique in its large geographical and economic scale and types of
damage. The geographical, damage, and economic scales drive the need for
distributed decision-making, where experts will have to consult and work at a
distance using remotely acquired data. Sendai also provides the first
opportunity to create a corpus from multiple modalities of unmanned systems
being used by the same agency. Of the 15 deployments since the first use of
rescue robots at the 9-11 World Trade Center collapse, only two, Hurricanes
Katrina and Haiti, used both sea and aerial vehicles; notwithstanding, these
were controlled by different organizations for tasks by different agencies
preventing a longitudinal survey of what works (or does not) for decision-makers
and why and how assets should be coordinated.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal promises an immediate benefit to society by supporting
life saving and economic recovery efforts in Japan through a participatory
research paradigm. There are also long term benefits for future disasters since
emergency response and unmanned systems are both formative domains and the data
collected will advance the discovery and understanding of intelligent, human-
centered systems in unpredictable situations. The PI is a woman who is well
known as a role model for recruiting women and minorities; the data from this
project will be integrated into her numerous museum, documentary, K-12, and
general public education events. Data gathered by the NSF-sponsored RESPOND-R
mobile distributed instrument for response research will be organized into an
ontology and made available as appropriate given the sensitive nature of video
footage.