* 1135724
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Remote Imaging of Community Ecology via Animal-borne Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Naomi Leonard, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

This project will construct a wireless network of animal-borne embedded devices
that will be deployed and tested in a biologically-relevant application. The
networked devices will provide not only geo-location data, but also execute
cooperative strategies that save battery-life by selectively recording
bandwidth-intensive audio and high-definition video footage of occurrences of
animal group behavior of interest, such as predation. &lt;br/&gt;This project
comprises three concurrent and interdependent research themes. The first is the
investigation of methods to design and analyze the performance of distributed
algorithms that implement autonomous decisions at the mobile agents, subject to
communication and computational constraints. The second will pursue data-driven
fundamental research on the modeling of animal group motion and will promote a
formal understanding of the mechanisms of social interaction. The third is
centered on the investigation of methods for hardware integration to build
distributed networks of embedded devices that are capable of executing the newly
developed algorithms, subject to power and weight constraints. &lt;br/&gt;The
results and experience gained in this project will guide the development of
effective autonomous systems for the monitoring and protection of endangered
species. This project will create undergraduate and graduate research
opportunities at all participating institutions, expanding on an existing
collaboration between the University of Maryland, Princeton University, and the
National Geographic Society. There is the potential for using wide-reaching
media resources to disseminate the results of this project to a broad audience.
This may contribute to attracting more students to engineering and science.