* 1135202
* SciGames: A Technology-enhanced Model for Bridging Informal and Formal Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* David Kanter, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2014
* USD 499,998.00

The New York Hall of Science, in collaboration with the Tufts Center for
Engineering Education, the Learning Games Network, and New York City departments
of education and of parks and recreation, is creating and testing two innovative
science games to support student learning about frictional force and linear
motion. SciGames integrates rigorous, highly motivating, data collection
activities conducted in museum and playground settings, with in-depth data
analysis and additional scientific investigation in the classroom. The primary
goals of the SciGames project are to increase student motivation and interest in
science and improve student learning about core physical science concepts. This
exploratory project targets underrepresented urban students and their teachers
from 20 schools in New York City (NYC) and through its partnership with NYC
department of parks and recreation has great potential for scale-up throughout
NYC, as well as dissemination to other urban
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SciGames model creates experiences for
students that build on the positive, fun, free-choice learning characteristics
of informal settings; promotes learning through repeated game-like
experimentation and play; and supports students' sustained interest and learning
in science classrooms where core concepts are formalized. The project is based
on four design principles: (1) SciGames turns students' informal experiences
into a game, (2) SciGames makes science content an integral part of game play,
(3) SciGames generates data for further analysis during game play, and (4)
SciGames, through the use of digital apps, supports students inquiring into data
back in their classrooms. Researchers are developing the games using rigorous,
well constructed, iterative cycles of design, development, testing, evaluation,
and revision with different groups of NYC students and teachers. Pre and post
data on students' science learning and affect are being used to inform the
design cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a two-year period, SciGames will
produce two science games and associated digital apps, and a portable kit that
supports game implementation, data collection and analysis. SciGames is an
important experiment, combining the informal, engaging aspects of play with more
formal science investigation to encourage and sustain the interest,
participation, and learning of underrepresented students in STEM. This project
has the potential to transform how we think of and structure science learning
for middle school students.