* 1135249
* 2011 Large Facilities Workshop at the Florida State University (FSU),  Tallahassee, FL
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,11/30/2011
* Brian Fairhurst, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 11/30/2011
* USD 14,899.00

This award from the Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and physical Sciences
Directorate supports Florida State University to host the NSF's Large Facilities
Workshop in Tallahassee, FL, on April 19-21, 2011. The 2011 NSF Large Facilities
Workshop will share the goals of previous workshops, which are to bring together
program directors, facility managers and others involved in large facility
management, to discuss common issues and learn from each other?s experiences.
The emphasis is on facility operation rather than scientific research. Specific
goals include discussions of facility operating experiences, development of
personal contacts between facilities, education on current issues, and
discussions of current concerns. &lt;br/&gt;The awardee operates the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL). The NHMFL is a network of three
institutions, the University of Florida in Gainesville, and the the Los Alamos
National Laboratory in New Mexico. It is the only national user facility of its
kind in the United States. It has the largest and highest-powered magnet
laboratory in the world. &lt;br/&gt;The meeting will occur over 3 days, and
include plenary sessions, breakout discussions, and field trips to large
facilities at FSU (NHMFL and The Antarctic Marine Geology Research Facility.
&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will contribute to the advancement of knowledge and
understanding of large facilities operators by facilitating dissemination of,
and access to, information regarding the efficient management of large
facilities. By seeking out and sharing better ways to operate and manage these
facilities, administrators can strengthen, broaden and perpetuate the
capabilities of NSF-supported research infrastructure.