* 1135072
* Collaborative Research: Sustained Observations of the North Pole Environment to Characterize Ongoing Arctic Change
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2011,08/31/2016
* James Morison, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 473,482.00

This award supports the continuation of the aerial hydrographic surveys
component of the North Pole Environmental Observatory (NPEO) as part of the
Arctic Observing Network (AON) and the Study of Environmental Arctic Change
(SEARCH). During the annual aerial hydrographic surveys a number of tasks will
be completed: (1) conductivity/salinity, temperature, dissolved oxygen and
nutrient profiles will be measured in the water column; (2) water samples will
be retrieved and returned to the laboratory for analysis of a variety of tracers
[salinity, Ba, alkalinity, dissolved oxygen, nutrients, delta O-18]; and (3) a
variety of ice-based drifting instruments will be deployed for other AON
projects, including ice mass balance buoys, ice-tethered profilers and
atmospheric pressure buoys. The "Intellectual Merit" of NPEO rests on its
foundation of successfully tracking change in the air-ice-ocean system since
2000, and obtaining data that will help to answer the question "have a
combination of long-term trends and decadal variability driven the Arctic Ocean
to the brink of a new seasonal ice regime?" The "Broader Impacts" of NPEO center
on enabling the scientific efforts of other investigators, and educating the
public about environmental change in the Arctic. NPEO improves the scientific
infrastructure by providing scientific data, developing new observational
methods, and providing operational field support to other Arctic researchers.
NPEO continues to take advantage of the cachet that the North Pole provides for
generating many avenues for informal education and outreach. NPEO maintains a
Web site, participates in various talks and demonstrations at the annual Polar
Science Weekend at Seattle's Pacific Science Center, and will sponsor a booth at
the SACNAS (Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Latinos and Native Americans in
Science) conference aimed at broadening participation of under-represented
groups in careers in environmental science.