* 1135745
* RAPID:  TAG-AMS Measurements of Organic Aerosol during the BEACHON-RoMBAS 2011 Field Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Allen Goldstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2013
* USD 162,420.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the sources, processing, and
feedbacks of secondary organic aerosols (SOAs) that are produced from volatile
organic precursors emitted from the Manitou Forest in Colorado during summer
2011. The principal investigator (PI) has developed a novel thermal desorption
aerosol gas chromatograph (TAG) coupled to an aerosol mass spectrometer (AMS)
that characterizes the organic composition of ambient aerosols. This project
supports deployment of TAG-AMS as part of the BEACHON-RoMBAS (Bio-hydro-
atmosphere interactions of Energy, Aerosols, Carbon, H2O, Organics, and Nitrogen
- Rocky Mountain Biogenic Aerosol Study) intensive field campaign and the
interpretation of resulting data. The TAG speciates the organic composition of
ambient aerosols hourly while the AMS measures mass spectra of the corresponding
total particulate organic matter. Relative to other approaches, the simultaneous
quantification of organic speciation and mass loading using the same ion source
and high-resolution time-of-flight mass spectrometer provides enhanced
resolution in characterizing the associated sources and chemical processing of
particulate organic matter in the atmosphere. The prototype TAG-AMS instrument
was deployed and operated successfully in Pasadena, CA as part of the CalNex
(Nexus of Air Quality and Climate Change) campaign during May and June 2010.
Measurements with the TAG-AMS during BEACHON-RoMBAS will contribute to the
overall programmatic goal of understanding sources, processing, and feedbacks of
secondary biogenic aerosols. Results will also be interpreted in conjunction
with prior TAG and AMS measurements in the Blodgett Forest in California during
BEARPEX (Biosphere Effects on Aerosols and Photochemistry Experiment). Both the
Manitou and Blodgett forests are dominated by ponderosa pine but differ
significantly in relative amounts of anthropogenic air pollutants and emission
fluxes of biogenic volatile organic carbon (VOC). The combined data sets from
these two sites will yield insight regarding production pathways for SOA from
biogenic precursors over a broad range in chemical regimes. In addition,
experience gained through this field deployment will allow the PI to further
evaluate performance of the new TAG-AMS system. Results from this project will
substantially improve our understanding of and ability to predict the chemical
processing of biogenic gases to form particulate organic matter in the
atmosphere, influences of this particulate material on clouds and precipitation
fields, and resulting feedbacks on forests. This project will foster new
collaborations involving the PI and other participants in the BEACHON-RoMBAS
field campaign. Data interpretation will lever additional insight from
measurements during the BEARPEX campaign. A postdoctoral researcher will be
trained through the project and results will be integrated into classroom
instruction by the PI. Knowledge gained by the PI, collaborating scientists, and
students will be broadly disseminated through scholarly publications and will
thereby contribute substantively to both the atmospheric chemistry and air
quality communities.