* 1135612
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Visual and Technical Styles: An Integrative Approach to the Identification of Archaeological Social Boundaries
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Chivis, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 17,830.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Jodie O'Gorman, Jeff Chivis will examine the
varying types of interactions and the sharing of sociopolitical and
technological ideas that were associated with the introduction of Hopewellian
beliefs into west Michigan during the early Middle Woodland period (~50 B.C. -
A.D. 250). During this time interval a new prehistoric society emerged in the US
Midwest. Characterized by a more complex religions system and form of social
organization it is responsible for monumental sites which included mounded
"pyramids" and populations numbered in the thousands. While much is understood
about development in the core area, how Hopewellian influence spread is much
less clear. Some archaeologists believe that it was ideas rather than people
which moved outwards from the core while others argue that it was primarily
indirect influence which spread. Through study in one outlying region Mr. Chivis
will address this question directly. The research is important because it
provides insight into how in traditional societies people and ideas can spread
and interact in complex fashion and over extended periods of
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In west Michigan, this Hopewellian transition is
evidenced by the implementation of a distinct mortuary program involving the
construction of burial mounds, the utilization of grave inclusions, and the
application of characteristic design elements on pottery vessels. Mr. Chivis'
research will examine Middle Woodland pottery from west Michigan and northwest
Indiana to record the different types of communities and interactions involved
in the initial spread of Hopewellian information into west Michigan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ceramics are abundant and well preserved in archaeological
contexts and have the potential to provide insight into the behaviors and
cultural affiliations of their producers. Mr. Chivis' research employs a
comprehensive methodology by uniting stylistic pottery analysis with
compositional analysis. Utilizing ceramic petrography as the primary method of
compositional analysis, this research design will explore new ways to discover
markers of identity in the archaeological record and will permit one to
distinguish between the spread of ideas vs. the actual movement of people. This
methodology will provide a significantly more comprehensive identification of
identity, communities, and interaction networks than has previously been
possible within the study region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this research rests on the fact that, as a member of a federally recognized
tribe in Michigan, Mr. Chivis will be enhancing the involvement of
underrepresented/minority individuals within archaeology. Mr. Chivis will make
the resulting data available to his tribe and the larger anthropological
community through potential peer-reviewed publications and presentations at
various national conferences. Dissemination of this information to local tribal
entities will provide them with a supplementary perspective of their past and
could promote more frequent and worthwhile communication between academia and
Native American tribal governments.