* 1135026
* NEESR: Tsunami Induced Coherent Structures and their Impact on our Coastal Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Patrick Lynett, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,274,980.00

The destruction from earthquake-induced tsunamis in the U.S. and other Pacific
Rim countries can result in considerably more damage and deaths than the seismic
ground motion. The goal of tsunami research is to save lives and reduce economic
losses. To do this, we must develop sufficient scientific knowledge and
appropriate engineering tools on which to base comprehensive tsunami mitigation
plans and communicate this information effectively to decision makers, the
emergency planning community and the public. The overarching theme of this
effort is to formulate the complex processes affecting our coastal structures
that are driven or affected by turbulent coherent structures (TCS). The role of
wall bounded TCS in multiple forcing environments will be examined. Near the
seabed, sediment pickup and transport can be significantly enhanced by TCS,
leading to extreme scour and infrastructure failure. In the horizontal plane,
TCS can appear as giant whirlpools and are commonly associated with extreme
damage in ports and harbors. Extensive experiments will be performed at the
Oregon State University (OSU), using the Large Wave Flume (LWF) to study the
fine detail of TCS significance on nearbed processes, such as mobilization and
transport of sediment, as well as the Tsunami Wave Basin (TWB) to characterize
the complete hydrodynamic structure of a large, horizontal TCS generated by a
port. The observations will be complimented with a wide-reaching numerical
effort. To study the detailed TCS generation and its effects on sediment
suspension due to transient long wave motion, we will use 3D turbulence
resolving simulation models, with grid resolutions on the order of 1 mm. Fully
coupled with the flow models will be Discrete Element Models for individual
sediment particles, permitting grain-resolving simulation of tsunami-induced
transport. Coupling the LWF and the TWB results with the fine resolution
numerical tools will allow for predictions of bed mobilization, scour, and
harbor wall forces for a generic tsunami problem, including the combined forcing
of the mean "uniform" tsunami flow and the very localized, complex velocities
due to TCS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed activities
are to ultimately reduce the loss of life and property due to tsunamis through
assessing population at risk needs to be aware of the associated risk and be
prepared to respond in case of a tsunami warning. Here, we take a two-pronged
approach to public education of the hazards possible during a tsunami event.
First, a program targeting middle and high school students in coastal states
will be closely connected to the experimental research proposed in the TWB.
Students will formulate a harbor tsunami response plan, that will be implemented
and tested in the TWB. Second, we identify several ways to enhance the transfer
of our intellectual efforts to various stakeholders. Our knowledge transfer to
engineering practitioners will take the place with 2-3 webinars regarding harbor
design, sediment scour, and sediment liquefaction. These webinars will provide
information regarding both existing design practices as well as new knowledge
gained. The practitioners will be receiving professional development credit and
the sessions will be recorded on the NEESHub for future use.