* 1135523
* CI-TEAM Demo: Environmental CyberCitizens: Engaging Citizen Scientists in Global Environmental Change through Crowdsensing and Visualization
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Alex Mayer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2015
* USD 349,840.00

This demonstration project is creating and evaluating a set of activities aimed
at preparing a diverse science and engineering workforce with
cyberinfrastructure knowledge and skills. A multidisciplinary team of faculty
and undergraduate students is collaborating with citizen scientist end users to
develop and deploy data collection and visualization tools, to monitor the
critical ecosystems of Lightfoot Bay in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. The
program is building upon existing educational programs at Michigan Technological
University, Keweenaw Bay Ojibwa Community College, several local high schools,
and a local land conservancy. Research scientists at International Business
Machines (IBM) who are actively engaged in the development of crowd sensing
applications are collaborating with the co-PIs and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Sensor-enabled smartphones
are serving as the primary platform for acquiring, analyzing and disseminating
environmental information. In this demonstration project the team is developing
and using smartphone applications to acquire digital images, in-situ
measurements of water quality parameters, and personal narratives. The project
is developing applications for transferring the acquired data synchronously or
asynchronously to an interactive website through which citizen scientists will
interact with professional scientists. Inspired by the popular concept of the
internet, the project focuses on end-to-end engagement that not only collects
data but provides for a compelling creative visualization environment through
which users combine quantitative data in meaningful ways while framing and/or
annotating it with qualitative data. The smartphone applications and interactive
data displays are developed in existing computer science classes, driving
significant, sustainable enhancements in their curricula. High school, community
college, and undergraduate students are testing the applications in the field
and the data visualization site and are providing feedback to the developers.
These activities are offered through existing general science, environmental
science and engineering, and social studies and science courses and will be
sustained beyond the project period by training the teachers to deploy
smartphone applications and interactive data displays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
stakeholders are developing and implementing a coordinated Cyber-Infrastructure
Plan to provide a platform for collaboration and flexibility, ensuring a
productive environment for all participants. A rigorous evaluation effort is
being conducted with both formative and summative components. The evaluation is
designed to allow constant improvement and to determine and document the
project?s overall effectiveness at achieving its intended outcomes, including
outcomes related to career choices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The model to be tested here has the potential to be broadly adaptable
and/or adoptable. The project is targeting rural, low-income high school and
community college students with high proportions of Native Americans. Specific
environmental data and information will be targeted that is relevant to the
local Ojibwa culture. The project schools and study area are in rural areas that
are consistently underserved by cyberinfrastructure. The rural nature of the
area will present technological challenges (e.g. poor cell phone coverage), but
it is particularly important to engage citizens in underserved areas to
demonstrate that advanced cyberinfrastructure systems can improve their quality
of life and economic opportunities.