* 1135518
* Support for US Delegation to Annual Meetings of the International Society for Rock Mechanics; Beijing, China 2011; Stockholm, Sweden 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Peter Smeallie, American Rock Mechanics Association Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2013
* USD 12,752.00

This award is an international travel grant to the American Rock Mechanics
Association Foundation (ARMA/F) to support the U.S. delegate to the 2011 and
2012 International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) Council meetings and
symposia. For 2011 and 2012, the U.S. delegate is Peter Smeallie, the executive
director of ARMA and the ARMA/F. In 2012, the delegation will be expanded to
include the ISRM Vice President for North America who at that time will be a
delegate from the United States. Mr. Smeallie serves on the ISRM Council and
represents the interests of the U.S. rock mechanics community. The U.S. delegate
will attend the ISRM Council and Commission meetings, as appropriate, in Beijing
in 2011 and in Stockholm in 2012.

The presence of the US delegation will enhance US geo-engineering and rock
mechanics by providing an international perspective on important issues
currently being addressed by ISRM, such as international underground research
laboratories, radioactive waste disposal, rock testing methods, application of
geophysics in rock mechanics, and post-mining rock mechanics. The ISRM meetings,
at which up to 46 nations participate, will also allow the opportunity to
generate international interest in U.S. rock mechanics research and education.
US participation in the activities of ISRM has a direct impact on issues of
national importance through collaborative alliances fostered by the
international society. These areas include resource exploration and production,
national security issues, environmental considerations, and civil infrastructure
systems through advances in tunneling and excavation technologies.