* 1135231
* Social Science and the Alternative Energy Future: A Workshop Proposal to the National Science Foundation
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* None None, American Academy of Arts and Sciences (AAAS)
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 05/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

American Academy of Arts and Sciences&lt;br/&gt;Social Science and the
Alternative Energy Future: A workshop proposal to the National Science
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical
need to identify the legal, social, and economic barriers to the adoption of new
energy technologies and to assess how they might be better understood and
managed using tools developed by the social sciences. To address this need, the
American Academy will convene a workshop on "Social Science and the Alternative
Energy Future" on May 19-20, 2011, in Washington, D.C., that will identify
priority areas for future social science research and develop recommendations
for bridging the gap between the energy and the social science communities. The
workshop will bring together social scientists, scientists and engineers, legal
scholars, business leaders, and government officials to investigate issues that
will benefit from further social science research and to understand how social
science expertise can be more effectively applied to the development of energy
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Previous studies from the
National Academies and others have concluded that the energy system must undergo
transformational change to ensure an affordable, secure, and sustainable energy
system. Transformational change of the existing technological infrastructure
will require changes to economic, social, and legal structures as well, yet many
of the societal considerations underlying these necessary changes have not been
adequately addressed. This workshop will consider four key issues that will
require new thinking from social scientists in order to meet the needs of
policy-makers, and that have not been adequately addressed by other
studies:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How will the transformation of the energy
system affect the decisions made by individuals and communities?&lt;br/&gt;2.
How do regulations need to change to support new energy
technologies?&lt;br/&gt;3. What governance framework will help sustain energy
policies over the long term?&lt;br/&gt;4. What will be the effect of changing
the energy system on other physical systems, including ecosystems and natural
resources?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The final workshop report will
review existing social science research, identify priority areas for future
research, and develop recommendations for increasing communication between
social scientists and energy policy-makers. By creating new interdisciplinary
collaborations between previously-isolated professional communities, this
workshop will inform governmental policy development and the research
initiatives of nongovernmental organizations, and will increase public awareness
of the societal risks and benefits of alternative energy technologies.