* 1135854
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Holistic Design Methodology for Automated Implementation of Human-in-the-Loop Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Taskin Padir, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 416,000.00

This project develops a framework for design automation of cyber-physical
systems to augment human interaction with complex systems that integrate across
computational and physical environments. As a design driver, the project
develops a Body/Brain Computer Interface (BBCI) for the population of
functionally locked-in individuals, who are unable to interact with the physical
world through movement and speech. The BBCI will enable communication with other
humans through expressive language generation and interaction with the
environment through robotic manipulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing
advances in system-level design, this project develops a holistic framework for
design and implementation of heterogeneous human-in-the-loop cyber-physical
systems composed of physically distributed, networked components. It will
advance BBCI technology by incorporating context aware inference and learning of
task-specific human intent estimation in applications involving semi-autonomous
robotic actuators and an efficient wireless communication
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project are expected to
significantly speed up the design of complex cyber-physical systems. By
accelerating the path from idea to prototype, this work shortens the time frame
of and cost of development for assistive technology to improve the quality-of-
life for functionally locked-in individuals. This project establishes an open
prototyping platform and a design framework for rapid exploration of other novel
human-in-the-loop applications. The open platform will foster undergraduate
involvement in cyber-physical systems research, building confidence and
expertise. In addition, new activities at the Museum of Science in Boston will
engage visitors to experiment with systematic design principles in context of a
brain computer interface application, while offering learning opportunities
about basic brain functions.