* 1135303
* Minority Faculty Development Workshop (MFDW): Engineering Enterprise and Innovation
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Gilda Barabino, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 07/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

Abstract of proposal # 1135303: &lt;br/&gt;The 2011 NSF Minority Faculty
Development Workshop (MFDW): Engineering Enterprise and innovation, will be the
sixth in a series that began in 2001 with funding under the Engineering
Directorate. The PI proposes to organize two and a half day workshop at Georgia
Tech University. The PI and the university have previous experience in
organizing such conferences. This workshop will bring together women and
underrepresented minority early and mid career engineering faculty where they
have the opportunity to network, learn and discuss their personal experiences
and challenges to collaborate with industry. The workshop will provide
opportunities for professional development and better understanding of research
innovation and translation. Participants will share and develop ideas for
projects which are geared towards the development of products and services for
commercialization. Also, the workshop will provide a model for an
institutionalized minority faculty development program with an emphasis on
innovation and entrepreneurship that includes mechanisms for assessment and
relevant follow up activities. In addition, the workshop will address strategic
goals of the National Science Foundation and critical needs of the nation,
related to enhance global competiveness and improve the national economy.