* 1135308
* EESE: Collaborative Research: Understanding and Preparing Future Computer Professionals for the Ethical Complexities of a Diverse World
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Keith Miller, University of Illinois at Springfield
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 35,024.00

Are computing professionals adequately prepared for the ethical challenges that
they will face in an increasingly global and interdisciplinary workplace? In
this multi-institutional research/education project, the PIs will investigate
the gap between the need for ethical computing professionals and the ethical
learning that occurs in graduate computing programs. They will then apply these
insights to develop and disseminate best practices in graduate ethics education.
The mixed-method research combines surveys, interviews, focus groups, content
analysis, and experimental design, and will be conducted in partnership with
ACM's SIGCAS and the IEEE's SSIT. The project will begin with an investigation
of computing programs and courses at four diverse institutions: a traditional
research 1 university, a rural polytechnic, an urban liberal arts college, and a
leading institution for online education. What are the existing goals and
strategies used in graduate computing ethics education at these sites? What
ethical issues are covered? What pedagogical approaches and materials are used?
Faculty and students will be surveyed and interviewed about their perspectives
on computing ethics education. Observations of teaching ethics across the
courses will be conducted at each institution by the project team and the
evaluation team. With baseline data from these four institutions, the PIs will
survey members of leading professional associations to gauge alignment between
industry practice and interests and the education in ethics provided by
postsecondary institutions. Finally, the PIs will refine a set of best practices
and pedagogical recommendations for CS ethics education, and disseminate their
findings along with examples of teaching materials designed to be applicable
across a range of institutional settings. Specific research questions to be
addressed include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What specific ethical issues are CS
instructors currently teaching and what pedagogies are currently being used in
graduate-level computing courses?&lt;br/&gt;a. What are the similarities and
differences in computing ethics issues covered within curricula across different
institutions?&lt;br/&gt;b. What materials (texts, readings, videos, simulations,
social media, etc.) are used in classes?&lt;br/&gt;2. How can professionals?
experience in the computing industry enrich teaching about ethical challenges in
the workplace?&lt;br/&gt;a. What do computer professionals think students should
know about ethics before entering the workplace?&lt;br/&gt;b. How do computer
professionals think this information can best be conveyed?&lt;br/&gt;3. How can
computing ethics education be improved?&lt;br/&gt;a. What do CS students need to
learn about ethics that they are not currently learning?&lt;br/&gt;b. What are
the best pedagogical approaches for teaching students these
ideas?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project outcomes will include a report on the state
of ethics education in graduate computer science/technology, a report on
industry needs for an ethically knowledgeable workforce, and recommendations for
best practices in ethics education effective in graduate education and the
workplace. The project will ultimately result in computing professionals who are
more attuned to their ethical responsibilities to the public, leading to more
reliable computing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will
fill an important gap in the research literature about the appropriateness and
effectiveness of pedagogical approaches currently used to increase graduate
computing students' awareness of ethical issues relative to the challenges that
they will face in the workplace. Results of the study will be based on, and thus
applicable to, a broad range of stakeholders in graduate computing ethics
education, and thus could transform curricular standards promulgated by
professional societies such as the ACM and IEEE. The innovative mixed-method
approach that will be used has merit not only for this study but could also be
applied to future studies in other domains.