* 1135033
* NEESR: Inertial Force-Limiting Floor Anchorage Systems for Seismic Resistant Building Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Robert Fleischman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,232,599.00

The objective of this research project is to advance knowledge toward the
development of innovative floor anchorage systems that reduce inertial forces
during earthquakes and maintain a centered floor afterward. This new knowledge
will be generated through a combination of analytical and experimental research,
including nonlinear transient dynamic analysis, and using the equipment and
tools available at two George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) facilities: the large scale structural and hybrid testing
laboratory at Lehigh University and shake table testing at the University of
California, San Diego (UCSD). The project will first explore new knowledge of
the dynamic behavior of building structures with inertial force-limiting floor
anchorage systems. With this knowledge, the project will determine the
appropriate design parameters for this system to produce optimal seismic
performance for a variety of building geometries and properties. The ultimate
goal of the research will be to produce a feasible prototype design for one or
more candidate structures that can be used in dissemination of the concept to
the practice. Data from the project will be archived and made available to the
public through the NEES Project Warehouse/data repository, available at
http://www.nees.org. This project is a collaborative effort among researchers
from the University of Arizona, Lehigh University, UCSD, and Universita di Roma,
La Sapienza, and practitioners from two seismic design
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept has the potential for producing more
economical and safer seismic designs with application to a wide array of
construction types and building systems. The benefits of such a system include:
(1) reduced seismic forces; (2) reduced structural lateral drift; (3) reduced
structural damage; (4) reduced nonstructural and contents damage; and (5) a
higher factor of safety against collapse. If successful, this research can
transform the manner in which structures are designed to resist earthquakes by
modifying the response to strong ground motion and thereby significantly
impacting the cost-effectiveness of the U.S. construction industry. Effective
transfer of research results into practice will be facilitated through team
members who are practicing engineers at two seismic design firms. International
collaboration will facilitate exchange with the broader earthquake engineering
community. An outreach program with the K-12 community in Tucson, Arizona, will
expose students in the next generation to the importance of earthquake hazard
mitigation. This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program (NEHRP).