* 1135394
* CI-TEAM Demonstration Project: Enhancing STEM Education through Faculty Training in the Use of Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Issa Salame, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,734.00

In this demonstration project, the City College of New York (CCNY), with the
collaboration of LaGuardia Community College (LAGCC) and Hostos Community
College (HCC), are engaging community college professors in faculty development
workshops focused upon integrating CI applications into introductory STEM
courses. The CI applications to be demonstrated in this work are research
databases, software packages for graphing and statistical analysis in
mathematics, and cyber environments for virtual laboratory experiments in
chemistry and physics. The ultimate beneficiaries will be the students of these
faculty participants. The training is to be used in specific courses at LAGCC
and HCC.

The project goals are: Goal 1. To develop community college faculty expertise in
using CI effectively to promote STEM learning. Goal 2. To strengthen and enrich
students? learning of science and mathematics with the appropriate use of CI-
applications. Goal 3. To broaden participation and increase the number of
students who are interested in CI in order to increase the cyber-ready
workforce.

Intellectual Merit: This project is based on a creative and potentially
transformative concept: in allowing students to use the Internet, their comfort
zone is expanded to include other computer-based tools that will improve their
performance in STEM courses and extend their CI-based learning to their
workforce experiences. Science education research underscores the benefits of CI
in enabling students to take an active role in their learning, to deepen
understanding of basic scientific concepts, to improve critical thinking and to
build problem-solving skills. The working hypothesis is that integrating
computer applications into the learning experience at a fairly early stage in
students? college careers will inculcate computer-based practices for their
lifetimes.

Broader Impact: Dissemination of this work will help to transform lower-level
college science and mathematics courses by incorporating the extensive use of CI
throughout the learning process. The long-range benefit lies in its impact on
underrepresented minority students' performance in introductory STEM courses and
in diversifying the student population participating in CI activities as part of
their science, math, or engineering education. The project is easily adaptable
to other institutions. In this project, the activities will be scaled up to
include additional courses at the participating colleges and then beyond to
other colleges at the City University of New York (CUNY). A strong national
dissemination effort is also planned.