* 1135382
* FESD Proposal,Type I: Open Earth Systems: Whole planet models for global processes and major events in Earth's history
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Darryn Waugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,845,532.00

The goals of the Open Earth Systems project are to develop capabilities to model
global-scale interactions between the primary components of the Earth system --
the mantle, crust, core, ocean, and atmosphere, and to determine how these
interactions control decisive events in Earth's history. Decisive events that
uniquely shaped our planet, such as acquisition of surface water, atmosphere
oxidation, super-continent formation and breakup, extreme volcanism, climate
changes, geomagnetic reversals, and mass extinction events, all require mass and
energy exchange between diverse parts of the Earth system that remain poorly
understood at the fundamental level. Our project takes state-of-the-art
numerical models of the mantle and crust, the core, the ocean, and the
atmosphere, and for the first time, couples them together. Our specific
objectives are to determine how Earth's dynamics, starting with mantle
convection, alters the chemistry of the ocean and atmosphere, produces extreme
volcanic activity, banded iron formations, leads to reversals of the geomagnetic
field, and cycles oxygen, carbon, iron, and other essential constituents through
the Earth system. The multi-disciplinary expertise for this effort is well
represented in our investigator team, including Johns Hopkins University PIs
Peter Olson, Linda Hinnov, Anand Gnanadesikan, and Darryn Waugh, in addition to
PIs David Bercovici from Yale University, Michael Manga from UC Berkeley, and
Shijie Zhong from the University of Colorado Boulder. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
integral part of this project is developing new approaches for recruiting
underrepresented minorities into the geosciences. We are initiating an
internship program called Geoscience Ingenuity, partnering with Ingenuity
Project representatives and instructors at Baltimore Polytechnic Institute, an
engineering-oriented high school where the Baltimore Ingenuity Project is based.
Geoscience Ingenuity offers mentoring and technical training for high school
students working directly with the PIs and the staff on Open Earth System
research projects. In addition, we offer summertime courses for Maryland
teachers capitalizing on the widespread public interest in extreme natural
phenomena, and emphasizing the roles these events play in the Earth system and
their impacts on society, human history, public health, and current world
affairs. Our FESD project serves as a cross-disciplinary training platform for
graduate students, with a particular focus on providing the intellectual
environment and the research tools for training graduate students in the
solution of geoscience problems that span the Earth system from the core to the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project focuses on several key interactions
between different parts of the Earth system that critical to the Earth's long-
term evolution, by coupling together a suite of well established models we call
Open Earth Systems. Discipline-specific models in Open Earth Systems include CIG
model CitcomS for mantle dynamics, tectonic evolution, and surface topography;
GFDL models CM2.1 and CM2G for climate ocean-atmosphere-land interactions; GFDL
model GOLD for ocean dynamics, CIG model MAG and also MAGIC for core dynamics
and the geodynamo, and MELTS for magma systems. These models are modified to
allow for coupling with the other models in the Open Earth System, in order to
investigate the following grand challenge hypotheses: (1) The evolution of
large-scale mantle convection and plate dynamics governs the history of global
sea level, continental uplift, and large igneous events, with changes in plate
motion, plate boundaries, and ocean basins caused by subduction zone formation
along dormant plate boundaries; (2) Lowered sea level due to the geodynamic
effects in (1) enhances the Earth system capacity for trapping carbon in the
deep ocean, and conversely, raised sea level and increased roughness of the
bottom topography during continental breakup and large igneous events increases
the likelihood of hypoxia events in the deep ocean; (3) Variations in the
frequency of reversals in the Geomagnetic Polarity Time Scale reflect changing
dynamical and thermal conditions in the mantle and their affect on the core,
initiate magnetic superchrons, and produce frequently reversing geodynamo states
during the Phanerozoic; (4) Crustal age peaks correspond to peaks in crustal
production rates from variable mantle convection modified by selective
preservation, and Precambrian BIF peaks correspond to large igneous events
modified by selective preservation.