* 1135357
* EESE: Experiencing Ethics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ioanna Semendeferi, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,325.00

This education project introduces novel science ethics coursework at the
University of Houston (UH) that features three levels: theoretical, case
studies, and experiential. The theoretical level identifies and explains central
moral issues and principles relevant to research ethics. This is followed by
dialectic investigation of famous cases in science ethics. The coursework
culminates with the experiential level, an ethics practicum with an emphasis on
topics of peer review, human subjects and animal experiments, which form
cornerstones of modern research life. The practicum element involves student
placement in participating labs or research groups, and is supported by an ever-
expanding group of mentors from UH and local medical schools, as well as by
conference committees and journal boards. In the introductory course the
practicum lasts 2-3 weeks whereas in the advanced course students are immersed
in the practicum throughout the semester; regardless of duration, concurrently
with the practicum students are engaged in the classroom in a deeper
philosophical investigation of relevant issues. Although it is challenging to
incorporate a practicum into the field of ethics, the PI believes it is of
immense value because it transforms the abstract into the concrete. A pilot
version of the course offered by the PI allowed him to identify and to formulate
processes for addressing major concerns relating to finding a placement for all
students, the mechanics of peer review traineeship, and the mechanics of
human/animal research traineeship. &lt;br/&gt;A diverse set of outreach
activities complements the above, and includes the traditional (such as seminar
and workshop organization and publication of a book) along with interaction via
social media (e.g., blogging and Facebook), in order to engage young people in
ethics discourse on an everyday basis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The processes developed by the PI and his team in successfully implementing this
challenging methodology will serve as an exemplar and be widely adopted, thereby
transforming the preparation of young researchers. A minority institution (the
University of Texas at Brownsville), several research labs, and a number of
conferences and journals have already expressed support for this initiative and
their intention to participate. This unique educational program links
theoretical analysis to real ethical experiences gained via a practicum, a
methodology the PI believes may prove particularly effective with blue collar
student populations who have a technical orientation and a very practical view
of the world. It advances "thinking aloud" as a strategy to help people deal
with ethical drift, a ubiquitous cause of unethical behavior, by regularly
soliciting feedback from friends. It advocates the use of social media on a
large scale, not only as a global outreach platform, but also as a lifelong data
gathering tool for evaluation purposes.