* 1135734
* U.S.-Brazil Planning Visit: Collaborative Research in Ceramic Thin Film Materials for Clean Energy Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Renato Camata, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 01/31/2013
* USD 14,408.00

Abstract Proposal: OISE-1135734 &lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Camata, Renato.,
University of Alabama at Birmingham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Renato
Camata from the University of Alabama Birmingham and Dr. Daniel de Florio from
the Universidade Federal do ABC in SÃ£o Paulo, Brazil plan to study oxide film
materials with high ionic conductivity for applications in fuel cells. The
proposed work will create novel thin film electrolyte materials with high ionic
conductivity in the intermediate temperature range of 500 to 750&amp;#730;C.
These new electrolyte materials have the potential to create solid oxide fuel
cells (SOFCs) that surmount the reliability and cost impediments in current SOFC
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials will be fabricated as thin films at the
University of Alabama and characterized at the Universidade Federal do ABC;
making the experimental facilities at both universities highly complementary and
ideally suited for the success of this project. Furthermore, the US PI is a
known expert in the field of oxide deposition via pulsed laser which is the
preferred method for this collaboration while the Brazilian PI is a well-
published researcher and leader in SOFC materials. This visit will also make it
possible for a US PhD dissertation student, to gain an invaluable international
research experience as he works on the characterization of the thin films
materials under the mentorship of both US and Brazilian experts.