* 1135874
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research:  Efficient Mapping and Management of Applications onto Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Pei Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 392,011.00

The computing landscape is a richly-heterogeneous space including both fixed and
mobile nodes with a large variety of sensing, actuation and computational
capabilities (including mobile devices, home electronics, taxis, robotic drones,
etc.). Cyber-physical applications built on these devices have the potential to
gather data on, analyze, and adapt to or control a range of environments. The
challenge, however, is that Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) are difficult to
program, and even more difficult to incorporate from one deployment to another,
or to dynamically manage as nodes availability changes. Thus, CPS applications
are too often programmed in a brittle fashion that impedes their ability to
efficiently use available compute/sense/actuate resources beyond a one-shot
deployment. In response, this project is improving CPS design and control in
four primary thrusts. First, the project is developing CPSISA, an abstraction
layer or intermediate representation to facilitate CPS applications expressing
their compute/sense/actuate requirements to lower-level mapping and management
layers. Second, the project is exploring methods of providing a Device Attribute
Catalog (DAC) that summarizes a region?s available CPS nodes and their
capabilities. Third, this research is improving and exploiting the ability to
model, predict, and control the mobility of CPS nodes. When some CPS nodes are
mobile, the accuracy and performance of a CPS application fundamentally is a
function of where nodes will be positioned at any moment in time. This work
exploits both static statistical coverage analysis and dynamic prediction and
interpolation. Fourth, using CPSISA, DAC, and other resources as input, the team
is developing tools to statically or dynamically optimize mappings of CPS
applications onto available resources. To test ideas in a detailed and concrete
manner, two applications are being studied and deployed. First, the FireGuide
application for emergency response assistance uses groups of mobile/robotic
nodes for guiding first responders in building fires. Second, a Regional Traffic
Management (RTM) application demonstrates ideas at the regional level and will
explore CPS scenarios for automobile traffic sensing and dynamic toll pricing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program has the potential for broad
societal impact. Studies that improve how building emergencies are handled will
improve emergency response safety both for occupants and for first responders
around the country. Likewise, the deployment plans regarding regional traffic
management will improve traffic patterns, fuel efficiency and quality-of-life
for commuters across the United States. The research team is distributing the
CPSISA, CPSMap, and CPSDyn software frameworks to allow other researchers and
developers to make use of them. Extensive industry collaborations foster
effective technology transfer. Finally, the project continues and broadens the
PIs? prior track records for undergraduate research advising and for mentoring
women students and members of under-represented minority groups.