* 1135525
* Collaborative Research: CI-Team Diff: The Virtual Learning Commons: STEM Research Communities Learning about Data Management, Geospatial Informatics, and Scientific Visualization
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Peter Golding, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2015
* USD 834,341.00

The expected national transformation of 21st Century science through
cyberinfrastructure (CI) depends on adoption of new CI approaches across many
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) domains. For STEM
faculty and researchers who are unfamiliar with CI but are otherwise well
prepared, the learning curve to adopt new technology is steep and tools are
immature and difficult to use. Key issues are the need for 1) effective
processes and mechanisms by which STEM professionals can learn to integrate CI
into their work, and 2) development of empirically based theories about the
diffusion of CI innovation in research settings so that effective processes and
mechanisms can be designed and enacted. This project is developing a synergistic
environment that will enable the STEM research community, including graduate
students, faculty, and researchers, to engage in life-long, life-wide learning
about emerging CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to: create
a virtual learning environment focused on techniques for data and information
acquisition, management, curation, analysis, visualization, provenance, and
discovery; engage local, regional, national and international STEM research and
education communities in face-to-face and virtual settings; and continue to
develop and extend our understanding, theories, concepts, and models of
technology adoption and diffusion of CI innovation in interdisciplinary research
settings. The project uses four activities to accomplish its goals: 1)
collaborative development of a Virtual Learning Commons (VLC); 2) virtual
workshops using videoconference technology and the VLC, 3) face-to-face working
meetings, and 4) postdoctoral researcher and graduate student mentoring. All
activities integrate research with education through problem-based, experiential
learning by communities of practice in the context of real problem
solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project will contribute
new knowledge about virtual, collaborative learning about CI and through CI,
developing a new, CI-enabled learning system. It will generate new communities
of CI-enabled professional STEM researchers, in particular those working in the
areas of data management, geospatial informatics, and visualization. It will
generate new understanding of diffusion of existing and emerging CI innovations
in the global STEM research community and new models of interdisciplinary,
distributed collaboration between CI researchers and STEM researchers at all
professional levels - graduate student to highly experienced. The project will
provide a better understanding of interactions between virtual learning
environments, communities of practice, and life-long, life-wide learning by
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves an experienced team of CI
researchers from the University of Texas at&lt;br/&gt;El Paso (UTEP), University
of Kansas (KU), and University of New Mexico (UNM) who are partnering with
research communities in science and engineering education, geo-epidemiology, and
information management at UNM, Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), and the
National and International Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Network. The
project builds on models of collaborative learning generated from our previous
CI-Team Demonstration and Implementation Projects to accomplish the
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will have broad
impacts within multiple STEM communities traditionally underrepresented in high-
end scientific computing, as well as involving underrepresented minorities at
two Hispanic Serving Institutions. The project will ensure that Hispanic
students in STEM disciplines at UTEP receive the knowledge and skills that
enable them to become leaders in CI-enabled STEM research, through mentoring
Science and Engineering Educators at UTEP as they learn about and use CI within
the VLC -- educating the educators. The project provides a model for moving
communities to CI-based approaches that can be replicated in any STEM community.
It will generate resources for the broad STEM research community to learn about
data management - now a requirement for all NSF programs. It will also generate
a new virtual space within which an emerging community of practice engaged in CI
Workforce Development may begin to share resources and collaborate.