* 1135368
* EAGER: Electrical Grid Leveling by Distributed Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Trung Nguyen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 25,675.00

1135368 (Nguyen). Our electrical grids are currently overloaded because of
simultaneous peak electrical energy demand. This simultaneous demand sets the
peak power generation level for power plants and peak power delivery capacity of
the electrical grids. The peak power demand in the US and around the world is
expected to increase significantly as the population grows and electrification
of transportation is implemented. This creates a significant pressure for the
need to build new power plants and upgrade the electrical grids. While the total
daily electrical energy demand is fairly constant, its distribution rate (power)
is not uniform with daytime load being almost double the night time load. If we
can create a way in which this total daily energy demand is delivered at a
constant rate, our existing electrical power plants and grids, which were
designed for peak power, could produce and transmit energy more efficiently and
economically. Furthermore, new power plants deployment and electrical grid
upgrades or replacement can be done at a rate that is more manageable and less
disruptive. A concept that may make this possible is to store electrical energy
locally at the ?point of use? when demand is low or not needed for use when it
is needed. An example of this is to buy and store electricity at night, when the
demand and cost are low, for use in the day time when the demand and cost are
high. This distributed energy storage approach allows the power plants and
electrical grids to operate at more economical and sustainable levels. This one-
year proposed project plans to conduct a systems and economics study of this
concept and its impacts on the current energy production and distribution
systems. Two storage applications will be evaluated, phase change systems for
air-conditioning, a major use of electrical energy, and electrochemical storage
systems (stationary batteries, flow batteries and fuel cells). The research team
will identify the requirements of each application and determine the minimum
round-trip storage efficiency and costs that these systems must have to be
competitive using existing price differences. They will determine the percent of
power plant and grid capacity that will become available when local energy
storage capacity is used in various application sectors (commercial and
residential). This work will be done by two undergraduate students, one each
from Chemical Engineering and Electrical Engineering. The results generated will
be used in an elective course called ?Energy for Sustainability? that the PI is
developing for all disciplines in the school of engineering at the University of
Kansas. This distributed energy storage concept may have a transformational
impact on our current electrical energy production and transmission
infrastructures. The data generated by this study will be very useful to the
energy generation and transmission industries and the research community.
Finally, this research will serve as an excellent venue to introduce issues on
energy and environmental sustainability to the participating undergraduate
students and to contribute to the development of a workforce that is more
knowledgeable of these sustainability issues.