* 1135514
* NSF/FDA SIR:  Techniques for Assessing the Performance of Optical Coherence Tomography Systems for Nanoparticle-based Detection of Gastrointestinal Cancers
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Yu Chen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 87,527.00

1135514&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence
(SIR) proposal aims to investigate nanoparticle-enhanced optical coherence
tomography (OCT) imaging techniques for detection of gastrointestinal (GI)
cancers through the development of novel phantom-based test methods.
Conventional white-light endoscopy and biopsy are currently the gold standards
for GI cancer screening, however, they suffer from high false-negative rates
resulting in undetected cancers. OCT provides real-time imaging of tissues with
resolution approaching that of histopathology. Clinical studies of OCT for GI
cancer detection are promising, however, the relatively low contrast between
neoplastic and non-neoplastic tissues limits its diagnostic accuracy. The recent
advent of plasmonic nanoparticles has introduced a new opportunity to enhance
OCT contrast for GI cancers. The molecular-specific binding of antibody-
conjugated nanoparticles to cancer biomarkers raises the potential for improved
clinical cancer detection through OCT-targeted endoscopic biopsy. Substantial
progress has been made in the development of nanoparticle-enhanced OCT imaging,
however, innovation has been inhibited by a lack of reliable, widely-accepted
benchtop techniques for characterizing image quality and the ability to detect
neoplastic lesions. As a result, quantitative intercomparison of OCT system
performance is problematic and the potential for understanding device-,
nanoparticle- and tissue-dependent effects is diminished. The inability to
assess OCT systems with wellestablished techniques also complicates the
regulatory process and increases the burden on manufacturers to provide clinical
studies to demonstrate safety and effectiveness. Therefore, the
primary&lt;br/&gt;objectives of the proposed project are to develop and validate
novel phantom-based test methods that will enable rapid and reliable evaluation
of OCT system performance and to advance nanoparticle-enhanced detection of GI
cancer with OCT. Biologically-realistic tissue phantoms representing normal and
nanoparticle-labeled cancerous tissues will be developed. Techniques for OCT-
based measurement of sample optical properties and estimation of nanoparticle
contrast enhancement will be developed. Additionally, idealized "metric
determination phantoms" will be developed to characterize fundamental OCT
performance parameters such as resolution and sensitivity. The potential for
improving imaging performance by incorporating plasmonic nanoparticles (e.g.,
gold nanoshells) will be assessed.