* 1135733
* Dimensions: Coexistence, Herbivore Host Choice, and Plant-Herbivore Evolution in the Recently Radiated and Speciose Neotropical Tree Genus, Inga
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,020,685.00

Tropical forests are extremely diverse and the origin of such high diversity is
a central question in biology. This project will explore how the interactions
between plants and the insects that consume plants (herbivores) may contribute
to this high diversity. Plants have evolved a battery of defenses to protect
their leaves from insects, and insects are continually evolving counter-
adaptations. Although it is hypothesized that the rate of defense evolution is
extremely fast, how this evolutionary process proceeds is still poorly
understood. The research addresses how herbivores drive the evolution of plant
defenses, how plant defenses influence which species of plants herbivores
consume and how plant-herbivore interactions might influence plant community
composition and diversity in the tropics, the most species-rich forests in the
world. It will focus on the taxonomic, genetic and functional diversity of trees
in the genus Inga (Leguminosae) and its insect herbivores at five sites in
Central and South America. Inga is one of the most speciose (more than 300
species) and among the most locally diverse and abundant Neotropical trees. This
interdisciplinary study will measure plant defenses, including chemical toxins,
physical defenses and the attraction of protective ants to sugar-bearing
nectaries on the leaves. DNA sequencing of herbivores and Inga will allow
quantification of the diversity of species, will test whether more closely
related Inga species have more similar defenses, and will determine whether
herbivores choose hosts based on the similarity of their defenses. It is
hypothesized that if plant species differ in their defenses, they will be
attacked by different herbivore species, and thus can coexist as neighbors,
leading to high local diversity typical of tropical forests. Thus this project
will shed light on the origin and maintenance of biological diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing loss of biodiversity is a critical issue for
science and society. The research will be communicated to different audiences in
order to enhance their appreciation of nature and science. The team will create
a theater of biodiversity for school children and families in Utah, conduct Tom
Sawyer style Saturday science days for children from poor communities near the
Brazil and Peru field stations, give presentations on tropical diversity for
tourists, and develop the use of Inga in agroforestry in Peru. The integrative
project will also create an open, accessible website to share data and other
project results, and to facilitate related research by other scientists.