* 1136662
* Dimensions:   Collaborative Research: Diversity and Symbiosis: Examining the Taxonomic, Genetic, and Functional Diversity of Amphibian Skin Microbiota
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kevin Minbiole, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2015
* USD 261,972.00

In adult humans, symbiotic microbes outnumber human cells ten to one. The
composition of these microbial communities can influence whether individuals are
lean or obese and the likelihood that pathogens are able to successfully
establish themselves in the body. Amphibians also possess a diverse symbiotic
microbiota, and these bacterial symbionts may limit infection by pathogens, such
as the fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) that has decimated many
natural amphibian populations. This research will examine links between three
critical diversity components of the symbiotic microbial communities that reside
on amphibian skin: taxonomic diversity (number and relative abundance of
species), genetic diversity (which genes are turned on), and functional
diversity (disease resistance). Using focused field surveys and manipulative
experiments, three objectives will be addressed: (1) establish the range of
taxonomic, genetic, and functional diversity within the microbial community on
five species of host amphibians in Panama, (2) examine how the presence of a
pathogen (Bd) impacts diversity components, and (3) examine the relationship
between microbial diversity and resistance to disease. As all animals host
symbiotic microbes, these results will have broad applicability to other
systems, including humans. In addition, new statistical methods for these
complex datasets will be developed, which will rapidly expand the ability to
integrate these diversity components in a wide array of systems.

Undergraduate students will be trained in research. In addition, in Panama, a
partnership with the Panama Amphibian Rescue and Conservation Project (PARC)
will be established. A PARC intern will be supported to work with school groups
to stress the importance of conservation, beneficial microbes and biodiversity.
The partnership with PARC will extend to working with them on novel probiotic
solutions, based on antifungal skin bacteria, that will allow successful
reintroductions of threatened frogs, thereby helping to restore biodiversity to
the Neotropics.