* 1136142
* Origins, Carriers, and Implications of Mass-Independent Fractionation of Sulfur Isotopes (S-MIF)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Boswell Wing, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,200.00

Lionel (Bill) Poirier of Texas Tech University and Boswell Wing of McGill
University are supported by an award from the Chemistry Special Projects program
and the Geobiology and Low-Temperature Geochemistry program to conduct the
"Joint NASA-NSF Workshop: Origins, Carriers and Implications of Mass-Independent
Fractionation of Sulfur Isotopes". The workshop will be held at the Hotel Monaco
in Alexandria, VA on June 12-14 2011, with roughly 25-30 participants including
geochemists, chemical physicists, both theoretical and experimental, and
atmospheric modelers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is expected to lay the
basis for research that will help us understand the important atmospheric
transformations that laid the basis for the emergence of life on our planet.
Long-lasting collaborations and strategic alliances may naturally arise among
the workshop participants themselves, who represent a diverse range of
universities, national and international laboratories, and nationalities, as
well as scientific disciplines, but the findings of this workshop will be
disseminated very broadly. In choosing the potential participants, due
consideration has also been paid to achieving a balance of gender, age, and
ethnicity. To foster domestic graduate student training and postdoctoral
mentorship, a number of participants from this group of next-generation
researchers will also be encouraged to attend the workshop. A workshop of the
highly interdisciplinary type proposed here should be especially beneficial for
these newer members of the scientific research community.