* 1136258
* How to Dive Deeper and Longer: Air Sac and Lung Volumes of  Penguins
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Paul Ponganis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/2014
* USD 32,284.00

The principal investigator will obtain direct lung and air sac volume for three
species of penguin (Emperor, Adelie, and King), using state of the art medical
technology (MRI, CT-scan) available at the UCSD Keck Center. These data are
critical to understanding penguin dive physiology because: (1) The respiratory
oxygen store is estimated to be a significant fraction of the total oxygen body
store in these species, and (2) the ratio of air sac to lung volume is a
potential mechanism for the prevention of pulmonary barotrauma (lung squeeze).
Direct measurements are needed to evaluate and interpret data obtained using
indirect techniques (based on simulated dives in pressure chambers or on
buoyancy-swim speed calculations during dives at sea). The data will allow the
investigators to test the hypothesis that mass-specific lung volumes are smaller
in deeper diving penguins, and that the resulting ratio of air sac to lung air
capillary volume will be sufficient to allow for 60-fold compression of air in
Emperor penguins without risk of 'lung squeeze'. Adelie and King penguins are
already available for participation in the study. The P.I. seeks support to
export Emperor penguin chicks from Cape Washington, to be raised at Sea World,
to round out the species comparisons. Broader impacts include creation of
educational exhibits at Sea World Parks; establishment of a research and
conservation fund for penguins; and student training in medical techniques.