* 1136122
* Promoting Undergraduate Licensure in Science Education (PULSE)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Doris Kimbrough, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,199,996.00

The PULSE (Promoting Undergraduate Licensure in Science Education) Program
recruits undergraduate science majors with academic talent and financial need
and prepares them in an exemplary manner to pursue a secondary science teaching
career in settings that have the greatest need for excellent teachers: high-
needs local school districts. PULSE supports the preparation, licensure,
placement, and successful induction of twenty-five secondary science teachers
who are committed to serving in high-needs settings. PULSE Noyce Scholars are
eligible to receive awards for up to two years in the amount of $12,000/year.
Recruitment targets the highest performing STEM students at the University of
Colorado at Denver (UCD). Special efforts are made to recruit from
underrepresented populations in STEM education, which include Asian, Hispanic,
Black, and Native American students, as well as students with disabilities.
PULSE is committed to including one individual with disabilities in each cohort
of scholars and works with UCD Disability Services and Resources to achieve this
end. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PULSE Program enables students to earn a
baccalaureate degree in Biology, Chemistry, Physics or Geography/ Environmental
Sciences while simultaneously completing coursework in UCD's science education
Individually Structured Major (ISM) or by completing post-baccalaureate
licensure. PULSE provides recruitment activities, a formal program of
preparation for licensure, field-based experiences in high-needs schools, a
variety of formal and informal teaching and career exploration opportunities,
STEM or STEM education research experiences, and newly developed internships and
coursework to increase both the number of STEM majors who pursue secondary
science teaching and the quality of their preparation. To implement the program,
UCD partners with Aurora Public Schools (APS). APS serves as the site for many
field and other learning experiences provided through PULSE, as well as a site
for potential future employment of the Noyce Scholars who become certified
science teachers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Scholars are licensed through
the Urban Community Teacher Education (UCTE) program, which was redesigned by
the UCD School of Education and Human Development to reflect research and best
practice in preparing teacher candidates for teaching in urban classrooms. The
Noyce Scholars participate in program-specific learning experiences that
leverage existing institutional strengths (e.g., science and science education
research and urban teacher education) and a strong partnership with APS to
provide a multi-faceted and developmental set of experiences that span from
freshman year through the Noyce scholars' induction years. The learning
experiences of the Noyce Scholars serve as a model for integrating undergraduate
science education, science research, preparation to teach in urban settings, and
strong induction-years support for teachers. The development, deployment, and
evaluation of this model are contributing to the STEM education field's
understanding of urban science teacher preparation and support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PULSE Noyce Scholarship Program responds in a
systematic way to the national challenge of preparing secondary science teachers
who are prepared to function effectively in high-needs settings. It combines the
ISM with targeted recruiting of students in traditional STEM courses to prepare
secondary science educators drawn from groups traditionally underrepresented in
K-12 science education. The program's partnership with APS and structured
induction support offers a strong model for other teacher preparation programs
and for STEM recruitment and retention efforts in high-needs districts.