* 1136261
* Geometry and Topology in Mainstream Culture, Part II
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Jeffrey Weeks, Weeks                   Jeffrey        R
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2014
* USD 164,988.00

While researchers in Geometric Topology have made enormous progress in
understanding manifolds (multi-connected spaces), the concept is only now
entering the popular imagination. The P.I.?s current work lets ordinary people
experience 2- and 3-manifolds directly: Every day hundreds of people download
the Torus and Klein Bottle Games for their iPhones and iPads, many more download
the desktop versions, and the P.I.'s software appears in science museums and on
the Science Channel (Summer 2011). The present project's goals are to maintain
and extend the existing software, so people may use the full suite of programs
on newer devices like tablets and phones as well as on traditional desktop and
laptop computers; to write new software that will let non-mathematicians
understand 3-manifolds in the same user-friendly way that the Torus and Klein
Bottle Games currently let them understand 2-manifolds; and to develop software
to better understand planar tilings and their symmetry groups. The practical
need for efficient tiling algorithms has also led to some interesting
theoretical progress (using the hyperbolic and euclidean analogs of spin space
to manage the isometries of a surface) that will be pursued further. While
continuing to support classroom use of the Geometry Games software, the proposal
puts equal emphasis on introducing topological and geometrical ideas into the
common culture.

Humanity's understanding of geometry has advanced tremendously over the past two
centuries, and continues to advance today. Nevertheless, the popular conception
of geometry all too often remains limited to the Euclidean geometry of 2000
years ago. The present project aims to help bring the public's understanding of
geometry up to date. The main new idea -- that space itself has a "shape" -- is
not inherently difficult to understand, but it is difficult to explain in words.
Explanations with pictures work a little better, but in practice they too
usually prove inadequate. The only truly effective way for a student (or
nonspecialist adult) to fully grasp the new concept of space is for the student
to experience the new space for him or herself. The P.I.'s existing software for
this purpose has been well received (the iOS version alone gets 4000+ new users
each week). The present project will develop and extend this software to let
people better experience 3D spaces as well as 2D spaces, along with related
concepts of symmetry. The motivation for developing the public understanding of
modern geometry is two-fold: first, to prepare the next generation of scientists
and engineers, who will need strong 3D visualization skills as well as a modern
understanding of geometry and space; second, so that all people may understand
and enjoy geometry as a part of our shared culture, just as all people may enjoy
literature and music.