* 1136563
* Proposal for a Workshop on Basic Research at the Intersection of Marine/Hydrokinetic Energy and the Aquatic Environment
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 40,102.00

Marine and Hydrokinetic Energy (MKE) generates power by harnessing the natural
flow of water without using a dam, a diversionary structure, or an impoundment.
It is defined as electrical energy from waves, tides, currents and temperature
differentials in oceans, estuaries, and tidal areas, as well as from free
flowing water in rivers, lakes, streams and man-made channels. Marine and
hydrokinetic energy has the potential to provide almost 10% of the US
electricity demands. However, the potential environmental effects of marine and
hydrokinetic energy are far from well understood, both in general scientific,
engineering, socio-economic, and ecological principles and in site-specific
cases. The objective of this project is to bring together a group of experts via
a workshop to: (1) lay down the major research challenges and opportunities at
the interface of marine/hydrokinetic energy and the environment, and (2) to
create synergies among principal investigators towards forming multi-
disciplinary research groups that can better undertake end-to-end research in
energy and the environment. Invitees will include researchers in academic
institutions, National Research Laboratories, and Federal agencies to foster
across-agency interactions. Topics to be covered in the workshop span the full
spectrum of physical-engineering-economic aspects of MHK energy in oceans,
estuaries and rivers including: impact of offshore MHK farms on ocean waves and
seabed geomorphology, impact of energy devices on hydrodynamics, wave
propagation and turbulence, impact on sediment transport and stream
morphodynamics, and evaluation of ecosystem changes and trade-offs including
alteration of stream biology and bio-geochemistry as well as impacts on fish
movement and migration,. Engineering aspects of turbine size and cluster
arrangement on the above aspects will also be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
marine and hydrokinetic energy technology develops at a fast pace and as the
pressure for new licenses piles up, accelerated research in providing the
scientific understanding of harnessing the natural power of water for renewable
energy without harming the environment becomes a priority and thus this workshop
is very timely. About 25 ? 30 scientists with expertise in fluid mechanics, wave
propagation, geomorphology, sediment transport, hydrology, aquatic biology,
nutrient transport, bio-geochemistry, and ocean engineering will be invited,
seeking a balance between senior and junior investigators, gender and
underrepresented groups. Also, an expert in communicating science to the public
and science education will be invited to participate. Participants will be
invited to give a presentation of their recent work as well as their
perspectives on research opportunities and challenges that lie ahead. Students
and post-docs will be encouraged to attend and will be provided with travel
funds. In addition to presentations, focus groups will be created to discuss
specific topics and to contribute to a state-of -the-art summary on MHK energy
and the environment research status and future needs.