* 1136479
* Coupling of Gas-Phase Radical Oxidation Chemistry and Organic-Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Neil Donahue, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 661,375.00

Through laboratory experiments this project will probe complex interactions
between gas-phase organic oxidation chemistry and the evolution of organic
particulate matter (PM) making use of advanced instruments including (1) a
Chemical Ionization Mass Spectrometer (CIMS) designed for flexible, highly
sensitive measurement of critical radicals as well as gas-phase organic
compounds including organic acids and peroxides and (2) a High-Resolution Time
of Flight Aerosol Mass Spectrometer (HR-AMS) to measure the size-dependent non-
refractory fraction of particle composition between 50 and 700 nanometer size,
explicitly resolving carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen in the particles. A
portion of the experiments will be "traditional" secondary organic aerosol (SOA)
formation from such systems as alpha-pinene plus ozone, but with measurement of
peroxides and other reactive oxygen species under a range of conditions. The
larger share of experiments will be carried out with several carefully selected
sequences of organic precursors designed to model later-generation oxidation
products of traditional SOA experiments. Specifically, SOA formation will be
initiated from precursors at selected points in a 2-dimensional (2D) space
combining volatility and carbon oxidation state to test whether organic aerosol
mass yields and properties vary systematically based on location in this space.
If SOA properties do organize in this space, that will confirm the utility of
this 2D representation as a dramatic simplification for model representations of
SOA behavior, and the results of this research will provide essential parameters
required to implement this 2D framework in models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic
aerosols are significant players in both climate and particulate matter health
effects. In each case their contributions are among the most uncertain.
Consequently, the results of this project will significantly enhance
understanding of particulate matter health effects and aerosol-cloud
interactions influencing climate. This will inform evolving policy in both
areas. The research will be carried out by a postdoctoral associate, a graduate
student, and undergraduate students.