* 1136509
* Extending the Work of the International Exascale Software Project
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jack Dongarra, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 07/31/2015
* USD 99,820.00

The International Exascale Software Project (IESP) brings together
representatives from the major segments of the global high performance computing
(HPC) community -- software research and development, leading edge scientific
applications, leadership-class facilities, major system vendors and relevant
government funding agencies -- in a proactive effort to plan and create a new
software infrastructure for the extreme scale systems that represent the future
of computational science. Through a series of workshops, begun in the spring of
2009 and rotating between the US, Europe, and Asia, the IESP and its
international partners have endeavored to provide leadership in formulatung a
long-term roadmap to an exascale-capable software infrastructure, and in
initializing the corresponding research and development process necessary to
produce it. As expressed in the IESP Roadmap version 1.0 (referenced below as
"Roadmap" and published on May 30, 2010), the project's mission commits to a
vision of the future of scientific computing that involves to two key
objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding purpose of the IESP is to empower
ultrahigh resolution and data intensive science and engineering research through
the year 2020 by developing a plan for 1) a common, high quality computational
environment for peta/exascale systems and for 2) catalyzing, coordinating, and
sustaining the effort of the international open source software community to
create that environment as quickly as possible. (Roadmap, p.
3)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a series of workshops, rotating between the United
States, Europe and Asia, IESP participants from all segments of the HPC
community have begun to forge a working consensus on a plan to address the
momentous challenge of creating a software stack for extreme-scale Computational
Science, which we call an "X-stack." Building on this success, our proposed IESP
workshop for the spring of 2012 in Chicago will focus on further developing and
expanding upon the strategies identified in the plan in order to make more rapid
progress toward the project's objectives.