* 1136790
* EFRI-MIKS: Force Sensing and Remodeling by Cell-Cell Junctions in Multicellular Tissues
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* William Nelson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,315,987.00

This award by the Office of Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
supports work to study mechanical interactions between cells that govern the
basic processes of life and underpin many unresolved questions in multicellular
biology. Mechanical stresses can modulate healthy and diseased cell responses
such as renewal, growth, cell death or disease progression. Such mechanical
signals can also directly regulate signaling pathways controlling cancer
metastasis, cardiovascular remodeling or stem cell differentiation. The mechano-
response of cell-cell adhesive structures to applied force is only recently
documented, yet remains poorly characterized. Our inter-disciplinary team is
addressing critical measurement challenges in biology to understand the cellular
responses of dynamic mechanical load at cell-cell junctions. In this program, we
will: 1) Develop novel engineering devices to image cell-cell junctions in
living cells under dynamic applied load. These measurements will test models of
cell adhesion remodeling in response to external mechanical load in
multicellular tissue-like assemblies; 2) Apply innovative single-molecule assays
to characterize force-dependent protein-protein interactions that are
hypothesized to underlie cell adhesion remodeling; 3) Demonstrate a new class of
molecular force sensors that can directly visualize the transmission of
molecular-scale mechanical force through cell-cell adhesions. Our team unites an
unusual combination of expertise in cell biology, structural biology,
engineering, and biophysics and is well-positioned to tackle fundamental
questions in mechanobiology that would be impossible for each individual
research group to address alone. This work has transformative potential to
revolutionize quantitative biology and unites unique views and skills in the
growing, interdisciplinary field of mechanobiology. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the work lies in the development of basic knowledge and new models for
cell response to environmental cues. Inter- and intra-cellular responses to
mechanical stimuli offer a test bed for characterizing the thresholds and
mechanisms of environmental adaptation and remodeling of multicellular
assemblies. The outcomes, methods, devices and probes developed for our
experiments will be made available through publications, detailed
specifications, and databases for other researchers. Models and results will be
disseminated through our webpage, publications and seminars for researchers in
the field, and public seminar forums. &lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of our work
lies in enhancing knowledge of multicellular mechanical signaling, the role of
the mechanical environment in cell behaviors, fundamental mechanisms for force
and displacement sensing at the molecular scale, and the development of enhanced
protocols, probes, and technologies to study the mechanobiology of multicellular
systems in vivo and in vitro. Topics of our research will be incorporated in
modules for teaching basic Engineering and Biology courses, and the development
of undergraduate research experiences within our laboratories. The PIs actively
participate in community outreach, undergraduate research opportunities, and
research experience for teachers and under-represented student research
programs. This award allows us to expand these efforts and include more
participation to this work, as well as to showcase the work through public
outreach via booths at community fairs and public talks.