* 1136233
* GSE/RES Collaborative Research: Recruitment and Retention of Women in Geosciences: An Investigation of Individual and Environmental Factors
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Julie Sexton, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2017
* USD 431,555.00

Intellectual Merit: The goal of this proposed collaborative research project is
to contribute to the knowledge needed to increase the proportion of women
receiving undergraduate geoscience degrees from U.S. universities. The
proportion of women earning undergraduate geoscience degrees has stagnated at
approximately 40% for the past 6 years, while women constitute only about 20% of
working geoscientists. The American Geological Institute reports that the 40%
level may represent a ceiling for female geoscience graduates. Most other STEM
fields are closer than the geosciences to achieving gender parity. Little
empirical research has investigated why women major in geoscience or how women's
choices differ from men's choices to select and persist in a geoscience degree.
This study would fill this research gap by studying why some geoscience programs
are more successful than others at recruiting and retaining a high percentage of
female students. Specifically, the researchers will study the characteristics of
geoscience programs, students, and faculty at one set of universities with
above-average graduation of female geoscience students and another set of
universities with below-average graduation of female geoscience students. The
study would be guided by Social Cognitive Career Theory and will use mixed
methods research methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
will contribute to the knowledge needed to increase the proportion of women
receiving undergraduate geoscience degrees from U.S. universities. Ultimately,
this may increase the proportion of women choosing geosciences careers. Results
will be disseminated widely to geosciences departments for recruiting and
retaining female geosciences majors including recommendations for concrete steps
that may achieve gender parity.