* 1136350
* Full STEM: Creating Dedicated Science and Math Teachers for a Sustainable Future
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Martha Bruch, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Through this Capacity Building Grant the SUNY College at Oswego is developing
the means necessary to increase the number of secondary education teachers in
the STEM disciplines in high-need schools in their area. The school districts
involved include: the Central Square Central , the Altmar-Parish, the Mexico
Central, the Fulton City, the Oswego City, and the Hannibal school districts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing the following: 1) a teacher
preparation program designed so that students majoring in STEM disciplines can
receive a master's degree in teaching and complete their science major within a
five year period; 2) programs that expose STEM majors to teaching possibilities
early in their academic careers through internships and student teaching
opportunities; 3) online versions of some of these classes to expand the reach
of the program; 4) articulations with regional community colleges that allow
transfer students to complete their degree and certification within the same
timeframe as students who start as freshmen on the four year campus; 5)
partnerships with local, regional and state middle schools and high schools to
place and support Noyce teachers as they begin their professional careers; 6) a
campus infrastructure to support the grant distribution process, including
mechanisms for ensuring that scholarship recipients are meeting the expectations
of the program; and 7) a robust assessment process that ensures the goals of the
Robert Noyce Scholarship Program are being met and that provides formative
feedback for program improvement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project anticipates
recruitment of three types of students: upper division students at SUNY Oswego
presently majoring in STEM disciplines (including transfer students from
community colleges and technical colleges) to complete the undergraduate degree
in their STEM discipline and a master's degree in teaching (MST); those who have
graduated with a degree in a STEM discipline who will be recruited into a fast-
completion MST program that allows for completion of the master's degree within
a one year plus one summer timetable; and those students early in their careers
as STEM majors who will have experiences that allow them to determine whether a
career as a teacher is an appropriate choice for them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The program draws on an established
body of literature as to what makes for an effective STEM teacher. It uses the
findings from a variety of successful programs to develop a unique model that
includes a quality educational experience for future teachers, field experiences
and orientations that help students to develop innovative pedagogical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This model has the potential to
be easily used by other institutions with strong science programs and histories
of quality teacher education. The interaction between the College of Liberal
Arts and Sciences and the School of Education combines a dedication to
discipline with strong and active pedagogy.