* 1136428
* Cal Poly Pomona Noyce Master Teacher Fellows Program (CPP MTFs)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Janeen Volsey, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,438,805.00

Cal Poly Pomona, in partnership with Pomona Unified School District and Ontario
Montclair School District, is preparing 20 middle school Master teachers using a
five-year video-based analysis-of-practice professional development program
focused on improving Master teacher science and mathematics content knowledge,
pedagogical content knowledge and leadership skills. Video and computer
technologies provide an opportunity for creating a practice-based program which
includes videotaped lessons and coaching sessions with student teachers along
with accompanying lesson plans, student work, student assessments and curriculum
materials that support important Master teacher learning. The project is looking
at program effectiveness in terms of its impact on student teacher learning and
retention in the field. A quasi-experimental two-group design allows for
comparisons between student teachers whose Cooperating Teacher experienced the
CPP MTF program and student teachers who received support from Cooperating
Teachers who were not in the program. Pre-post assessments of MTFs' content
knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge (PCK), communication and facilitation
skills, pre-post videos of MTFs' classroom practice, and pre-post student
teacher content knowledge and PCK as well as a longitudinal data base provide
the necessary data to analyze factors that predict student teacher learning and
their longevity in the teaching profession. The project is using a longitudinal
database to track attrition rates of student teachers from both groups to
determine the value added to student teachers as a result of their Master
teacher's participation in the CPP MTF program. MTFs gain the knowledge and
skills necessary to become adjunct faculty in the College of Education and
Integrative Studies at Cal Poly Pomona as well as receive state certification as
a Teacher Performance Assessment Scorer. Options to become National Board
Certified, potential mentors in the Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment
(BTSA) Program within their school district or complete the requirements for
certification in an additional content field are available to the MTFs. The
Huntington Library, located in Pasadena, provides expertise and resources
critical to botany content.