* 1136399
* Elon University Noyce Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Anthony Crider, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,199,448.00

The Elon University Phase I Noyce Scholars Program, a partnership between Elon
University and the Alamance-Burlington School System, is recruiting, preparing,
and supporting during induction eighteen undergraduate Mathematics, Biology,
Chemistry, and Physics majors as they become secondary-level teachers. Their
recruitment begins with paid, education-related internships for fifty first- or
second-year students (10 students per year). Among many valuable experiences,
some participants serve as teaching assistants for Elon Academy, a college-
access program for students with financial need and/or no family history of
college. Two-year scholarships encourage talented STEM majors to complete a
Teacher Education program to earn licensure (grades 9-12) in addition to their
Bachelor's degree in Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry, or Physics. Three cohorts
(6 students per year) receive a $21,900 scholarship during both their junior and
senior years. They benefit from Elon's close relationship with the Alamance-
Burlington School System. Field experiences in high-need high schools prepare
them to fulfill their teaching obligations. Their program is supplemented with
special experiences, including documented extra mentoring by university and
secondary-school educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As Elon Noyce Scholars are
meeting their obligation to teach for four years in a high-need school district,
they are supported through their induction into the teaching profession program,
during which time they receive mentoring from secondary-school and Elon faculty,
as well as receive financial support for professional development activities and
the purchase of classroom materials. The PI and two Co-PIs administer the
program, supported by an Advisory Board that includes STEM professors and
secondary-school teachers, an Education professor, a university administrator, a
STEM educator from a local community college, and an Elon STEM student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Elon Noyce Project attempts the novel integration of
recruitment, preparation, and induction support with the intent to increase the
quantity, quality, and longevity of Elon graduates as secondary mathematics and
science teachers. It also aims to answer such research questions as: What
recruitment strategies are most effective in attracting students to STEM
education? What elements of Elon's teacher preparation programs do Scholars find
most beneficial? How do Scholars compare with other new STEM teachers? How does
the program affect teacher and K-12 student outcomes? Answers to these and other
questions are infoming the future of STEM teacher recruitment, preparation and
induction support nationally. An external Program Evaluator is measuring
effectiveness and impact.