* 1136306
* Teaching Science to English Language Learners: A New Approach to Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Edmond Mathez, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 07/31/2012
* USD 149,999.00

The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), in partnership with the national
nonprofit Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages, Inc. (TESOL,
Inc.), is developing the TESOL components of a new teacher preparation program.
In response to the New York State Board of Regents' recent decision to authorize
non-traditional entities such as informal science education institutions (ISEs)
to develop teacher preparation programs, AMNH is developing the capacity to
offer a program that would allow teacher candidates to earn a NYS Board of
Regents-awarded Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) degree with a Specialization in
Earth Science teaching for grades 7-12. The unique resources AMNH bring to bear
on the MAT program include (1) a scientific staff of more than 200, (2) a staff
of doctoral-level education and pedagogy professionals, (3) a history of
providing content-rich professional development opportunities to teachers, (4) a
track record of partnering with host public schools to improve student
achievement, (5) experience using mentors to aid students and teachers through
prior NSF investments, and (6) its vast collections, research
facilities/laboratories, and exhibition halls. The 15-month, 36-credit academic
program, offered jointly by faculty in the fully accredited AMNH Richard Gilder
Graduate School and the AMNH Education Department, includes coursework in
science content and pedagogy, summer teaching and science practicum residencies
at AMNH, and mentored school-based residencies in six high-needs host schools in
the NYC region. AMNH is working with TESOL, Inc. to infuse the following TESOL
components into its MAT program: (1) preparation of Museum and school mentors to
support teacher candidates in meeting English Language Learner (ELL) needs, (2)
baseline analysis of ELL demographics, resources, and needs in host schools, and
(3) support in ELL instruction for AMNH science and education faculty through
professional development and the creation of a TESOL resource collection. The
MAT program presents a model for how a nonprofit such as TESOL, Inc. can work
with a combined ISE and Institute of Higher Education to improve ELL achievement
across the nation. Leveraging the unique resources of a science museum for
teacher preparation, the project also contributes to education reform more
broadly by strengthening the formal role of science-based cultural institutions
in improving the teaching and learning of science.