* 1136497
* 2011 EarthScope Workshop: Opportunities for EarthScope Science in Alaska in Anticipation of USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Carl Tape, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2012
* USD 44,281.00

EarthScope science investigations depend on the three EarthScope facilities for
geophysical data acquisition: San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth, Plate
Boundary Observatory (PBO), and the transportable seismic and magnetotelluric
Observatory (USArray). PBO has an established presence in Alaska since 2004,
while USArray is anticipated starting in 2014, following its deployment on the
East Coast. Other NSF programs will be supporting related research efforts in
Alaska in the coming years, in particular the GeoPRISMS
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coming deployment of the USArray transportable
seismic array to Alaska provides a timely prompt for a broad scientific
community to discuss scientific opportunities and goals that can be addressed
using data from EarthScope facilities and other sources. These and related
topics will be discussed by a broad group of scientists at a workshop organized
in conjunction with the 2011 EarthScope National Meeting in Austin, Texas.
Convening the workshop at this time will draw a large group at a minimal cost,
compared to a stand-alone workshop. The workshop presentations and discussions
will help inform the US earth science community about new scientific
opportunities, and will provide recommendations based on scientific needs about
the future deployment and operation of EarthScope facilities in
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary products of the workshop will include a
workshop report, a of 1-page white papers solicited from all attendees, a set of
recommendations for EarthScope facilities in Alaska, and an updated website for
EarthScope Science in Alaska, with explicit connections to all related efforts,
such as GeoPRISMS and the Cascadia Initiative.