* 1136887
* Analysis of Polar Module on the 2010 General Social Survey
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Lawrence Hamilton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 04/30/2012
* USD 44,444.00

The circumpolar North has been experiencing strong climate and environmental
changes, largely originating elsewhere but with implications not only for
northern residents and ecosystems but for mid-latitude climate as well. Both
northern and southern polar regions also are experiencing an increase in
resource-directed human activities with ecosystem effects. Without public
knowledge, prospects are worse for policies that sensibly address polar issues.
The proposed research will utilize a unique information resource presented by
the 2010 General Social Survey (GSS) polar module, conducting in-depth analysis
with the potential to inform policy and with educational applications of
results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The polar module questions were carried on the
GSS in 2006 and again in 2010, before and after the International Polar Year
(IPY, 2007-2008). Earlier work by Hamilton (2008) examined the 2006 responses in
detail. The analysis proposed here will examine the 2010 polar module responses,
and investigate how they relate to respondents - general and polar science
knowledge, contact with science- or IPY-related activities, and their background
or belief characteristics including education, age, gender and ideology. Because
the same questions were first asked on the 2006 GSS, the research team will also
study changes in polar-issue responses, using the panel component of GSS to
detect individual, as well as social shifts. The approach involves thoughtful
application of diverse tabular, graphic, and modeling techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data analysis will be multifaceted and, where appropriate,
state of the art. Guiding principles are robustness and replication, aimed at
identifying nontrivial conclusions that show stability across variations in
measurement and statistical techniques. Multivariate analysis will use
probability-weighted binomial, multinomial or ordered logit modeling to test
hypotheses about the effects of education, science knowledge, information
sources, and other factors on perceptions about polar topics. Simpler
examination of tables and graphs forms a critical first step before advancing to
multivariate models. Presentations aimed at general-public audiences will
visualize key findings through graphics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The polar module
was designed around IPY, so its results will have substantially greater value in
the immediate future, while IPY evaluations are ongoing. Cross-sectional data
for the 2010 GSS were released in February 2011. These include about 700 first-
time GSS respondents who answered the polar module questions. The panel
component of 2010 GSS will be released in late spring 2011, and including about
700 additional interviews with the polar questions. Many people answered the
polar questions twice, in 2006 and 2010. Analysis of the panel component could
contribute to the ongoing assessment of IPY impacts. Results will be shared with
other projects such as those on climate change education. Timely analysis of the
2010 GSS will also inform the design of new polar-issue questions for future
national surveys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables from this analysis will
include at least one academic paper and, importantly, one publicly accessible
report. The report will be published by early summer 2012. Presentations of
results in 2012 will be made at general public or stakeholder meetings, as well
as appropriate professional forums. The GSS data are public, and the research
team will archive additional programs developed to facilitate analysis of the
polar module questions.