* 1136451
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: An Integrated Study of Energy Metabolism, Carbon Fixation, and Colonization Mechanisms in Chemosynthetic Microbial Communities at Deep-Sea Vents
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Costantino Vetriani, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2016
* USD 420,434.00

Deep-sea hydrothermal vents, first discovered in 1977, are poster child
ecosystems where microbial chemosynthesis rather than photosynthesis is the
primary source of organic carbon. Significant gaps remain in our understanding
of the underlying microbiology and biogeochemistry of these fascinating
ecosystems. Missing are the identification of specific microorganisms mediating
critical reactions in various geothermal systems, metabolic pathways used by the
microbes, rates of the catalyzed reactions, amounts of organic carbon being
produced, and the larger role of these ecosystems in global biogeochemical
cycles. To fill these gaps, the investigators will conduct a 3-year
interdisciplinary, international hypothesis-driven research program to
understand microbial processes and their quantitative importance at deep-sea
vents. Specifically, the investigators will address the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Determine key relationships between the taxonomic,
genetic and functional diversity, as well as the mechanisms of energy and carbon
transfer, in deep-sea hydrothermal vent microbial communities.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Identify the predominant metabolic pathways and thus the main energy sources
driving chemoautotrophic production in high and low temperature diffuse flow
vents.&lt;br/&gt;3. Determine energy conservation efficiency and rates of
aerobic and anaerobic chemosynthetic primary productivity in high and low
temperature diffuse flow vents.&lt;br/&gt;4. Determine gene expression patterns
in diffuse-flow vent microbial communities during attachment to substrates and
the development of biofilms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration: To address these
objectives and to characterize the complexity of microbially-catalyzed processes
at deep-sea vents at a qualitatively new level, we will pursue an integrated
approach that couples an assessment of taxonomic diversity using cultivation-
dependent and -independent approaches with methodologies that address genetic
diversity, including a) metagenomics (genetic potential and diversity of
community), b) single cell genomics (genetic potential and diversity of
uncultured single cells), c) meta-transcriptomics and -proteomics
(identification and function of active community members, realized potential of
the community). To assess function and response to the environment, these
approaches will be combined with 1) measurement of in situ rates of
chemoautotrophic production, 2) geochemical characterization of microbial
habitats, and 3) shipboard incubations under simulated in situ conditions
(hypothesis testing under controlled physicochemical conditions). Network
approaches and mathematical simulation will be used to reconstruct the metabolic
network of the natural communities. A 3-day long project meeting towards the end
of the second year will take place in Woods Hole. This Data Integration and
Synthesis meeting will allow for progress reports and presentations from each
PI, postdoc, and/or student, with the aim of synthesizing data generated to
facilitate the preparation of manuscripts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. Combining the community expression profile with diversity and metagenomic
analyses as well as process and habitat characterization will be unique to
hydrothermal vent microbiology. The approach will provide new insights into the
functioning of deep-sea vent microbial communities and the constraints
regulating the interactions between the microbes and their abiotic and biotic
environment, ultimately enabling us to put these systems into a quantitative
framework and thus a larger global context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This is an interdisciplinary and collaborative effort between 4 US and
4 foreign institutions, creating unique opportunities for networking and
fostering international collaborations. This will also benefit the involved
students (2 graduate, several undergraduate) and 2 postdoctoral associates. This
project will directly contribute to many educational and public outreach
activities of the involved PIs, including the WHOI Dive &amp; Discover program;
single cell genomics workshops and Cafe Scientifique (Bigelow); REU (WHOI,
Bigelow, CIW); COSEE and RIOS (Rutgers), and others. The proposed research fits
with the focus of a number of multidisciplinary and international initiatives,
in which PIs are active members (SCOR working group on Hydrothermal energy and
the ocean carbon cycle, http://www.scorint. org/Working_Groups/wg135.htm; Deep
Carbon Observatory at CIW, https://dco.gl.ciw.edu/; Global Biogeochemical Flux
(GBF) component of the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI),
http://www.whoi.edu/GBF-OOI/page.do?pid=41475)