* 1136469
* RAPID: Real-Time Investigations of the Tohoku and Darfield Earthquake Sequences
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Gregory Beroza, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2013
* USD 144,875.00

The earthquake sequences excited by 2010 Darfield (New Zealand) and 2011 Tohoku
(Japan) are natural experiments being conducted in two distinctive and well-
instrumented tectonic laboratories. This NSF project supports U.S. scientists to
participate in these experiments by collaborating with their Japanese and New
Zealand colleagues. The international project team is gaining new knowledge
about short-term earthquake predictability, which is a major unsolved problem of
physical science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project goal is
to improve the physical and statistical foundations for time-dependent
earthquake forecasting. New forecasting models incorporating seismic, geodetic,
and other data are being developed and evaluated using the existing
infrastructure of the Collaboratory for the Study of Earthquake Predictability.
The research is focused in two areas: (a) the retrospective calibration and
prospective testing of physics-based forecasting models, including those based
on rate/state-dependent friction, the Coulomb stress function, and observations
of slow slip events, and (b) the evaluation of hypotheses critical to
forecasting large earthquakes, including the characteristic earthquake
hypothesis, the seismic gap hypothesis, and the maximum-magnitude
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The basic research sponsored
by this project is elucidating critical scientific issues related to temporal
changes in primary and secondary seismic hazards. The results will help the
Working Group on California Earthquake Probabilities formulate an improved time-
dependent Uniform California Earthquake Rupture Forecast, and they will also aid
the U.S. Geological Survey and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration improve their procedures for time-dependent forecasting of
earthquake and tsunami hazards off the Cascadia coast.