* 1136857
* Collaborative Proposal: EDGE Program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ami Radunskaya, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2014
* USD 172,342.00

The EDGE Program is a comprehensive mentoring and training program designed to
support the academic development and research activities of women in
mathematics. The program targets women in five targeted groups from new PhD
students to senior faculty. The program includes a summer session, with
workshops in real analysis, alge-bra and other topics at a graduate level, as
well as support for collaborative research. The program also supports regional
mentoring clusters, research symposia, mentor training, an annual conference,
travel support for research collaborations, travel support for research talks
and other open-ended mentoring activities for each targeted participant group.
The EDGE program provides support for the implementation of successful
recruitment and retention practices by a broad spectrum of mathematics
departments. By ensuring success in Ph.D. programs, we can transform the
mathematics community by increasing the number of women, particularly from
minority groups who assume lea-dership roles in academia, industry, and
government.

The goals of the EDGE Program are to increase the number of women PhDs in the
ma-thematical sciences, especially those from underrepresented groups; and to
place more women in visible leadership roles in the mathematics community.
Increased diversity in the mathematics community will ultimately strengthen U.S.
competitiveness in mathe-matics and science and allow people from all
backgrounds and cultures to thrive, ad-vance, and contribute to the profession.
To accomplish these goals, the current EDGE program will continue the
development and articulation of successful and replicable paradigms for the
retention and success of women and minorities in the mathematical sciences. Our
summer program, along with sustained mentoring and research activities provide
practical manifestations of these paradigms. We support the implementation of
these practices by a broad spectrum of mathematics departments, thereby
transforming the mathematics community by in-creasing the number of women,
particularly from minority groups who assume leader-ship roles in academia,
industry, and government.