* 1136347
* A Proposal for Conducting a Strategic Planning Session of the Working Group on Rural Alaskan Self-Reliance
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* F. Stuart Chapin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 03/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

Rural Alaskan communities face pressing and daunting challenges in terms of
their sustainability, resilience, self-reliance and adaptation in the face of
climate changes, rising energy costs, and access to wild foods. This comes at a
time of increasing U.S. federal debt, declining Alaska state oil revenues, and
shrinking state and federal budgets. It therefore seems unwise for rural Alaskan
communities to expect state and federal agencies to adequately address the
challenges they face. Instead, it is more in keeping with Alaska Native
traditions to seek solutions that provide greater community self-reliance. This
project will support a strategic planning workshop to develop a framework for
community-initiated self-reliance. It is widely recognized that Alaska is facing
large directional changes to which communities must adapt. However, there is
currently no framework for designing or implementing such adaptations. The
proposed research will design such a framework and initiate steps toward its
implementation. This constitutes fundamental research on the processes of
social-ecological transformation. The proposed planning workshop provides an
opportunity to integrate local and native wisdom and knowledge with western
science (e.g., climate change projections) in the context of policies and
institutions whose suitability to support adaptation is currently
unclear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop proposed by the Working Group on
Rural Alaska Self-Reliance (WGRAS) will develop a plan for pilot community
adaptation projects whereby University of Alaska resources are partnered with
Alaskan communities to address locally identified challenges to self-reliance
and sustainability through holistic, interdisciplinary, effective, and
accessible processes. This provides a framework for adaptation planning by rural
Alaskan communities that will enable them to develop and seek ways to implement
their vision of self-reliance in a rapidly changing world. The proposed workshop
will provide the framework by which that demonstration project could be
implemented.