* 1136277
* University of Maryland Noyce Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Brian Hunt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,198,251.00

The College of Education is committed to doubling the number of STEM teacher
candidates by 2013. In support of this goal, the Noyce Scholars Program is
attracting and preparing a talented, diverse cohort of University of Maryland
(UM) students to effectively teach mathematics in high needs middle and high
schools. In an effort to increase freshman and sophomore interest in teaching
mathematics, program activities include employing freshman and sophomores as
tutors in local middle schools and providing freshman and sophomore summer
internships with a focus on mathematics teaching and learning. Noyce Scholars
receive scholarships, engage in preparation specific to high needs contexts,
and, in their final year, are being placed in year-long internships in high
needs schools with highly effective mentor teachers. Prince George's County
Public Schools serves as district partner for this effort. During employment in
their first two years, Noyce Scholars are being supported through an induction
program consisting of collaborative, online study of Noyce Scholars' records of
practice and virtual mentoring. The project is expected to produce a total of 32
teachers from both the undergraduate math degree with secondary certification
and the integrated masters programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UM Noyce Scholars
Program builds on program development work in mathematics teacher education and
it enhances the infrastructure for mathematics teacher education at UM. The
program adds to UM's ability to recruit, prepare, diversify, and support
secondary mathematics teachers in the State of Maryland and beyond.