* 1136287
* Cretan Workshop on Global Challenges and Future Opportunities for Nanomanufacturing and Nanotechnology; Crete, Greece; June 29-30, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Efstathios Meletis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2012
* USD 42,350.00

This grant provides funding to organize the Cretan Workshop on Global Challenges
and Future Opportunities for Nanomanufacturing and Nanotechnology in Crete,
Greece, on June 29-30, 2011. This workshop has two main objectives. First, to
bring together a group of US researchers and their foreign counterparts to
identify current challenges, future rewarding research directions, priorities
and approaches and to provide opportunities for collaboration on specific fields
where advances in nanomanufacturing have the promise for an immense impact,
namely: (i) Current Nano Challenges; (ii) Environmental Implications; (iii)
Energy Conversion and Storage; (iv) Biotechnology; and (v) Large Scale
Nanomanufacturing, Innovation and Commercialization. The second objective is to
provide a unique opportunity for several US graduate students to gain
international research experience, meet, discuss and present their work via
poster presentations, be exposed to an interdisciplinary environment and offer
potentially high benefits through collaboration with investigators abroad. The
preliminary list of invitees/participants includes world leaders and renowned
researchers from the US, Europe, the region (Greece) and around the world who
are in the scientific forefront of nanoscience and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop provides an excellent venue
and environment for the exchange of ideas and open discussions that allow for
the presentation of the researchers? latest work, augmenting efforts to advance
the research frontiers in this field via international collaborations. The
workshop will provide a significant opportunity for human resource development
and graduate education, training and exposure to an interdisciplinary
international environment. An elite volume will be compiled in electronic format
with all invited presentations and posters presented by the students. In
addition, participants can submit manuscripts based on their presentations for
consideration for publication to a number of reputable referred journals.
Special efforts will be devoted to make the workshop available for
underrepresented minorities, women and persons with disabilities.
Underrepresented minorities will also be pursued through interaction with the
Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers (housed on UTA campus).