* 1136431
* TEMSII: Teaching Excellence in Math and Science Scholars II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* David Kagan, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2017
* USD 749,600.00

This Noyce Phase II project continues the Noyce Phase I TEMS work currently in
progress through collaboration between California State University (CSU), Chico
and CSU Sacramento, in partnership with three area school districts. The
Northeastern California Curriculum Committee, representing all the rural schools
of Northeastern California, is also a collaborator in this project. In
conjunction with other existing programs, the Noyce Scholars program has
assisted Chico and Sacramento in efforts to increase the number of mathematics
and science teachers they produce each year as part of a larger statewide goal
of the CSU system. The project is providing scholarships to 37 preservice
students at the two campuses, including both undergraduates and post-
baccalaureate students. Noyce Scholars participate in enhanced and expanded
activities including Hands-On Lab science teaching experiences, Project M.A.T.H.
(Mathematics And Teaching on the Horizon), new courses for STEM professionals
allowing them to gain teaching credentials, expanded teacher recruitment
activities, expanded early field experiences for preservice teachers, and
collaborative efforts with existing programs such as the Alliance for Minority
Participation, the Mathematics and Science Teaching Initiative, and the
Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment induction programs. Mentoring and
advising are also greatly expanded to insure the success of Noyce scholars from
underrepresented groups. TEMS II brings the scholars and faculty from two
different environments together to learn from each other, thus increasing their
capacity to effectively teach populations of students throughout California. The
evaluation plan is designed to be a prototype evaluation model for the
California State University System, adding to the body of knowledge about
widening the pipeline to the teaching profession in mathematics and science.
Evaluation efforts lead to new information regarding the effectiveness of
recruitment strategies and the teaching success of the Noyce Scholars once they
have been teaching for one year, in comparison to new teachers who have not
participated in the Noyce program.