* 1136264
* GSE/RES: Understanding Gender Differences in Turnover and Retention in Engineering Careers
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2016
* Nadya Fouad, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2016
* USD 521,113.00

Intellectual Merit: The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee proposes two studies
to examine attrition and persistence in engineering careers. Study 1 extends
Fouad and Singh's previous work on women engineering alumnae from 30
universities to male engineering alumni from the same universities, using a web-
based survey, allowing comparison of attrition decisions between male and female
engineers with the same educational preparation. The survey will use a modified
Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT) model to assess three domains of self-
efficacy, three domains of outcome expectations, interests, workplace supports
and barriers, job attitudes (satisfaction and commitment), cognitive and
psychological withdrawal, and intentions of leaving the career or profession.
Study 2 will focus on only those men and women engineers who are currently
working in engineering to identify factors that influence their decisions to
stay in engineering, and differences in how men and women become embedded in
their careers. Job Embeddedness (JE) theory will be incorporated into the
modified SCCT model as a moderator of intentions to leave. Study 2 will also use
a web-based survey with members of professional engineering societies to examine
self efficacy, workplace supports and barriers, job attitudes (satisfaction and
commitment), job embeddedness, work engagement, cognitive and psychological
withdrawal, and intentions of leaving the career or profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results will offer important new
insights into the distinctive and specific needs of both men and women engineers
that can help organizations in designing effective career development and other
work-life programs that will aid their retention efforts. Specific
recommendations will be developed that will help engineers feel more connected
to their profession as engineers and to their organization, thereby aiding their
retention in the profession. In addition, such interventions could enhance
multiple types of efficacy, job and career satisfaction, and minimize withdrawal
cognitions, thereby potentially altering the trajectory of departure choices.
The findings may also be used to identify strategic decision points and career
stages at which interventions need to be tailored and specifically targeted to
increase retention in engineering careers. The findings will also have practical
guidance to educational institutions to help them better prepare students for
engineering careers.