* 1136706
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Lake Baikal Responses to Global Change: The Role of Genetic, Functional and Taxonomic Diversity in the Plankton
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Lev Yampolsky, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2015
* USD 196,120.00

Human-induced global change is altering most ecosystems on Earth. Highly diverse
ecosystems may be better buffered against change, maintaining key functions even
as the physical environment changes. How ecosystems respond will likely depend
on their biodiversity, but how different components of biological diversity
determine ecosystem responses to global change are still poorly understood.
Genetic diversity enhances the ability of populations to adapt to change and
functional diversity allows different species to carry out key ecosystem
functions, but little is known about how these components of diversity will
interact with each other and with the number of species present in a changing
environment. Sixty years of existing ecological data, field sampling, genetic
analyses, experiments, and mathematical models will be used by an
interdisciplinary team of researchers to examine multiple aspects of
biodiversity in the largest, oldest and most biologically diverse lake in the
world, Lake Baikal in Siberia. A major goal of the project will be to develop
the ability to predict how this ecosystem will respond to rising temperatures
and other stressors. Holding 20% of world's unfrozen fresh water, this UNESCO
World Heritage Site is recognized internationally as a globally important
freshwater resource, a treasure trove of biodiversity, and a unique natural
laboratory in which to study evolution. With an unprecedented diversity of
endemic species found nowhere else, Lake Baikal serves as a model for ecosystems
with highly unique biota and cold aquatic environments undergoing rapid
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers and students will engage in an
interdisciplinary international collaborative research program. Funding will
support graduate training in both applied and basic areas of science, including
molecular biology, ecology, and informatics. Data collected by this project will
be publicly available so that they can be used by other scientists and
educators. Project results will be communicated to environmental organizations
in Russia and the US and to a US-based film team planning an IMAX movie about
Baikal and freshwater conservation. School teachers from Michigan, Texas and
Tennessee will participate in the project and, together with researchers,
develop educational activities on aquatic ecology, biological diversity and
global change.