* 1136349
* Collaborative Proposal: Integrated Computational System for Probability Based Multi-Scale Model (PMM) of Ductile Fracture in Lightweight Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Somnath Ghosh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 124,929.00

The proposed collaborative research will build on computational models developed
by S. Ghosh (principal investigator, OSU) and R. Ghanem (co-principal
investigator, USC) to develop an integrated computational system for probability
based multi-scale model (PMM) of ductile fracture in lightweight metals and
alloys with precipitates and inclusions. It will incorporate (a) a probabilistic
multi-scale pre-processor consisting of a multi-scale image builder and
morphology based domain partitioning; (b) image based microstructural Voronoi
Cell finite element model for accurate, high resolution analysis and
probabilistic characterization of plastic deformation, strain localization and
ductile fracture; (c) stochastic homogenization based continuum plasticity-
damage model for macroscopic analysis in the multi-scale material model. The PMM
simulator will help in the development of light alloy components with optimal
material microstructures for superior failure properties such as ductility.

Major materials, automotive and aerospace industries will benefit significantly
from the comprehension and flexibility of this computational system in handling
a variety of problems for different materials, loading and geometric constructs.
Specifically the research will aid the materials industry, to leapfrog present
technology and use these lightweight alloys in new safety-critical applications.
Graduate students at two institutions will work together with researchers at
Ford Research Laboratory to develop significant interdisciplinary expertise and
industrial exposure. This interaction will provide a well-rounded education as
students train to enter the technical workforce. New courses in Stochastic
Material Modeling and Multiscale Analysis will be developed. The PI?s will
organize workshops at respective universities to introduce students and
industrial partners to this novel area of research.

