* 1136452
* Workshop on Mechanical Engineering Design Knowledge Modeling; Washington, DC; 28 August 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* David Rosen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 47,314.00

The objective of this award will be to conduct a one day workshop with the aim
of clearly defining a research program for capturing, representing, and modeling
mechanical engineering design knowledge that the research, academic, and
industrial community can pursue in both the near and long term. A formalized
language of mechanical engineering is envisioned that will allow engineers to
communicate more precisely between each other and with computers. The resulting
formalized ME design knowledge and language will be encoded and implemented in
an open-knowledge repository. Such a knowledge repository could capture the
disparate and representationally diverse ME knowledge of typical undergraduate
students providing numerous benefits, including: 1) a standard for ME knowledge;
2) a knowledge base to support engineering design; 3) a knowledge base for
computer-aided tutoring systems; and 4) a key component of the ME research and
education infrastructure. A convergence of artificial intelligence, engineering
informatics, description logics, and the semantic web with mechanical
engineering design research will be the enabling factor to realize the vision of
this research proposal and workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
work may impact US economic and national security since a ME knowledge
repository could increase the value of US graduates who have expertise beyond
just the application of engineering science principles. Successful definition of
a research agenda toward an ME knowledge repository has the potential for
transformational outcomes. Increased awareness in the research community of
high-impact research areas will increase interest in knowledge modeling.
Establishing an ME knowledge repository as part of the educational
infrastructure enables myriad methods and tools. The knowledge repository also
has the potential to be a valuable resource for ME education research, as well
as ME research in general. The networking function of the workshop will
establish new relationships between individuals spanning widely across the
field. This opportunity will provide a stimulus for new interactions and
collaboration to advance the state of the art in engineering knowledge modeling.
An understanding should emerge of the potential for this work to impact critical
areas of engineering education, engineering information modeling, knowledge
modeling, and the semantic web. The results will be disseminated through
presentations, conference papers, and journal articles.