* 1136327
* Collaboration for Excellence in Science and Math Education (CESAME)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2018
* J. Michael Wyss, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,450,000.00

The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB), Lawson State Community College
and Birmingham City Schools are partnering to greatly enhance the entry of
science and math majors into careers in secondary education in high needs
schools, introducing STEM majors to education opportunities during the formative
stage of their college programs and providing support through a program of
academic and practical experiences.

Two models being tested are: 1) a multi-year program, engaging freshmen and
providing scholarships for junior, senior and 5th year students and 2) a one-
year program for students with a STEM undergraduate degree. Each program is
enrolling 20 students as scholarship recipients, and leads to a Master degree.
Students enter the program during their freshman year as facilitators in UAB?s
Summer Science Institute for secondary students. There are 25 potential
scholarship candidates facilitating these summer programs, from which the 40
scholarship recipients are chosen. During their initial 3 years of teaching,
each Noyce graduate is assigned a Center for Community OutReach Development
(CORD) STEM specialist to insure that they receive appropriate support by UAB
faculty and mentor teachers. A Learning Resource Lab provides a place for
teachers to come for guidance and support on an as-needed basis.

The Intellectual Merit of Collaboration for Excellence in Science and Math
Education (CESAME) includes the testing of the design, resources and performance
of an innovative method to recruit promising STEM students to be transformative
secondary STEM education leaders. The Broader Impacts are in the 40 excellent
STEM teachers who plan to be teachers in underserved schools and a sustained
platform to supply highly qualified STEM teachers.