* 1136903
* EFRI-MIKS: Microfluidic-Based Screening of Multi-Kingdom Microbial Communication Molecules
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Nancy Keller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,999,998.00

This NSF award by the Office of Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
supports work to enable the creation of novel platforms and animal models
allowing new insight in complex multi-kingdom interactions. Significant progress
has been made to decode the small molecule signals developed by all organisims
to respond to, and survive in, their environments. However, evolutionary
programs have ensured that other organisms mimic or highjack these communication
signals in a defensive or symbiotic maneuver, exponentially increasing the scope
and complexity of this chemical language. The outcome of these inter-kingdom
signals can determine the behavior, survival, virulence or gene expression of
all participating organisms. Because of&lt;br/&gt;the disparity in the methods
and platforms used and available to study each organisms as well as the
complexity of the signaling involved, progress in discovering these interactions
is slow. Here we bring together expertise from four scientific disciplines;
chemistry, biomedical engineering, immunology and&lt;br/&gt;microbiology; to
present disruptive methodologies to capture this language. Focusing on fungal
secondary metabolites (SM) as the communication molecules, we demonstrate the
enabling features and high-throughput power of novel microdevices in both
hypothesis driven and discovery-based science. Our overarching goal is to create
broadly applicable microscaled methods to unlock the secret language of cell-to-
cell communication in intra- and inter-kingdom interactions. A key component of
this award is to prime students at the highschool level to the broad
implications on human health, food safety and the environment of these multi-
kingdom interactions, through the creation of an interactive, hands-on, lab
course, in which students will be sensitized to aspects of micro-engineering,
fungal genetics and molecular biology.