* 1136895
* The molecular evolution of a blind cichlid endemic to the Democratic Republic of Congo, and the democratization of DNA
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Melanie Stiassny, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 14,997.00

This international dissertation enhancement grant supports the research of Jacob
Lowenstein (Columbia University) under the supervision of Dr. Melanie Stiassy
(American Museum of Natural History/ Columbia University). The research examines
the evolutionary genetics of the blind cichlid, Lamprologus lethops found in the
Congo River and will be carried out in collaboration with researchers at the
University of Kinshasa and the Institut de Développement Rural, Université
Marien Ngouabi, Brazzaville.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cichlid fishes have fascinated
biologists for years due to their unrivaled capacity to evolve into new species.
Many scientists believe their visual acuity underlies this propensity to
speciate, and enables them to choose mates and habitats with great selectivity.
The genetics underlying the evolution of the cichlid visual and pigment system
is becoming documented in a number of cichlids. The species studied in this
research, which is also depigmented, provides many opportunities then to
understand the genetics underlying speciation through comparative
biology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Mexican Tetra is an unrelated species used as
a model for evolutionary development research. Like this Congo River cichlid,
blind individuals of this fish are depigmented and have enlarged jaws. Thus,
there is great future potential for L. lethops to lend insight into gene
functioning bridging these two important study systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will further refine genetic techniques for species
identification helping to test and build a gene library being developed for
Lower Congo River fishes. Once complete, this resource may assist non-
specialists to monitor trade or conduct epidemiology studies on previously
unknown samples.&lt;br/&gt;