* 1136339
* Workshops to Increase Engineering Participation in the Noyce Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Sheryl Sorby, Higher Education Services, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 01/31/2014
* USD 136,138.00

This project is planning and implementing several one-day workshops each year in
conjunction with national and sectional meetings of the American Society of
Engineering Education (ASEE) for the purpose of encouraging engineering faculty
to develop Noyce proposals. These workshops target engineering faculty who are
inclined to consider submitting Noyce proposals, and help them to (1) develop
sufficient understanding of working with K12 systems, and (2) learn enough about
the Noyce program so that they can write Noyce proposals effectively. The
workshops are designed in consultation with two engineering educators who have
been highly involved in K12 education. A current, local Noyce PI and a Noyce
scholar are involved in part of each workshop to provide an understanding of how
a Noyce program works. The workshop program includes discussion of advance
homework assigned to participants to learn about K12 licensure requirements from
an education faculty member on their campus, discussion of examples of
successful projects, information about the requirements for successful Noyce
proposals, and guidance in how engineering faculty can work within their own
home institutions to gain buy-in from stakeholders at their universities and to
collaborate successfully with teacher education programs. Participants spend
time during the workshops developing detailed outlines of viable Noyce
proposals. The project maintains contact with workshop participants afterward
through individual communications and a listserv of workshop participants. Each
year, workshops are held in conjunction with the two national annual conferences
sponsored by ASEE, and with 4 or 5 sectional meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking the workshops with both regional and national ASEE
meetings is designed to impact a wide geographic distribution of participants,
with the intent of improving the geographic distribution of the Noyce portfolio
and thereby reaching a broader audience of prospective K12 teachers. Because
engineers are trained to approach STEM subjects from a problem solving
orientation, the ultimate result of this effort is to increase the number of K12
STEM teachers whose pedagogical approach to teaching STEM subjects includes
relevant examples from real world applications. The workshops are expected to
reach 360 participants over three years. Formative assessment from workshop
evaluations guides improvement and the numbers of new engineering-focused Noyce
awards is being tracked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;