* 1136709
* Center for Multiscale Theory and Simulation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Gregory Voth, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,675,000.00

The Center for Multiscale Theory and Simulation led by Professor Gregory Voth
from the University of Chicago will focus on the development of a novel,
powerful, and integrated theoretical and computational capability for the
description of biomolecular processes across multiple and connected scales,
starting from the molecular scale and ending at the cellular scale. The primary
goal is to provide a new cyberinfrastructure enabled framework to help connect
molecular properties and concepts (i.e. "chemistry") with key features of
cellular biology occurring at much larger length and time scales, the latter
being assembled by the molecular building blocks from the former. This project
is therefore devoted to the development of a transformative theoretical and
computer simulation paradigm that will help to better reveal and exploit the
molecular-level chemical features that define the functional behavior of
cellular systems. The project will provide a new theoretical and computational
tool for the molecular scientist working at the interdisciplinary interface with
cellular biology, while at the same time serving to broaden the understanding of
molecular-level (chemical) processes within the biological context. This project
will also have considerable technological spin-off potential in terms of new
computer modeling tools relevant to biotechnology, such as the development of
new pharmaceutical treatments and biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Center
will broaden its impact in the scientific and educational communities through
technological innovation, education, and outreach. Innovations in computational
software will be disseminated through partnerships with pharmaceutical and
biotechnology companies to aid development of anti-cancer solutions and drug
design. The Center's educational and training activities will span chemistry and
biology through co-mentoring, new undergraduate and graduate curricula, widely-
disseminated workshops, and supplemental training at Argonne National
Laboratory. Its broadening participation plan includes pro-active recruitment to
identify future graduate students and summer research experiences for
undergraduates. Public outreach will be developed with the Chicago Council on
Science and Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Multiscale Theory
and Simulation is funded as part of the Centers for Chemical Innovation