* 1136818
* Dimensions: Pattern and Process in Marine Bacterial, Archaeal, and Protistan Biodiversity, and Effects of Human Impacts
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2017
* Fengzhu Sun, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2017
* USD 2,119,585.00

Bacteria, Archaea, and Protists dominate global elemental cycling and are
immensely diverse genetically, taxonomically, and functionally. Yet the extent
of marine microbial diversity, its patterns, and relationships among genetic,
taxonomic, and functional diversity are very poorly characterized, even though
the ocean covers 70% of the planet's surface. Among the least well known
variables is the effect of human impacts on native marine microbial systems,
although it is recognized that impacted systems are more prone to events like
harmful algal blooms. Knowledge of these relationships and impacts are necessary
to anticipate the responses of biota to global changes and feedback mechanisms
that may alter the extents, rates, and even pathways of such changes. This
project will expand upon an existing NSF-funded 10+-year monthly ocean time
series (Microbial Observatory) that has focused on a single site midway between
Los Angeles and Santa Catalina Island, to also include quarterly sampling
adjacent to the impacted LA Harbor region to the barely-impacted Catalina coast.
USC already runs facilities in LA Harbor and Catalina, with daily boats between
(no cost). Measurements include (1) Genetic diversity: high throughput DNA
sequences of "housekeeping" and functional genes. (2) Taxonomic diversity: high
throughput tag sequences of small subunit ribosomal RNA genes, flow cytometry,
automated image analysis (3) Functional Diversity: (a) Functional measurements
(carbon fixation and respiration rates, microbial growth and grazing rates, cell
size, morphology, and biomass variations), (b) distribution and expression of
particular target functional genes involved with processes central to the cycles
of carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur, (c) exploratory metatranscriptomics to explore
functionalities that were not anticipated. (4) Integrating these: Multivariate
statistical and network approaches including newly developed techniques (e.g.
Bayesian networks to examine cause-effect relationships), and high speed
computational approaches to assess the relationships among the genetic,
taxonomic, and functional aspects of biodiversity observed. The PIs will also
examine the collected data for signatures and specific effects (on organism
identity and functions) associated with human impacted harbor site vs. the
relatively pristine one. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration: The PIs will use
network and time series analysis, along with other statistical tools to
integrate "classical" microbial and oceanographic rate process measurements,
flow cytometric and microscopic characterizations of communities, along with
targeted as well as untargeted metagenomics and metatranscriptomics to relate
genetic and taxonomic diversity with specific functions (at organismal, food
web, and system levels). For example, they should be able to determine how
different variants of particular taxa (e.g. at resolution levels ranging from
what might be considered near the subspecies to genus levels) would differ in
their association with particular measured functions, functional genes, or
particular other taxa - or they might see how particular clusters of related
organisms behave similarly or differently in their associations. This project
offers an unprecedented and potentially transformative opportunity to combine
and integrate measurements of genetic, taxonomic, and functional diversity along
with direct measurements of system function in a well studied marine system that
includes a gradient from one of the world's busiest harbors to a largely
pristine ocean habitat. Far beyond just describing the distributions of
organisms and functions (itself a necessary first step), they will specifically
link spatial and temporal variations in a variety of functions with variations
in genetic and taxonomic community composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project will involve PhD training of participants as well as a
direct connection to K-12 education via the COSEE teacher-training program at
USC. Additionally, the PIs' labs routinely include undergraduate students from
underrepresented minorities, who would participate. Outreach will include an
interactive website and direct interaction with the public at the Wrigley Marine
Science Center.