* 1136416
* Talented Teachers in Training for Texas (T4)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Karen Embry Jenlink, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,449,996.00

The Talented Teachers in Training for Texas (T4) is an effort led by the Stephen
F. Austin State (SFA) University in partnership with Angelina College (AC) and
the Texas Region 7 Education Service Center. The T4 endeavor supports
development of twenty secondary teachers of mathematics, chemistry, biology, or
physics. The goals of T4 are two-fold: (1) to increase capacity of STEM teaching
majors, and (2) to study the development of a research-based model for
strengthening the STEM teacher pipeline that provides support for STEM teachers,
regardless of the remoteness of their location in rural settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T4 recruits from the robust SFA and AC freshman and
sophomore population of STEM majors to choose a select candidate pool of fifty-
five Noyce Recruits. Each Recruit participates in a two-week summer experience
involving a math/science camp and STEM classroom observation. From this group,
twenty highly-talented Recruits, committed to a career in teaching, are chosen
to become Noyce Scholars, each receiving a $15,000 annual scholarship during
his/her junior and senior years. In addition, the Noyce Scholars receive
intensive academic mentoring, beginning when they are introduced to the
possibility of a STEM teaching career as a Recruit, continuing through their
scholarship years, and culminating with three years of active classroom
induction. T4 Noyce Scholars earn a baccalaureate degree in mathematics,
biology, chemistry or physics, as well as a Teaching
Certificate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T4 Noyce Scholars are mentored by STEM faculty
collaborating with the existing SFA Noyce Master Teaching Fellows and Master
Teachers, which is explicitly tasked with supporting Scholars during their
successful passage through the STEM pipeline. Researching teacher quality and
effectiveness is a prime focus of SFA's newly established STEM Research and
Learning Center. Through this STEM Center, T4 examines project data to discover
effective recruitment strategies, to document longitudinal effects of
collaborative preparation of highly qualified STEM teachers, to explore
sustained induction experiences in a rural environment, to develop culturally
responsive pedagogy, and finally, to learn how these teachers impact student
success. Through T4, SFA's effort adds to the knowledge base on recruiting,
equipping, and retaining STEM teachers by investigating the following: the
effectiveness of the summer camp/ shadowing experiences in recruiting; the
effectiveness of interaction with STEM professionals and master teachers; the
effect of the cohort design; and the effect of peer recruitment between cohort
years. By addressing these topics, T4 contributes to the knowledge base for best
practices in recruitment, induction, and retention of STEM majors and teachers.