* 1136079
* GSE/RES: Girls' Cultural-Gendered Identities and Perceptions as Future Technologists: A Mixed-Method Research Project of Intersectionality
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Kimberly Scott, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana Britton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 650,512.00

Intellectual Merit: This three-year research study draws from a pilot project
that examined how adolescent girls in under-resourced school districts perceive
and operationalize their developing consciousness as cultural beings and future
technologists. Researchers from Arizona State University, University of
Colorado-Boulder, and the National Center for Women Information Technology
(NCWIT) will capitalize on their already existing collaborations with Phoenix
Union High School District, Roosevelt School District, Gila River Indian
Community, and Colorado MESA to structure this study in three geographic regions
(Denver, Phoenix, and Gila River Indian Community). A stratified sample of 160
adolescent (ages 13-18) girls of color (e.g. African American, Latina, Native
American), from high-needs districts will be randomly assigned in one of two
conditions (C#1: technology program with cultural relevancy and gendered-
identities emphasized; and C#2 technology program without a focus on cultural
relevancy or gendered identities). The research team will administer pre-, mid-,
and post- treatment instruments to girls in each condition and implement
ethnographic methods and participatory action research to texturize the
quantitative data. Theoretical concepts of intersectionality and standpoint
serve as the frameworks for the design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This proposal will uniquely analyze how multiple and intersecting factors inform
various dimensions of self that shape girl's perceptions as technologists. This
study also will move beyond simply identifying girls? perceptions and barriers
and explore how they are constructed, experienced, and overcome in everyday
practice. Examining these intersections and dynamics will advance understanding
about nuanced factors that encourage or impede girls of color considering
technology at earlier stages in their educational careers than commonly
researched. The findings from this study will be of interest to educational
institutions and technology industries interested in diversity recruitment and
retention programs.