* 1136705
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Integrating genetic, taxonomic, and functional diversity of tetrapods across the Americas and through extinction risk
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Catherine Graham, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2017
* USD 225,671.00

This project examines continent-wide variation in the dimensions of
biodiversity. New data are collected on the biodiversity and extinction risk of
2,500 Western Hemisphere reptile species. These data are combined with existing
data for mammals, birds, and amphibians to measure and map the diversity of all
13,000 terrestrial vertebrate species of the Americas, in three dimensions. The
first is phylo-temporal diversity, measuring the genetically distinctiveness of
the species in an area. The second is compositional diversity, measuring which
species occur in an area. And the third is trait diversity, measuring how the
species in an area vary in place, food, time, and size niches. For each of the
three dimensions, measures will reflect differences over space (dissimilarity).
All data will be published in open access databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is important scientifically in representing novel, hemisphere-wide
analysis of the genetic, taxonomic, and functional diversity of a major species
group. This will allow determination of relationships among the three dimensions
of biodiversity, and, by using the extinction risk data, prediction of impending
changes in these relationships. These analyses have important practical
implications, because the degree to which the dimensions covary will determine
the efficiency possible in their conservation. Our PI institutions comprise four
universities and the non-governmental organization NatureServe, the latter of
which provides a channel for incorporation of results into conservation
decisions, as well as providing real-world exposure to the two postdoctoral
associates, and three graduate and approximately 40 undergraduate students, who
the project will employ. The project includes significant international capacity
building through Red List workshops in Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador, and Chile,
along with research coordination meetings in Brazil. Both students and PIs will
be traveling and collaborating with in-country scientists during these meetings,
with support provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering.