* 1136412
* LABT-Learning Assistants Become Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2020
* Richard Hutto, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1,200,000.00

Through the Learning Assistants Become Teachers (LABT) project, the University
of Montana (UM) in partnership with the Missoula County Public Schools is
recruiting thirty individuals to complete baccalaureate degrees in mathematics,
chemistry, biology, geosciences, environmental science, computer science, or
physics and providing them up to three years of scholarship support to complete
their STEM degree and earn secondary teacher licensure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
LABT project is designed to transform the culture of mathematics and science
teacher preparation on the UM campus through the recruitment of STEM
undergraduates to become assistants in large section mathematics and science
courses. The students work in pairs, and with faculty and graduate assistants,
to engage other undergraduates as peer tutors and this provides them with
experiences as facilitators of learning in anticipation of becoming teachers in
middle and high school classrooms. Additionally, the Learning Assistant model is
being extended into elementary and secondary schools where the Noyce Scholars
assist master teachers in high-need school districts. Noyce Scholars are being
prepared to work in western Montana communities, which are rural and represent a
diversity of cultures, including different Native American tribes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the LABT project are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. design
a recruitment and Noyce Scholarship award strategy that increases the number of
middle/high school mathematics and science teachers entering the profession
prepared to teach effectively in rural and frontier areas;&lt;br/&gt;2. improve
the quality of education for Noyce scholars by instituting a summer field
science workshop and an academic year pedagogy seminar;&lt;br/&gt;3. improve the
quality of education for both Noyce scholars and undergraduate students in
targeted mathematics and science courses by using Noyce scholars as Learning
Assistants (peer mentors using supportive teaching strategies); and&lt;br/&gt;4.
establish a culture at UM that engages faculty, graduate students, and
undergraduates in the learning of mathematics and science content through
research-based teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LABT is characterized by
freshmen and sophomore summer internships, modifications to courses in which
Learning Assistants work, pedagogy seminars, mentoring by master teachers, and
online wiki and Moodle mentoring of Noyce Scholars as they transition into the
early years of their teaching careers. Freshmen and sophomore summer internships
in ecological field placements serve as a first exposure to teaching, while
serving as one recruitment mechanism for Noyce Scholars. Semester-long pedagogy
seminars for all Learning Assistants, graduate teaching assistants, and faculty
interested in the model or teaching within the targeted courses will be
provided. STEM courses in which Learning Assistants are used are being
customized to include greater use of small-group work and questioning techniques
that encourage mathematical and scientific discourse, including challenging
assumptions, revealing contradictions and constructing new understandings.
Participating faculty recruit Learning Assistants from the best and brightest
former students so that subsequent course offerings become transformed through
the use of these Noyce Scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the number,
quality, and diversity of mathematics and science teachers with majors in STEM
disciplines ensures a depth of content knowledge which, when linked to the skill
set developed as Learning Assistants, provides novice teachers with a solid
foundation for success in the teaching profession. As the LABT project focuses
specifically on preparing future mathematics and science teachers for success in
rural/frontier areas of the west, and high-need reservation areas, persistent
patterns in which these areas are educationally underserved are being thwarted.