* 1136269
* Collaborative Research:  A Consortium of Resonance and Rayleigh Lidars
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1,337,825.00

This is a collaborative award to advance mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT)
science by developing and operating advanced upper atmospheric lidar
instruments. The Consortium of Resonance and Rayleigh Lidars (CRRL) includes six
institutions: the University of Colorado (CU) hosts the CRRL director and the
unique CRRL Technology Center (CTC); the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign in collaboration with Embry-Riddle University operates the Andes Lidar
Observatory (ALO) in Cerro Pach√≥n, Chile; Northwest Research Associates/CoRA
Division contributes to the operation of the Arctic Lidar Observatory for Middle
Atmosphere Research (ALOMAR) in Norway; and Utah State University (USU) in
collaboration with Colorado State University (CSU) operates a sodium lidar in
Utah. The increasing number of middle and upper atmosphere observing stations
around the globe, and the recent increase in data assimilation schemes for
numerical models, indicates the growing movement in the community to address the
middle and upper atmosphere as a global system requiring studies spanning a wide
range of spatial and temporal scales. The Na resonance wind and temperature (Na
W/T) lidar technique, central to CRRL, provides fundamental measurements of the
MLT region at temporal and spatial resolutions that are difficult to achieve by
other means. As a result, Na W/T lidars have yielded fundamental advances in our
understanding of MLT dynamics, thermal structure, chemistry, and microphysics
that were previously impossible. They are, therefore, key instruments for
achieving the community goals of whole atmosphere modeling and system science
studies. The effort will consolidate and advance middle and upper atmosphere
lidar systems leading to 1) improved coordination, performance, and scientific
productivity of the three Na lidars currently at low, middle, and high
latitudes, 2) more rapid and more efficient advances in lidar technology
developments, implementations, and transfers, 3) active education and training,
guest investigator, and outreach programs to educate future researchers and
broaden the lidar user base in the upper atmosphere community, and 4) a
coordinated vision and plan for the upper atmosphere lidar community. The
expanded measurement capabilities and community involvement anticipated within
RRL, especially the ability of the Na lidars to measure both temperature and
winds day and night, and the ability of the lidars to support and enhance
correlative instrumentation at key sites, will ensure the maximum scientific
benefit and the broadest possible applications of these systems. Finally, CTC
technology developments will strive to ensure the most efficient and
comprehensive utilization of advancing technologies to the benefit of lidar
research within and outside of CRRL. The CRRL activities will have a broad
impact 1) by enhancing the infrastructure for middle and upper atmosphere
research and 2) by defining a new means of educating, managing and coordinating
correlative research activities. The greatest research benefits will occur
through comprehensive and coordinated studies that merge multiple data sets and
diverse scientific interests which will enable the greatest scientific return on
the research investment. CTC technology developments will also benefit from, and
be of benefit to, technology developments currently outside the Aeronomy
community. The anticipated CRRL education, training, and guest investigator
programs will ensure a group of talented and enthusiastic users to pursue lidar
developments and applications in the future.