* 1136007
* CPS: Medium: A Cross-Layer Approach to Taming Cyber-Physical Uncertainties in Vehicular Wireless Networking and Platoon Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Gang George Yin, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2015
* USD 900,000.00

This project proposes a cross-layer framework in which vehicular wireless
networking and platoon control interact with each other to tame cyber-physical
uncertainties. Based on the real-time capacity region of wireless networking and
the physical process of vehicle movements, platoon control selects its control
strategies and the corresponding requirements on the timeliness and throughput
of wireless data delivery to optimize control performance. Based on the
requirements from platoon control, wireless networking controls co-channel
interference and adapts to cyber-physical uncertainties to ensure the timeliness
and throughput of single-hop as well as multi-hop broadcast. For proactively
addressing the impact of vehicle mobility on wireless broadcast, wireless
networking also leverages input from platoon control on vehicle movement
prediction. In realizing the cross-layer framework, wireless scheduling ensures
agile, predictable interference control in the presence of cyber-physical
uncertainties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will lead to a
general and rigorous framework for wireless vehicular cyber-physical network
control that will enable safe, efficient, and clean transportation. The
principles and techniques for taming cyber-physical uncertainties will provide
insight into other application domains of wireless networked sensing and control
such as unmanned aerial vehicles and smart power grids. This project will also
develop integrative research and education on wireless cyber-physical systems
through multi-level, multi-component educational activities.