* 1136913
* EFRI-MIKS: Multiscale Analysis of Morphogen Gradients
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Christine Rushlow, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,000,000.00

The NSF award by the Office of Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
supports work designed to address a fundamental question of developmental
biology: what controls the spatial and temporal patterns of cell
differentiation? Rigorous studies of this problem are necessary to understand
basic principles of embryogenesis, to elucidate origins of developmental
disorders, and to provide rational guidelines for tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine. An increasing number of engineering and synthetic biology
approaches invoke the notion of morphogen gradients, defined as concentration
profiles of molecules that provide dose-dependent control of gene expression.
Experimentally, this paradigm was first established in the early Drosophila
embryo, which we use as our model system. We propose to study how morphogens
pattern the dorsoventral axis of the embryo, subdividing it into the territories
that give rise to the muscle, nerve, and skin tissues. By understanding this
system at a deeper, quantitative level, we will elucidate general principles
underlying the operation of genetic and multicellular networks that drive
development. The broader impacts of our work are in the areas of developing
high-throughput and broadly available research technology, in the establishment
of publicly available databases, and in the interdisciplinary training of
students and postdoctoral fellows. Students and postdoctoral fellows funded by
this award will receive interdisciplinary training that will prepare them for
independent careers in the rapidly emerging field of Developmental Systems
Biology. As part of training in this important field, we will develop graduate
and undergraduate courses that use early embryonic development to introduce some
the key ideas of genetic, computational, and engineering studies of tissue
development and regulation. Rigorous training provided by our studies will
contribute to the new generation of scientists and engineers working on both
molecular and systems-level aspects of multicellular signaling.