* 1136143
* GSE/RES - Incremental Mindset and Utility for Science Learning and Engagement (I-MUScLE): A Quasi-Experimental Study of the Impacts of Targeted Classroom Treatments
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jennifer Schmidt, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2016
* USD 610,362.00

Intellectual Merit: Northern Illinois University proposes a study to understand
inhibitory and promoting factors in males' and females' science outcomes, using
a general framework provided by an expectancy-value theory of achievement
motivation. Primary variables of interest include students' beliefs about the
nature of ability in science as fixed or malleable (mindset) and students'
perceptions about the utility of science to their lives (utility value). The
research is a quasi-experimental study to test the independent and combined
effects of ability beliefs and utility value for adolescent boys and girls. The
study will be conducted in 24 7th and 9th grade science classrooms in a large
diverse school district (N=600 students). Classrooms will be assigned to one of
four treatment groups, with treatments lasting 6 weeks. Using data from surveys,
observation, experience sampling techniques, and school records, the researchers
will examine the impact of these various treatments on student engagement,
achievement, and interest in science, testing for differential effects by gender
and grade level. The data will be analyzed using Hierarchical Linear Modeling to
account for the nested structure of the data, with students being nested within
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The design of the proposed
study affords an unprecedented opportunity to test for gender variation in the
independent and combined effects of perceptions of science ability and science
utility. Theory and research suggest that those perceptions play important roles
in the development of learning outcomes, but these two factors have not been
examined simultaneously with respect to science, and differential effects by
gender have not been adequately explored. The study will impact theory by
elucidating the role of specific components of the expectancy-value model in
science and by clarifying the role of these components for each gender. The
study will impact practice by identifying effective classroom approaches for
promoting science engagement, achievement, and interest among boys and girls.