* 1136536
* CSR-CSI: Software Environment for Real-Time Non-Rigid Registration using Commodity and Grid Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Nikos Chrisochoides, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2013
* USD 130,128.00

In this project we will focus on four important aspects
(requirements)&lt;br/&gt;of an end-to-end software environment for performing
multiple parallel&lt;br/&gt;non-rigid registrations over the Grid. Our
application is Image Guided&lt;br/&gt;Neurosurgery (IGNS). IGNS is an important
tool for neurosurgical&lt;br/&gt;resection which is a common therapeutic
intervention in the treatment&lt;br/&gt;of malignant brain
tumors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four requirements we will study in this project
are: (1) the&lt;br/&gt;high-performance of the parallel and distributed non-
rigid&lt;br/&gt;registration code by dynamically balancing the processors work-
load,&lt;br/&gt;(2) the ease-of-use from medical doctors (radiologist) of
a&lt;br/&gt;web-service by developing a Graphical User Interface (GUI) for
clients&lt;br/&gt;of our web-service (3) the portability of the code to run from
a&lt;br/&gt;single high-end workstation to more than one clusters of
workstations&lt;br/&gt;within the local and wide area networks available to
research&lt;br/&gt;hospitals and medical centers, (4) the reliability by
guaranteeing&lt;br/&gt;that part of the system will complete the computations
for the image&lt;br/&gt;registration and by making sure we meet the time
constrains by&lt;br/&gt;acquiring and re-configuring the system at runtime to
compensate for&lt;br/&gt;lost (faulty) computing
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end-product will be a prototype of an IGNS
web-service. However,&lt;br/&gt;this project will have broader impact to image
guided therapy because&lt;br/&gt;the same framework (but different modalities
and finite element&lt;br/&gt;approximation models) can be used in prostate
biopsy and treatment,&lt;br/&gt;and liver
cryotherapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;