* 1136911
* Workshop: Plant Science Research Summit, "Grand Challenges in Plant Science Research for the 21st Century", to be held in Chevy Chase, MD on September 22-23, 2011
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Crispin Taylor, American Society of Plant Biologists
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2014
* USD 48,800.00

Intellectual Merit: The American Society of Plant Biologists will host a Plant
Science Research Summit at the Conference Center of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute in Chevy Chase, MD on September 22-23, 2011. The summit will engage
the broad plant science research community in a process to develop a consensus
plan to invigorate and guide plant science research over the next decade. The
summit will bring together representatives of the full spectrum of plant science
research, from basic to applied, to identify critical gaps in our understanding
of plant biology that must be filled over the next 10 years or more to address
grand challenges, such as those in health, energy, food, and environmental
sustainability. The primary product of the summit will be a report suggesting a
decadal plan for investments in plant science research, describing the
contributions of plant science to addressing important scientific priorities and
vital societal challenges. The report will be made widely available, and several
dissemination activities are planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
Plant Science Research Summit will help bring together the broad plant science
community across a variety of sectors, model systems, institution types,
scientific approaches, and other dimensions. The participants in the summit will
also be drawn from the community in a way that maximizes diversity by gender,
geography, age, disability, and other characteristics. An extensive
dissemination plan is proposed that will bring the results of the project
throughout and beyond the plant science community. This will help broaden the
reach of the project and of plant science to new communities. The report will be
written with a minimum of technical language so that it can be accessible to a
wide range of readers including policymakers, funders, educators, opinion
leaders, and others. Moreover, the results of the project are expected to be
broadly applicable not only to help guide research directions over the next
decade, but to provide a framework for education about the big questions in
plant science. It is expected that professional societies and other stakeholders
will be able to develop educational materials related to the priorities
identified in the report.