* 1136477
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research:  Functional Diversity of Marine Eukaryotic Phytoplankton and Their Contributions to the C and N Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Andrew Allen, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2014
* USD 599,967.00

Intellectual Merit: Phytoplankton form the basis of the marine food web and thus
are a crucial element in the biological pump whereby CO2 from the atmosphere is
sequestered in the deep ocean. For decades, biological oceanography focused on
the eukaryotic phytoplankton. In the 1970-80s, it was discovered that the single
celled picocyanobacteria are numerically dominant in the oceans and are
responsible for a large fraction of ocean photosynthesis. What ensued was the
growth of a new paradigm in which the picocyanobacteria dominate upper ocean
biology and biogeochemistry. In fact, new data support the classic view that the
eukaryotic phytoplankton are disproportionately important in both N and C
cycling, even in regions where very small cells dominate the biomass and where
the eukaryotes themselves are in the "pico" size fraction. In oligotrophic
environments, where very small cells dominate, in situ recycling appears to
supply most of the nitrogen (i.e., ammonium) required for primary production.
New nitrate supply must balance N loss from the system, however, and new data
suggest that this nitrate is an important contribution to phytoplankton N, even
in the oceanic deserts. It is not known whether the nitrate supply in these
systems is used by the entire assemblage or predominantly by larger
phytoplankton (essentially entirely eukaryotic). On the basis of still quite
limited molecular surveys, we now recognize that the diversity of both large and
small eukaryotic phytoplankton is greater than previously thought and that the
most abundant and widespread eukaryotes are probably not in culture and may not
be closely related to known cultivated organisms. This project will investigate
the taxonomic, genetic and functional diversity of eukaryotic phytoplankton at
two North Atlantic sites (subarctic and subtropical) in two
seasons.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use diagnostic microarrays for community
analysis based on functional genes (both DNA and RNA) and next generation
sequencing (i.e., transcriptomics using 454 technology) to identify the players,
both in terms of community composition and activity, and to explore the
functional diversity of the natural assemblage. In order to identify which
groups are active in C and N assimilation and which N source is being utilized
by the different size and functional groups, both filter-separated and flow
cytometry-sorted samples will be used to 1) measure 13C primary production and
15N assimilation by incubations with isotope tracers, 2) measure the natural
stable N isotope signatures of different taxonomic groups and 3) link the
molecular diversity to the functional diversity in C and N transformations.
Using flow cytometry linked to mass spectrometry, these investigators have found
an unexpectedly strong differentiation in the form of N assimilated by
prokaryotes and eukaryotes, with eukaryotes being more
dynamic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration: This project will investigate the
taxonomic, genetic and functional diversity of eukaryotic phytoplankton and to
link this diversity and assemblage composition to the carbon and nitrogen
biogeochemistry of the surface ocean. Taxonomic diversity will be investigated
by identifying the components of the phytoplankton assemblages using molecular,
chemical and microscope methods. Genetic diversity will be explored at several
levels, including direct sequencing of clone libraries of key functional genes
and metatranscriptomic sequencing and microarray analysis of size
fractionated/sorted phytoplankton assemblages. Using natural abundance and
tracer stable isotope methods, genetic and taxonomic diversity will be linked to
functional diversity in C and N assimilation in size- fractionated and taxon-
sorted populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of
this project include contributions to fundamental research and education: 1)
continued development of new advanced methods of isotope analysis in
environmental samples, with increasing breadth of applications in
biogeochemistry and biodiversity; 2) undergraduate teaching in foundation
courses on climate and environmental science to recruit freshmen and sophomore
students into the science majors; 3) undergraduate research experience through
internships and senior thesis research (a requirement at Princeton) for upper
level undergraduates; 4) training the next generation of microbial ecology/
biogeochemistry researchers through classroom and research experience at the
graduate level. In addition, a new module will be created (The Forests and
Deserts of the Ocean) for the Princeton outreach program for middle school
teachers (QUEST, Questioning Underlies Effective Science Teaching).