* 1136516
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Phytoliths, Starch Grains, and Emerging Social Complexity at Tell Zeidan, Syria
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Alexia Smith, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 17,776.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Alexia Smith, Thomas Hart will analyze ancient plant
remains gathered during the 2009 and 2010 excavation seasons at the Ubaid period
site of Tell Zeidan, Syria. Tell Zeidan is located at the confluence of the
Balikh and Euphrates Rivers and served as a regional center in northern
Mesopotamia between 6,000 and 3,800 B. C. The site is of particular importance
because it is one of the largest settlements outside of the southern Mesopotamia
heartland. In addition, since it was continuously occupied for over 2000 years,
it provides a unique opportunity to study one of the earliest developments of
social complexity. Mr. Hart's research will use new archaeological techniques,
such as phytolith and starch grain analysis, to determine the subsistence
practices that made the transition to complex society
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of agriculture in facilitating the
rise and spread of complex societies is widely accepted. However, with a few
exceptions, very little is actually known about subsistence practices in Greater
Mesopotamia (the Tigris-Euphrates watershed) between the 6th and 4th millennia
B. C. Knowledge of food production and consumption patterns before, during, and
after the development of complex societies is essential for revealing the role,
if any, of agriculture in emerging social complexity. This project will assess
and document each stage of plant food production and consumption from the Ubaid
period at Tell Zeidan by examining microscopic plant remains (phytoliths and
starch grains) found in archaeological soils, artifact residues, human teeth
residues, and the soils associated with the stomach contents of buried
individuals. Likewise, by using microscopic remains to reconstruct production
and consumption patterns, this project will explore new ways to identify
previously invisible markers of social complexity in the archaeological record.
When combined with other types of data as part of a larger intra-site study,
such as geographic information system data, charred seeds, animal bones, and
stone tool data, this project will provide a truly holistic picture of the
subsistence practices facilitating the rise of complex
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will seek to have a broader impact
beyond the research topics presented. The intra-site study component of this
project will foster international collaboration between Syrian researchers and
researchers from other universities in Europe and within the U.S. The results
from this project will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications while the
raw data will be distributed online thereby making the data available for public
use. Public outreach efforts in The United States will include public lectures
at the Connecticut State Museum of Natural History and workshops on early
agriculture and complex society at the Nonnewaug High School, Woodbury,
Connecticut. These efforts will seek to improve public understanding of science,
archaeology, and anthropology. Finally, this research hopes to facilitate future
research in the sciences by improving the Archaeobotany Laboratory at the
University of Connecticut and by training undergraduate research assistants in
the skills necessary for scientific research and analysis in this field.