* 1136538
* A Multi-Layered  Finite Element Application and Runtime System for  Scalable High-End Computer Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Nikos Chrisochoides, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2013
* USD 111,746.00

The goal of this research involves the study of high-end parallel finite element
mesh generation software capable to deliver and sustain concurrency which will
fully utilize current Teraflop and next generation Petaflop high-end
architectures. Other than the direct impact to supercomputing this research will
have a broader impact to many (bio-) engineering applications that can benefit
from scalable field solvers and Teraflop/ Petaflop supercomputers. Such software
can also provide challenging and realistic benchmarks which can help to
understand the behavior of end-to-end dynamic applications on multi-layered
architectures, and thus will be invaluable for the performance evaluation
community and design of new supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected
outcome of this research is an effective and efficient implementation of
adaptive finite element mesh generation and refinement on high-end parallel
architectures. However, parallel mesh generation belongs to the broader class of
adaptive and irregular applications which are challenging and labor intensive to
develop and maintain. As a result, parallel mesh generation is one of the last
applications to be installed on parallel architectures. This research will
remedy this problem for high-end architectures by focusing on the following
objectives. Develop a runtime system for multi-layered parallel adaptive and
irregular applications that can efficiently orchestrate intra- and inter-layer
data movement and load balancing. Use the runtime system to design an
evolutionary approach for developing multi-layered parallel mesh generation
software capable of exposing concurrency from the very beginning of the
execution and sustaining up to one quadrillion concurrent work units.