* 1136435
* Science and Math Innovative Learning Environments (SMILE) for Encore Careers in Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Gresko, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,199,003.00

Rio Salado, an online community college, and member of the Maricopa County
Community College District, in partnership with the Tempe Union High School
District and the Glendale Union High School District, is establishing the
Science and Math Innovative Learning Environments (SMILE) Program for Encore
Careers in Education to support the recruitment, development, and support of
professionals holding baccalaureate degrees in mathematics, biology, chemistry,
physics or engineering in becoming secondary teachers. Noyce funds are used to
provide stipends to forty STEM professionals as they transition into teaching
careers in grades 7-12 mathematics and/or science classrooms in high-needs
school districts in Arizona. Through the proposed hybrid format of the SMILE
program, which incorporates online courses with onsite practicum and student
teaching, the number and quality of mathematics and science teachers available
to high-needs school districts in Arizona is being increased.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SMILE program is based on Rio Salado College's Post-
Baccalaureate Teacher Preparation Program, a one-year program designed to
develop and certify new teachers who have a four-year degree in a non-education
field. Online courses incorporate Arizona's teacher certification requirements
in curriculum that offers the knowledge and essential skills participants need
to become highly effective teachers. Onsite practicum and student teaching
experiences provide opportunities to observe master teachers in the classroom
and practice teaching in a monitored and mentored environment. This combination
of approaches provides STEM professionals flexibility in completing courses and
allows the program to recruit SMILE Scholars statewide. Under the SMILE program,
courses in methods and curriculum development are enhanced to incorporate
mathematics and science content based on state standards. Master Teacher
Seminars, designed specifically for the SMILE program, provide insight into
methods, content, and resources useful in mathematics and science classrooms.
SMILE Scholars receive additional development and support throughout the
preparation program and while completing the required teaching commitment. SMILE
Scholars are supported through professional development opportunities which
integrate teaching materials, online resources, and training programs developed
by three local NSF-funded centers that provide resources for STEM education. The
program also incorporates post-graduation mentoring to improve the quality and
retention of SMILE Scholars in the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated
course enhancements, archived Master Teacher Seminars, and professional
development opportunities created through the SMILE program become part of Rio
Salado College's teacher preparation program and therefore are useful to future
candidates. The SMILE program offers its Scholars opportunities to receive
training and experience with online teaching, thus building capacity within the
teacher education program and within the workforce to meet the recent call for
online high schools in each Arizona school district. In particular, the SMILE
program's emphasis on mathematics and science teachers promotes the development
of specific content and practicum experiences in this online teaching track to
address the challenges of teaching STEM content online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to recruiting, developing, and supporting forty STEM professionals to
become highly qualified mathematics and science teachers, the SMILE Scholars
program provides an opportunity to identify factors that affect recruitment of
STEM professionals into the teaching profession; identify program activities
that are particularly helpful in producing competent, confident teachers; and
identify conditions that promote retention of effective mathematics and science
teachers in teaching careers. The SMILE dissemination plan specifically targets
community colleges and alternative certification programs that have
traditionally been underutilized in preparing mathematics and science teachers.