* 1136332
* Phase-I: Internships and Scholarships to Promote Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge in Teacher Education at SUNY College at Brockport's Science Education Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Peter Veronesi, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,200,000.00

The State University of New York at Brockport is developing and implementing
resources and methodologies to improve technological pedagogical content
knowledge in teacher education. The project is using resources and computational
mathematics, science, and technology (C-MST) courses, developed under previous
grants, to improve teacher education. It emphasizes the recently developed
conceptual framework, technological pedagogical content knowledge that has now
put both science educators and computational scientists on the same path to
utilize an interdisciplinary approach to STEM and teacher education. Strong
content knowledge (via a STEM degree), extensive field experience (150 hours),
student teaching, dual certification (science and special education),
computational pedagogy courses, monetary support in the form of internships and
scholarships, and a capstone summer institute construct a set of coherent
strategies to attract, prepare, and retain a new cadre of 40 secondary school
science teachers. The project is informed by a formative evaluation to enable
frequent reviews and mid-course corrections and is disseminating its findings
and resources through articles, conference papers and the project's website. The
curriculum framework and learning modules are shared with national digital
library collections contributing to teacher education nationwide.