* 1136530
* RAPID: Identification of Genes Associated with Resistance to Epizootic Disease in a Marine Invertebrate
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Susan Ford, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael Lesser
* 03/31/2013
* USD 51,285.00

Funding was requested to identify MSX disease resistance genes in oysters to
better understand the genetic mechanisms of host defense, which are poorly known
in marine invertebrates. These genes or markers are valuable for studying host-
pathogen interactions and predicting host population response. The team will
collect and analyze pre-epizootic samples and establish a baseline population
genetics signature of a natural population that is potentially about to undergo
a heavy selective mortality by MSX. They will also collect samples as the
epizootic progresses and after mortality has occurred to validate markers for
MSX-resistance and document genetic changes caused by MSX
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team has previously worked at this location
through a NSF Ecology of Infectious Disease award and has already identified a
set of genes/markers that are associated with resistance to MSX and/or Dermo.
Because MSX and Dermo occurred together, they could not separate MSX from Dermo
resistance. This MSX outbreak in Maine, where Dermo is negligible, provides a
rare opportunity to do so and observe the timeline of a genetic response of the
host population and possibly rapid development of
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This request was made through a Rapid Response
Research Grant (RAPID) rather than through a regular proposal because a new
outbreak of MSX disease, caused by water-borne protozoan parasite Haplosporidium
nelsoni, is being observed in eastern oysters in Maine. The prevalence has
reached 96%, and heavy mortalities are expected soon when water temperature
increases this spring and summer. The study must be undertaken without delay in
order to understand the genetic mechanisms of oyster defense to MSX disease and
observe the timeline of genetic response and development of resistance of the
host population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of this proposal include
participation of one graduate student. The study will take advantage of the new
outbreak of MSX disease being observed in eastern oysters in Maine to understand
the response of oyster populations to MSX disease. The results will be useful
for understanding the consequences of future similar outbreaks.