* 1136951
* New Transition Metal Catalysts for Transfer Dehydrogenation Reactions with Oxygen: Efficient Alkene Synthesis from Alkanes
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Thomas Lyons, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Thomas Lyons of the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr.
Lyons will develop new transition metal-containing catalysts for transfer
dehydrogenation of alkanes, using molecular oxygen as a hydrogen acceptor. He
will collaborate with scientists at Eastman Chemical to develop the methodology
in a process-chemistry environment. For his plan for broadening participation,
the PI will work with colleagues at the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center
and LearnNC to develop high-school curriculum materials that illustrate the role
of catalysts in chemistry. Many of the students served in this project will come
from economically disadvantaged communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like
that of Dr. Lyons is aimed at developing better routes for the synthesis of pure
chemical compounds. These chemicals are ultimately used in consumer products as
well as in pharmaceuticals. The particular methods that Dr. Lyon is developing
are "green" in that they use environmentally benign reagents (oxygen) and
produce relatively benign waste (water). In addition, the processes developed
should use significantly less energy than current high-temperature methods used
in industry today. The hope is to develop more sustainable ways to produce the
chemical compounds that modern society depends upon. The efforts at broadening
participation being pursued by Dr. Lyon are aimed at giving economically
disadvantaged students in North Carolina (and beyond) exposure to real-world
examples of important chemical phenomena with the goal of increasing the
participation of talented students from these groups in the technological
workforce.