* 1136248
* GSE/RES: Impact of Single-Sex Public Educational Environments on Mathematics and Science Classroom Environment, Student Academic Performance, and Student Self-Concept
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* William Bridges, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2015
* USD 524,667.00

Intellectual Merit: Clemson University will investigate the classroom
environment of Single-Sex Public Education (SSPE) mathematics and science
classes in middle grades and the impact of these classes on students' academic
achievement and academic self-concept. The central hypothesis is that SSPE
settings increase girls' academic self-concept, but the teacher is a larger
influence than whether the class is SSPE or coeducational (COED) on academic
rigor and discourse in the classroom. There are three specific aims for the
proposed research: (1) Analyze and compare the academic rigor and classroom
discourse of SSPE and COED classes, (2) Analyze and compare academic performance
of SSPE students and COED students in middle grades mathematics and science, and
(3) Analyze and compare academic self-concept of SSPE and COED students in
middle grades mathematics and science. The project will analyze videoed lesson
sessions of SSPE and COED mathematics and science middle grades classes for
academic rigor and for classroom discourse; analyze student performance on the
state-mandated annual standardized assessment, the Palmetto Assessment of State
Standards (PASS) exam in mathematics and science; and assess student identities
and attitudes about mathematics and science through a survey
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: An improved understanding of
SSPE mathematics and science middle grades classrooms and their relationship to
academic achievement and academic self-concept will inform key stakeholders as
they make decisions about student participation in SSPE settings. The principles
of diversity and broadening opportunities for and participation of
underrepresented groups are central to the proposed research. Each aspect of the
research, from the objectives to the specific aims to the research plan to the
expected outcomes, revolves around the relationship of girls to mathematics and
science teaching and learning. The proposed research also enhances networks and
partnerships by fostering collaborations with several K-12 school districts and
schools across the state of South Carolina that are participating in single-sex
mathematics and science classrooms in the middle grades. Dissemination of the
research will include national presentations and publications, as well as
sharing the findings with participating schools and districts at local faculty
meetings and professional development in-service meetings.