* 1136073
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: CyberMech, a Novel Run-Time Substrate for Cyber-Mechanical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Christopher Gill, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 945,987.00

CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: CyberMech, a novel run-time substrate for
cyber-mechanical systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growing demands on our civil
infrastructure have heightened the need for smart structural components and
systems whose behavior and performance can be controlled under a variety of
loading scenarios such as high winds and earthquakes. However, due to the sheer
size, scale and cost of most civil engineering structures, design and testing of
such smart structures needs to be conducted using a hybrid cyber-physical
approach where the infrastructure system in question, for example a bridge, is
studied by coupling a small number of physical components with a numerical model
of the rest of the structure. Undoubtedly, the success of such a hybrid
approach, especially for dynamic real-time applications, hinges on effective
integration of the cyber and physical components of the system. This project
provides the essential building blocks and a computational integration platform
to enable real-time hybrid testing of civil engineering
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design and development of physical components,
multi-level numerical models, and real-time control algorithms will be conducted
at Purdue University. Washington University will provide an adaptive,
configurable concurrency platform and communication mechanisms that meet the
strict scheduling constraints of real-time cyber-physical systems. The two
institutions will collaboratively design a prototype system and conduct
extensive testing to validate the integration of the various components and
evaluate system performance. Specifications, software, benchmarks, and data
developed during the course of this project will be made freely available to the
cyber-physical research community. In addition to directly advancing the state-
of-the-art in real-time hybrid testing, this research will also impact the areas
of avionics, automotive design, smart grids for distributed power transmission
and similar applications in other domains.