* 1136212
* University of Rochester Noyce Scholars Program - Phase II: Preparing Highly-Qualified Mathematics and Science Teachers for High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* April Luehmann, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 749,994.00

The University of Rochester Noyce Scholars Program - Phase II: Preparing Highly-
Qualified Mathematics and Science Teachers for High-Need Schools builds upon and
expands the Phase I Noyce Scholarship grant of the University of Rochester (UR),
which prepared thirty highly qualified mathematics and science teachers for high
need schools. As in Phase I, the project is the result of a partnership of UR
faculty from the Warner School of Education and STEM departments within the
College of Arts, Sciences and Engineering, and the Rochester City School
District--an urban district with the highest poverty in New York State, low
state test scores, and a shortage of qualified STEM teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase II will prepare an additional twenty-seven secondary
STEM teachers over a period of three years, starting in 2012.
Scholarship/stipend participants will be recruited from UR undergraduates
majoring in STEM disciplines and recent STEM graduates, as well as
undergraduates in twenty-nine regional higher education institutions and career
changers from local technology companies, all of whom have degrees in a STEM
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each Phase II UR Noyce scholar will receive a
$20,000 award which, combined with tuition waivers from the UR Warner School of
Education and other sources, will fully cover tuition costs for their 15-month
graduate teacher preparation program. The project also includes a longitudinal
evaluation of both Phase I and II scholars, designed to measure the
effectiveness of the program and contribute to understanding of what it takes to
attract, prepare and retain effective STEM teachers in high needs schools, with
special attention to identifying the challenges encountered by reform-minded
novice STEM teachers and strategies that can support them in coping with these
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment will be expanded through targeted
initiatives for engineering students and graduates, as well as new internship
opportunities for STEM undergraduates in the Horizons National summer program
and the Rochester Museum and Science Center (RMSC). The UR teacher preparation
program will be strengthened by utilizing Noyce Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs)
for student teaching placements and as program mentors, as well as by offering
new options for interested Noyce scholars to deepen their preparation in urban
education and/or teaching students with disabilities. Post-graduation activities
will be expanded to include networking and mentoring by Noyce MTFs,
opportunities for summer teaching in informal settings such as RMSC and Horizons
National summer programs, and attending professional development offered by
Noyce MTFs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance, apply and
disseminate knowledge about innovative strategies for the recruitment,
preparation, induction and retention of highly-qualified STEM teachers for high
needs schools--including engaging in teaching experiences in informal settings,
alternative mentoring formats, and support in using standards-based curricula.
The project will increase the number of effective mathematics and science
teachers in high-need schools, which in turn will increase learning
opportunities and achievement for students from underrepresented groups. Through
Phase II dissemination mechanisms, including a website, scholarly publications,
and conference papers, the knowledge gained about effective strategies to
attract, prepare and retain STEM teachers, as well as concrete ways to
strengthen STEM teacher preparation programs will be broadcast to others seeking
to strengthen the STEM education workforce nationwide.