* 1136414
* A Community of Problem Solvers: Teachers Leading Problem-Based Learning in Southern Illinois
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2019
* Lingguo Bu, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Carson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 3,250,000.00

Southern Illinois University Carbondale (SIUC), in partnership with Shawnee
Community College (SCC), Boys and Girls Club of Carbondale, and over 12 high-
need school districts in the region, is mentoring and preparing 20 Master
Teaching Fellows (MTFs) to transform science and math teaching in the partner
schools. Through courses, leadership activities, research experiences and
involvement with training pre- and in-service science teachers, MTFs are
establishing a sustainable community of problem-solvers. MTFs are mentored by
SIUC and SCC STEM faculty and educators in a synergistic endeavor to strengthen
inquiry-based science experiences for teachers and students. As the principal
agents for educational reform, MTFs are acquiring a deep grounding in science
and mathematics content, inquiry-based learning methods, instructional
interventions, and Action Research skills. They are developing leadership skills
in designing and implementing professional development activities for their
fellow in-service teachers in the region and for pre-service teachers. SCC is a
key link in this partnership as most students at SCC attended the partner school
districts and transferred to SIUC to complete their undergraduate degrees.
Collaborating with researchers and IGERT fellows, MTFs conduct scientific
research at the Cache River Natural Area and develop Problem-Based Learning
(PBL) exercises and materials for a Resource Center housed at SCC. A virtual
community is also being established using a course management system to
disseminate resources and promote team communication. This community-based
approach leads to inquiry-based instruction, especially problem-based learning,
in the middle grades and improved student performance in science and mathematics
at this critical juncture in education. MTFs conduct mentored authentic
research, which they then translate to PBL exercises for their classrooms and
the Boys and Girls Club of Carbondale, and disseminate to other teachers. IGERT
Fellows mentor the MTFs and guide them in implementation of classroom
activities. Additional pre- and in-service teachers are engaging in similar
projects with their students or through a summer research experience. The focus
on a widely studied and attractive natural area is designed to draw teachers,
students and their families into "backyard" or community science projects.
Additional professional development components of the program for MTFs include
enriching science, leadership and science pedagogy courses, workshops and
lectures in existing courses that MTFs will assist SCC and SIUC faculty in
teaching, induction of novice teachers, development of a PBL Resource Center,
shared maintenance of the web site, and National Board Certification to
transform teacher leadership in their schools.