* 1136580
* Dimensions IRCN: A Research Coordination Network for Biodiversity of Ciliates
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* John Clamp, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2017
* USD 554,267.00

Ciliates are a major group of unicellular, eukaryotic organisms (protists) that
play important roles in nearly all ecosystems and serve as model organisms for
basic research in genetics and cell function. Approximately 7500 species are
known, but three times that many may be undiscovered, especially in poorly
explored places like tropical forests or the deep ocean. Better knowledge of the
biodiversity of ciliates would translate into more effective management of
ecosystems or new model organisms for biomedical research, but achieving this
has been slower and more difficult than has been the case for multicellular
organisms. Modern studies of biodiversity often use DNA from preserved specimens
but there is no such archive for ciliates. Also, sequencing most genes has been
more challenging for ciliates than for animals or plants. Lastly, researchers
who study biodiversity of ciliates are scattered thinly and unevenly across the
world, and many are younger investigators who have little money for traveling to
meetings or other laboratories to build collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
International Research Coordination Network for Biodiversity of Ciliates (IRCN-
BC) will be an international collaboration that will lower barriers to research
on ciliate biodiversity, generate new collaborations, establish procedures for
archiving material, and, most significantly, stimulate research that will unite
the taxonomic, genetic, and functional dimensions of biodiversity. The IRCN-BC
will accomplish these goals by sponsoring workshops and symposia to build
strategies and develop techniques, by creating archives for preserved samples of
cells and DNA, by maintaining a website to report activities, attract new
members, promote collaborations, and share data, and by funding travel for
researchers. The IRCN-BC will be a model for accelerating multidimensional
investigation of biodiversity in other protistan groups. Students at Minority
Serving Institutions (MSIs) traditionally get scant exposure to areas of biology
outside biomedicine. The IRCN-BC will create an email listserv of contacts at
MSIs to inform faculty and students about the IRCN-BC, especially connections
between biodiversity and biomedicine. Students from underrepresented minority
groups (African-American, Pacific Islander) will be targeted for inclusion in
two workshops.