* 1136253
* GSE-RES:  Gender Research on Adult-child Discussion in Informal Engineering eNvironmenTs (GRADIENT)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Monica Cardella, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Dana Britton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 524,718.00

Intellectual Merit: The Science Museum of Minnesota and Purdue University's
Institute for P-12 Engineering Research and Learning are conducting a study
within out-of-school contexts that will explore gender differences in the
development of engineering interest and understanding in children between the
ages of 4 and 11. During the study, the researchers will closely examine three
specific informal environments: a pre-school program where parents and children
can engage with engineering focused activity, a family-oriented engineering
event for elementary students and their parents, and an engineering exhibit
within a science museum. These settings, each featuring a high level of parent-
child interaction, have been intentionally chosen due to an emerging trend in
engineering education research that identifies the parent as playing a crucial
role in girls' decisions regarding engineering careers. The project will examine
the ways in which engineering practices (such as the iterative design, build,
and test cycle) impact the development of interest and understanding. The study
focuses on studying children during the critical years before middle school,
when girls have been shown to have significantly lower levels of interest in
engineering than boys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Investigating the
processes by which girls develop early interest and understanding in engineering
is essential to addressing the persistent underrepresentation of women in
engineering fields. Informal learning experiences, such as interactions in the
home, visits to museums, and other everyday encounters, represent a rich array
of settings for the development of engineering interest that have been minimally
researched. The project will share results from the study through traditional
academic channels, and also through parent and practitioner workshops for
informal science educators that disseminate useful practices and techniques for
engaging girls in engineering at a young age. In addition, the partnership
between the Science Museum of Minnesota and Purdue University creates a strong
foundation for subsequent collaborative projects focused on researching informal
engineering education. The project has the potential to significantly impact the
ways in which girls begin to cultivate a lifelong interest in engineering, which
may ultimately encourage more women to pursue engineering careers in the future.