* 1136008
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Credible Autocoding and Verification of Embedded Software (CrAVES)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2016
* Arnaud Venet, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

The CrAVES project seeks to lay down intellectual foundations for credible
autocoding of embedded systems, by which graphical control system specifications
that satisfy given open-loop and closed-loop properties are automatically
transformed into source code guaranteed to satisfy the same properties. The goal
is that the correctness of these codes can be easily and independently verified
by dedicated proof checking systems. During the autocoding process, the
properties of control system specifications are transformed into proven
assertions explicitly written in the resulting source code. Thus CrAVES aims at
transforming the extensive safety and reliability analyses conducted by control
system engineers, such as those based on Lyapunov theory, into rigorous,
embedded analyses of the corresponding software implementations. CrAVES comes as
a useful complement to current static software analysis methods, which it
leverages to develop independent verification
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computers and computer programs used to manage
documents and spreadsheets. They now also interact with physical artifacts
(airplanes, power plants, automobile brakes and robotic surgeons), to create
Cyber-Physical Systems. Software means complexity and bugs - bugs which can
cause real tragedy, far beyond the frozen screens we associate with system
crashes on our current PCs. Software autocoding is becoming the de facto
recommended practice for many safety-critical applications. CrAVES aims to
evolve this towards higher standards of quality and reduced design times and
costs. Rigorous, mathematical arguments supporting safety-critical
functionalities are the cornerstone of CrAVES. Collaborative programs involving
high-school teachers will encourage the transmission of this message to STEM
education in high-schools through university programs designed for that purpose.