* 1136218
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Functional Diversity of Microbial Trophic Guilds Defined Using Stable Isotope Ratios of Proteins
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Jennifer Macalady, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2015
* USD 179,001.00

Advancements in DNA sequencing technology have accelerated the pace of discovery
of species and gene distributions, especially for microorganisms. This
acceleration contrasts with slower progress in linking environmental genetics
and taxonomic diversity to the function, resource utilization, and ecological
niches of these organisms. This project will develop a novel application of
isotope geochemistry and apply it in the field of biochemical oceanography as a
first step toward tackling these challenges. The goal of the project is to
combine natural isotope ratio data with proteomics. Different metabolic
processes yield different ratios of the stable isotopes of carbon, nitrogen,
hydrogen, and sulfur; and by measuring these ratios on specific proteins, these
natural isotope signals can attribute biogeochemical processes (functions) to
specific microbes (taxonomic and genetic information). Because this is a novel
methodology, the project first will seek to identify the fundamental principles
of natural isotopic sorting that could result from different types of trophic
structure. This will be implemented using pure cultures and then will be tested
on a model ecosystem from a stratified lake. An example of a question to be
answered is: How does the distribution of organisms' genetic fingerprints in a
mixed microbial community scale with the community's genetic diversity? Does
higher genetic diversity predict more trophic, or feeding,
levels?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help to develop a concept of
trophic guilds and ecosystem dependence for microbes; such concepts are well
developed in macro-ecology, but remain less well understood for microbial
diversity. Ecosystem conservation is not possible without a better understanding
of what maintains microbial functional and genetic diversity. The success of
this project could lead to many further applications for understanding the
physiological and ecological roles of uncultured microbes in the environment.
The project has three principal investigators: an isotope geochemist, a
microbial physiologist, and a microbial ecologist - a team well suited to
achieve the interdisciplinary goal of linking geochemistry with microbial
diversity. The proposed activities will educate a post-doctoral investigator,
two graduate students, and several undergraduate summer students. Through
additional activities such as The Cambridge Science Festival and Science by the
Pint, the research also will be communicated to the general public.