* 1136359
* Increasing the Quality and Quantity of Mathematics Teachers for High-Need Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Robert Smith, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,199,469.00

The major goals of the Millersville University (MU) Noyce Scholars Program
include increasing the number of highly qualified secondary mathematics teachers
and providing the teachers to the high-need school districts in the region. Over
the life of the grant, the Scholars Program provides 30 scholarships for
mathematics teacher candidates in the final two years of their preparation.
Approximately 70% of the scholarship recipients are traditional undergraduates,
while 30% are being awarded to non-traditional, career-changing, Post-
Baccalaureate Certification candidates. The project is a collaborative effort
among faculty from the university's School of Science and Mathematics and School
of Education, and it includes a team of investigators who are all senior
personnel, with broad experience, representing mathematics, mathematics
education and teacher preparation programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the gap between the number of teachers annually certified at MU and
those who are pursuing teaching careers in high-need school districts. The
project is building on the previous success of the "urban summer seminar in
Philadelphia", and the "university's urban field placements in Lancaster,
Lebanon, and York School Districts of Pennsylvania" projects. Beyond increasing
the number of highly qualified mathematics teachers who go on to teach in high-
need districts, the project also enhances existing teacher training networks and
strengthens existing partnerships with high-need school districts. Candidates
are experiencing at least four distinct urban education experiences during early
field placements, an urban one-week immersion summer seminar, and student
teaching. Additionally, by participating in recruitment seminars and regular
colloquium talks, all MU STEM majors have opportunities to hear guest speakers,
including Noyce program alumni, discuss their experiences in teaching in high-
need school districts.