* 1136693
* RAPID: Establishing Radionuclide Levels in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans Originating from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Facility
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Ken Buesseler, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2012
* USD 157,626.00

The March 11, 2011 earthquake in Japan and the subsequent tsunami damaged and
disrupted cooling systems at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power facility.
Contamination of land and seas surrounding the site, as well as food supplies
and drinking water, is being reported. Small but measurable quantities of
radioactivity have been detected in the atmosphere over the US, including
aerosol samples collected at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, where
I-131 was seen to increase to detectable levels as of March 21-22, and is
continuing to increase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding through this Grant for
Rapid Response Research (RAPID), investigators at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution will establish a baseline radionuclide data set for the Atlantic and
Pacific using an east to west network of sampling stations where they have the
ability to sample regularly. The sites where the principal investigator has thus
far made contact and has arrangements for sampling assistance include: Bermuda,
WHOI, Santa Barbara Channel, Hawaii, Midway, Guam, and closer to the site in
collaboration with Japanese scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Establishing early activities after an accidental release of man-made
radionuclides is key to understanding both the magnitude of the release and
public health issues, as well as setting the stage for the use of the longer
lived radionuclides as tracers in subsequent studies by the community to
understand ocean processes. To put the total potential Fukushima Daiichi source
in perspective, all of the atmospheric weapons testing in the 1950?s and 60?s
released 36 million Curies of Cs-137, Chernobyl 1-3 million Curies, and Three
Mile Island only 10 Curies. At Fukushima, the potential source of Cs-137 in the
reactor cores is 67 million Curies and 180 million Curies in the spent fuel
ponds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Data collected during this project
will be shared with the larger community at both scientific meetings and
deposited in appropriate data bases (WHOI BCO-DMO and IAEA Global Marine
Radioactivity Database (GLOMARD)). The sampling network can be used to inform
policy makers of radioactivity levels to consider for fisheries and human
health. Collaboration with the Japanese is important to the success of this
effort for both access to data and sampling in coastal waters, and the WHOI team
will build upon existing relationships with JAMSTEC established under prior NSF
funding (VERTIGO project). They will also include other Japanese universities
and national labs that are monitoring radionuclides in air, land and oceans, as
well as share data with the broader international community. In addition to
building international relationships, the collaboration with H. Dulaiova at U.
Hawaii will serve to mentor junior faculty and students at a U.S. university.
The PI has already helped develop a web site at WHOI in response to the Japanese
crisis and had several interviews with the media (web, print, TV). Public
outreach is important as anxieties over radioactivity run high, and these
results need to be put in context of natural sources of radiation, the scales
and pathways of exposure and relative risks to society.