* 1136392
* SSTLC:   Supporting STEM Teaching and Learning through Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2021
* Stephen Schneider, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,999,735.00

The University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMA) Noyce TF/MTF project, S2TLC:
Supporting STEM Teaching and Learning through Communities, responds to the
critical need for middle and high school teachers of science and mathematics
through a collaboration among the UMA Department of Teacher Education and
Curriculum Studies (TECS), the College of Natural Sciences (CNS) and College of
Engineering (COE), local high-need middle and high schools in the Pioneer Valley
of western Massachusetts (Springfield Public Schools, Holyoke Public Schools,
Greenfield Public Schools and Mahar Regional School), and the Hitchcock Center
for the Environment, a nonprofit organization focused on the professional
development of teachers and the education of youth in the sciences. The project
is encouraging talented science and mathematics students and professionals to
pursue teaching careers and develop a long-term commitment to teaching students
in high-need secondary schools. A dynamic and interactive community of 20 Master
Teacher Fellows (MTFs) and 20 Teacher Fellows (TFs) are receiving professional
development, community support, licensure, graduate degrees/certificates and
salary supplements while they teach in high-need schools. S2TLC is providing
inservice secondary mathematics and science teachers (MTFs) with professional
development in effective inquiry-based, place-based, and culturally responsive
instructional practices and leadership and mentoring skills. In collaboration
with MTFs and partnership schools, the institution is revising and implementing
an initial licensure teacher program for secondary mathematics and science
teachers in order to better ensure their retention in the profession and
successful instruction. Virtual and face-to-face communities of practice provide
MTFs, TFs and other teachers with support for effective instruction and lessen
the traditional isolation of classroom teachers. The project is developing
mathematics and science content courses that integrate the use of cognitive
technological tools to facilitate learning. This project is creating a community
of practice that grows over time to connect a wide range of stakeholders across
districts to educate, challenge, and sustain teachers as leaders and community
members. Through a network of teachers in urban and rural schools, it is
expected to increase the understanding of how varying contexts impact the
manifestation of changes in practice, as well as student experience of these
practices.