* 1136415
* Math for America Los Angeles: Empowering Master Teachers to be Instructional and Institutional Change Agents
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2020
* David Drew, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,246,774.00

Math for America Los Angeles (MfA LA) is a non-profit organization formed by the
University of Southern California (USC), Claremont Graduate University (CGU) and
Harvey Mudd College (HMC) whose mission is to raise student achievement by
addressing issues of teacher recruitment, retention and quality in the greater
Los Angeles area. In concert with current efforts to recruit talented new
secondary mathematics teachers through the MfA LA Teacher Fellowship Program,
MfA LA is developing a cadre of 24 experienced mathematics teacher leaders.
Because of chronic shortages in qualified mathematics teachers in California and
the high cost of recruiting and training teachers due to teacher attrition, it
is critical to ensure that the most talented teachers do not leave the
profession, but instead find avenues for professional growth. MfA LA has
designed a novel, research-based program to give passionate teachers a
comprehensive package of training, resources, professional development
experiences and connections to become leaders who can enact school change and
raise student performance. A key idea of the MfA LAMaster Teaching Fellowship
Program (MTFP) is that there is no better way for teachers to develop their
leadership capacity than to directly engage them in the work of designing and
orchestrating student-centered changes in their schools and districts, with the
support of other experienced teachers and STEM educators. Pairs of teachers who
work at the same school apply to the program, and if selected, must agree to
participate in the program together for at least five years during which time
they receive a $10,000 annual stipend, receive training in mentoring, mentor
beginning teachers, participate in the three-week Park City Mathematics
Institute Secondary School Teachers Program, receive mentoring and support from
local STEM faculty and other Master Teachers through regular professional
development meetings, present their work at regional or national mathematics
education conferences, and receive training and support to become certified by
the National Board of Professional Teaching Standards. In total, this Master
Teacher Fellowship Program includes roughly 300 hours of professional
development over five years. Assuming that one teacher reaches 200 students a
year, the 24 MfA LA Master Teachers can directly reach 24,000 students over five
years of service while bringing about systemic changes in their schools and
districts to improve student performance and helping their colleagues and other
beginning teachers improve their practice.