* 1136366
* MUST STEM Fellows
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2018
* Joanne Goodell, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,199,998.00

The MUST STEM Fellows Program merges the best elements of Cleveland State
University's (CSU) existing Master's of Urban Secondary Teaching (MUST) program
with the CSUTeach model. It will support 24 Fellows, in 4 cohorts of 6 students
each, with full tuition scholarships over the 5-year period of the award,
beginning in summer 2012. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Features retained from each
program include the following: A compact 14-month program that results in a
Master's degree in education and a teaching license (MUST); Understanding urban
teaching through a STEM lens (MUST and CSUTeach); Working with highly skilled
STEM master and mentor teachers in STEM-focused urban high schools (CSUTeach);
Early field experiences (CSUTeach); Action research (MUST) and portfolio
requirements (MUST and CSUTeach); Strong collaboration between faculty in the
Colleges of Science, Engineering and Education
(CSUTeach)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is the first graduate teacher preparation
program in Ohio to utilize the UTeach model, and is poised to significantly
increase the number and quality of STEM teachers entering teaching in Ohio and
beyond. In addition, a strong component of this program is the potential of
Cleveland State to build on the prior success of the MUST program in attracting
diverse candidates to STEM high school teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project completes the transformation of Cleveland State's secondary STEM teacher
education program, aligning it to the UTeach model. A unique climate for
innovation and collaboration is being created around the transformed programs,
which is serving as a model for and catalyst of similar transformations in STEM
education across the region and state.