* 1136500
* Workshop on Effective Engagement and Collaboration of US CISE Researchers with Their Counterparts in China
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Ben Zhao, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2012
* USD 99,893.00

This project is to hold a two-day workshop in Arlington, Virginia on May 23-24,
2011. The purpose of the workshop is to exchange ideas, methods, success
stories, cautionary tales, and future directions regarding academic
collaboration between US and China institutions. The goal of the workshop is to
foster investigating new avenues to encourage and enable meaningful
collaborative research projects in computing to leverage the newly found and
expected future growth of research and education capabilities in China. The main
participants of the workshop will be US-based academic scholars. The workshop
will also invite scholars based in China, as well as officials of NSF and other
government agencies. The intellectual merit of this workshop is twofold. First,
the workshop, through exchange of experiences, participants will gain further
insightful understanding of the Chinese education structures and research
programs, and their differences from those of the US. Second, the participants
will identify research fields and methods to engage CISE researchers in China.
Ultimately, the workshop will lead to more engagement of CISE researchers in
China and improve our education and research programs at our home institutions.
The broader impacts of the workshop are reflected in the hope that more
collaborations between US-based and China-based CISE researchers will benefit
the faster advancement of CISE research and education, and benefit the academic
communities of both countries. More specifically, the broader impacts of the
workshop include potential for strong growth in the number and scale of
collaborative projects between US and Chinese researchers. The workshop will
also bring together more diverse teams to bear on critical research problems
across International borders. Finally, the increase in US-China collaborations
will serve as an effective channel for academics to share educational tools and
experiences while integrating research results into local curricula.