* 1136302
* The Chemistry and Sources of Carbon Monoxide in Present and Past Atmospheres
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* John Mak, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 753,172.00

This research effort will (1) quantify temporal variability in contributions of
major sources of CO over the past several thousand years and (2) begin to
investigate the corresponding trends in OH. The work is motivated by the need to
better understand the background chemistry of the CH4-OH-CO system in today's
atmosphere relative to the range in variability over the past. OH largely
determines both the chemical oxidation mechanisms and the lifetimes of most
reactive atmospheric species. Similarly, CO is one of the most important
reactive trace gases in the atmosphere because of its combined reactivity and
abundance. Because of the close link between CO and CH4, these studies will also
help to resolve mechanisms that drove CH4 concentration changes in the past. CO
concentration, 13CO, and C18O will be measured in air trapped in archived core
samples of firn and ice. Delt17O in CO will be measured as a proxy of large-
scale OH abundance and temporal variability. The application of delt17O to
constrain atmospheric OH has been demonstrated but a new analytical approach
with the capability to characterize low-volume air bubbles in ice cores is
required to extend the record to the past. The Principal Investigator (PI) will
construct a new analytical system to measure delt17O in CO in low-volume air
bubbled based on the system currently used to measure 13C and 18O in CO from ice
cores and an offline system designed to measure of delt17O in CO from larger
whole air samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying OH variability is critical
to understanding the overall fast photochemistry of the troposphere (NOx, CO,
CH4, VOCs, SOx, secondary aerosols, etc.) and the lifetimes of H-containing
greenhouse gases. One postdoctoral scientist and one graduate student will
participate in and be trained through this project. In addition, two
undergraduate geology majors at Stony Brook who plan to become high school
teachers will be mentored by a local high school teacher. These undergraduate
students will also mentor high school students in appropriate research topics
through the PI's group. This pilot program will be evaluated by all students and
teachers/advisors involved and, if successful, a broader program will be
implemented.