* 1136221
* CRPA: Astrophysics and Dance: Engaging Deaf Students in Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Jacob Noel-Storr, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 09/30/2015
* USD 149,973.00

The Rochester Institute of Technology's National Technical Institute for the
Deaf (NTID) and Center for Computational Relativity and Gravitation (CCRG) will
collaborate on a CRPA project designed to develop a dance-based performance to
educate deaf and hard of hearing students on astrophysics concepts. This project
seeks to address the following goals: 1) provide all audience members with
access to scientific information in an inherently engaging and stimulating
manner; 2) facilitate the acquisition of scientific knowledge in all audience
members, including deaf and hard-of-hearing individuals, with special reference
to general information and basic concepts from the fields of gravitational
physics and astrophysics; and 3) stimulate general interest in STEM fields
within all audience members. An extensive team of physicists, arts faculty,
computer scientists, performance experts, and evaluators have assembled to
translate original research on gravity-based astrophysics, including collision
events between black-holes and neutron-stars, entire galaxies, and the central
black-hole engine that powers active galactic nuclei, into novel educational
presentations. The original science to be presented was generated in part by the
scientists at the Center for Computational Relativity and Gravitation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project deliverables include live performances and a
project website with educational materials and a virtual tour of the recorded
performance. The live performances will include dance and computer generated
visualizations of space phenomena, supplemented with discussion and interactive
components to engage audiences both before and after the presentation. The
mixed-method evaluation will provide insights into how the medium of dance can
be used to engage audiences in STEM fields and increase the understanding of
STEM content areas which have had little previous investigation, but may be
highly relevant to the engagement of underserved audiences. Performances are
planned for select sites in New York, Ohio, Connecticut, Rhode Island,
Washington, DC, Pennsylvania and Maryland. It is estimated that the project will
directly impact 7,000 individuals, approximately half of whom will be deaf or
hard or hearing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deaf and hard of hearing populations are
greatly underserved in science education. This project is an effort to bridge
that gap by providing creative models for communicating to the public on
contemporary science concepts. Learning outcomes for the target audience include
increasing awareness and interest in STEM, acquisition of information and basic
concepts from the fields of gravitational physics and astrophysics, and
enhancing awareness of relationships among science and the arts. Project
activities will be disseminated through the website hosted by the Rochester
Institute of Technology, as well as social networking sites including Facebook,
Twitter, and Google+. The project will also be promoted through science
festivals and media events.