* 1136703
* Dimensions: Collaborative: The climate cascade: functional and evolutionary consequences of climatic change on species, trait, and genetic diversity in a temperate ant community
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Nathan Sanders, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2016
* USD 171,286.00

Earth's climate is rapidly changing and biodiversity is changing with it:
species evolve or disappear locally, regionally, or globally. This research
focuses on whether populations and species of forest ants are able to adapt to
climate change and avoid local extinction. Forest ants process soil, cycle
nutrients, disperse seeds of many understory plants, and respond rapidly to
changes in air temperature. Samples of common ant species will be collected from
forests throughout the eastern U.S. DNA sequencing and phylogenetics will be
used to reconstruct their evolutionary history and to reveal particular genes
that may have evolved in response to climate change. Genes will also be
sequenced from ants collected from experimental sites in Massachusetts and North
Carolina that have been continuously warmed for three years. In controlled
laboratory experiments, ants will be exposed to a range of high temperatures
predicted by climate change models, and the physiological and biochemical
responses of ants will be analyzed, which can provide clues as to the
adaptability of ants to increasing temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will help to understand how various physiological and
biochemical traits are likely to respond to climate change, potentially enabling
key species to avoid extinction. Additionally, this research program will train
undergraduates and graduate students and will provide public outreach and
education on the effects of climate change on biodiversity. Summer high school
outreach programs for both teachers and students will be enhanced, and citizen-
scientists will be engaged in documenting the effects of climate change on
biodiversity.