* 1136868
* 2011 Waterman Award
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Casey Dunn, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) is proud to announce the selection of
Brown University's Casey Dunn, an assistant professor in the Department of
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, to receive its 2011 Alan T. Waterman Award.
Dunn, an evolutionary biologist, works on the evolution, development, and
diversity of life, focusing primarily on the use of phylogenetic tools to
understand the links between genes, developmental mechanisms, form, function,
and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual Waterman award recognizes an
outstanding young researcher in any field of science or engineering supported by
NSF. Candidates may not be more than 35 years old, or seven years beyond
receiving a doctorate, and must stand out for their individual achievements. In
addition to a medal, the awardee receives a grant of $500,000 over a 3-year
period for scientific research or advanced study in their field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dunn is a brilliant evolutionary biologist, and is most
well known for his work on functional specialization in biological systems
(particularly colonial organisms) and studies of animal relationships. He has
made many unexpected and original contributions to phylogenetics and
evolutionary developmental biology, including the description of complex colony-
level development in siphonophores. His research with poorly known organisms is
made possible by integrating field and laboratory research with novel
computational tools to address classical questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dunn
has a long relationship with NSF, and an even longer history receiving awards.
He received a NSF graduate research fellowship and a doctoral dissertation
improvement grant, as well as fellowships from Pop Tech Science and Public
Leadership, and Kavli Frontiers of Science. With colleagues at Harvard,
University of Kansas, and the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, he is
part of a large grant project from NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program,
under which researchers are seeking to reconstruct, with phylogenomic tools, the
history of the animal tree of life. His first book, Practical Computing for
Biologists, was published last year.