* 1136406
* Pipeline for Excellent Rural Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2024
* Lisa Montplaisir, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,712,404.00

The goal of the Pipeline for Excellent Rural Teachers (PERT) project at North
Dakota State University (NDSU) is to extend and secure a pipeline to increase
the quality and quantity of highly-trained secondary mathematics and science
teachers in rural North Dakota. The rural nature of the state, coupled with vast
distances between urban centers, presents a major obstacle to recruiting STEM
professionals into degree programs leading to certification. College of Science
and Mathematics and College of Human Development and Education faculties have
created a one-year master's of education program (residential and online)
resulting in teacher certification. The project is recruiting 15 talented STEM
professionals as PERT Teaching Fellows. A partnership with Sitting Bull College,
one of six tribally-controlled colleges in the region, provides both science
coursework and extensive mentorship to PERT Teaching Fellows in tribal
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of PERT is the
transformative model for addressing a persistent teacher shortage in rural,
high-needs school districts. Successful elements of the program are informing
future induction programs for rural and tribal districts. The broader impacts of
PERT include its capacity to enhance the quantity and quality of secondary
science and mathematics teachers outside of North Dakota's six urban centers,
particularly in tribal communities. The transformation of STEM professionals
into Master teachers will improve student achievement throughout the state,
increasing the likelihood for successful matriculation of students into STEM
programs at the baccalaureate level.