* 1136330
* NSF/FDA SIR:  In Vitro Biological Characterization of Nanoporous Diamond Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 10/31/2014
* USD 130,000.00

1136330 Narayan

The research objective of the proposed Scholar-in-Residence program is to apply
nanofabrication technologies (e.g., microwave plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition and atomic layer deposition) and nanostructured materials (e.g.,
ultrananocrystalline diamond) to solve problems associated with biofouling and
size-selective transport of nanoscale biological molecules. As part of this
program, graduate student participants will perform in vitro biological
characterization of nanoporous diamond membranes at the FDA?s Center for Devices
and Radiological Health (CDRH) laboratories.

The information obtained in the biological characterization, materials
characterization, and functional characterization studies will serve as the
basis for a chemical property-physical property-performance database, which will
guide the development of nanoporous diamond membranes and other nanoporous
biomaterials. In this database, the relationship between in vitro cell-material
interaction, protein adsorption, and several processing parameters, including
diamond crystallinity, titanium nitride crystallinity, pore size, pore density,
and surface morphology, will be considered. The planned research is well-suited
to goals of the NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence program, because it combines an
advanced processing method at the UNC/NCSU Joint Department of Biomedical
Engineering with comprehensive biological characterization facilities at the
Food and Drug Administration.