* 1136394
* FSU Preparing Future Educators for Placement in K-12 Mathematics and Science Classrooms (PrEP) Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Erin White, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,183,058.00

Fayetteville State University's "Preparing Future Educators for Placement in
K-12 Mathematics and Science Classrooms" (PrEP) Noyce Scholarship Program
involves collaboration among the Departments of Mathematics and Computer
Science, Chemistry and Physics, Natural Sciences, the School of Education, and
the Mathematics and Science Education Center to provide scholarships to future
teachers. Candidates for these scholarships are undergraduates majoring in one
of the sciences or mathematics at FSU and professionals with science degrees who
are returning to school to become qualified as secondary school teachers of
their disciplines. To encourage undergraduates to consider this career path, the
program also provides internships for freshmen and sophomores to assist summer
teaching activities both at Fayetteville State University and at partner
community colleges. To assist new teachers in the first two years of their
induction as active teachers in high-need school districts, a program of ongoing
mentoring and continuing professional development maintains the professional
learning network developed during the scholarship training. From attracting
young students to the teaching profession, through teacher training, to support
of new mature professionals, this comprehensive program provides 66 new STEM
teachers to a region in great need of STEM educators. As a Historically Black
College or University, FSU serves large numbers of underrepresented minority
students. The Noyce Scholars among them, 66 all told, are leaders and role
models for the students they teach.