* 1136040
* Components, Run-time Substrates, and Systems: Medium: Holonic Multi-Agent Control of Intelligent Power Distribution Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Xinming Ou, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,100,000.00

Holonic Multi-Agent Control of Intelligent Power Distribution Systems
&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate a Holonic Multiagent System
Architecture capable of adaptively controlling future electrical power
distribution systems (PDS), which are expected to include a large number of
renewable power generators, energy storage devices, and advanced metering and
control devices. The project will produce a general, extensible, and secure
cyber architecture based on holonic multiagent principles to support adaptive
PDS. It will produce new analytical insights to quantify the impact of
information delay, quality and flow on the design and analysis of the PDS
architecture. Finally, it will develop a novel approach to automating PDS with
high penetration of distributed renewable resources for higher efficiency,
reliability, security, and resiliency.&lt;br/&gt;The complex nature of future
PDS will require them to adapt reactively and proactively to normal and
anomalous modes of operation. The architecture produced by this project will be
capable of optimizing performance and maintaining the system within operating
limits during normal and minor events, such as cloud cover that reduces solar
panels output. The architecture will also allow the operation of a distribution
system as an island in emergencies, such as hurricanes/earthquakes, grid
failures, or terrorist acts. &lt;br/&gt;The project will inspire future
engineers via a simulation that will allow students to inject faults, failures,
and weather events to see how an intelligent PDS will respond. These activities
will combine cyber- and physical expertise, thus creating a workforce prepared
for tomorrow?s cyber-physical system challenges. Existing university programs
will be used to involve under-represented minorities and U.S. veterans in the
project.