* 1136382
* Teach SouthCoast STEM
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Tesfay Meressi, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,867,243.00

The University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (UMass Dartmouth) and its school and
community partners are preparing 20 new science and mathematics teachers
(Teaching Fellows) and 10 Master Teaching Fellows as STEM educators for the
middle and secondary schools of Fall River, New Bedford, and Wareham, MA. The
project is preparing STEM teachers by focusing on three major program strands:
1) educators deepening their STEM content knowledge and instructional practices
through content-intensive learning experiences; 2) educators developing critical
21st century skills through the active exploration of emerging technologies in
STEM education; and 3) educators developing teacher leadership skills via a
collaborative approach, based on a proven model that utilizes peer-coaching,
mentoring, and professional learning communities. Teaching Fellows earn a Master
of Arts in Teaching-Initial licensure in 15 months, an accelerated schedule that
includes a full year of teaching residency in a high-need school. Master
Teaching Fellows earn a graduate-level 12-credit STEM Teacher Leadership
Certificate within one year, developing mentoring skills, and ushering the TFs
into the teaching profession. While participating in the program, the Teaching
Fellows are developing into master teachers, earning a professional teaching
license and a STEM Teacher Leadership Certificate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
the training and mentoring activities of the TFs and MTFs, together with the
project's in-depth data management and thorough evaluation, the project is
uncovering direct relationships between teacher preparation and student
achievement. The project is tracking the growth of content knowledge and
pedagogical skills in beginning teachers, and also tracking the development of
leadership and mentoring skills in experienced teachers. With the requirement
that both TFs and MTFs complete coursework in educational research, the
participants engage in interpreting and sharing their own research, contributing
to change in STEM classrooms. In addition, the program is contributing to the
development of a Technology/Engineering teaching license at UMass Dartmouth,
meeting an urgent regional need.