* 1136707
* Dimensions:  Integrating dimensions of Solanum biodiversity: leveraging comparative and experimental transcriptomics to understand functional responses to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Leonie Moyle, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,182,938.00

Responses to environmental variation and change can be facilitated or
constrained by the genetic basis of adaptations that mediate organism-
environment interactions. This research aims to understand and interpret the
genetics of functional adaptive biodiversity by integrating analyses at multiple
levels of functional trait variation (DNA sequence, gene expression, phenotypes)
with data on the environmental, ecological, and evolutionary history of an
entire clade of species: Solanum section Lycopersicum (the wild tomatoes). The
project focuses on two traits critical to plant-environment interactions: leaf
ecophysiology (which influences plant responses to water, light, and carbon
dioxide), and constitutive and induced defense responses (which influence the
interaction between plants and their natural predators). Both traits differ
within and among Solanum species, likely as the result of rapid adaptive change.
Using 'next generation' sequencing technologies to quantify DNA sequence and
gene expression differences among genotypes and environmental conditions, the
project has three components: 1) Comparative transcriptomics (i.e., gene
expression profiling) which will provide a evolutionary genomics framework for
understanding genetic variation in the group, and identify candidate genes for
important ecological transitions among species; 2) Experimental transcriptomics
of gene expression responses to both benign (unstressed; noninduced) and
stressed (drought-stressed; induced defense) conditions, which will identify
molecular responses to ecologically-relevant environments, and evaluate the
genetic constraints on current and future evolutionary responses critical to
organism-environment interactions; and 3) Integration of results from this study
with existing data to generate a core set of loci underpinning functional
responses to abiotic and biotic environmental variation, and to develop an
integrated understanding of natural adaptive trait variation across an entire
group of species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global environmental change is expected
to fundamentally alter patterns of biodiversity, but predicting the direction
and magnitude of this change is extremely difficult. This research aims to
understand how current biodiversity is shaped by, and reacts to, environmental
variation. The sequence and trait data uncovered will contribute to
understanding how plants are able to respond to and cope with stress imposed by
both their physical environment and by their predators. The project will also
contribute to human resources by training researchers in a broad set of skills
at the interface of experimental genetics, genomics, and bioinformatics. This
research focuses on the wild tomatoes, a diverse group of Andean species within
the economically important genus Solanum. Uncovering the genetic basis of
diversification is particularly pertinent in the Andean biological hotspot,
where the impacts of land-use and climate change threaten a cradle of
biodiversity that holds an estimated 12% of global flowering plant diversity. In
addition, by examining the wild relatives of several important crop species,
including tomato, potato, and pepper, this research has the potential to
identify valuable natural variation that confers plant tolerance to critical
environmental stresses.