* 1136534
* RAPID: Observations of Sediment Scour and Deposition in the Vicinity of Ports and Harbors from the 11 March 2011 Japan Tsunami
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Patrick Lynett, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 99,561.00

Weiss/113534/Texas A&amp;M&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnitude 9 March 11, 2011
Japanese earthquake spawned a trans-oceanic tsunami causing significant effects
throughout the Pacific. While the tsunami outside of Japan was not catastrophic,
there were localized pockets of considerable damage, particularly in ports,
harbors, and marinas. Protective barriers around ports and harbors, such as
breakwaters, do effectively reduce the effects of everyday wind waves. However,
with tsunamis, the energy is focused at the gaps in these barriers, typically
the harbor entrance channel. This focusing leads to extreme currents,
turbulence, and significant sediment transport. It is the overarching theme of
this proposal to observe, document, and understand the tsunami-driven
hydrodynamic and sedimentological effects near ports and harbors and compare the
tsunami inundation characteristics in inhabited areas throughout the
Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports an interdisciplinary, coastal
impact survey of the tsunami that focuses on Pacific islands and other selected
far field locations to reconstruct the tsunami characteristics, as well as
sediment dynamics during the event. Engineering evaluation and sedimentary
studies are jointly done in and near harbors, ports, and coastal infrastructure
to provide a comprehensive assessment of this event. In the vicinity of
infrastructure the team determines the runup, inundation distance, and flow
depth. During the engineering evaluation, the team measures scouring around
infrastructure, if accessible, and interviews eyewitnesses about the timeline of
tsunami arrival, inundation dynamics, and the hydrodynamics in ports, harbors,
and marinas as a consequence of the tsunami. Discussion with local harbormasters
and captains provides information about regions and severity of underwater scour
and deposition. In uninhabited areas or areas with minimum influence of
infrastructure on the tsunami inundation dynamics, the team determines the
tsunami damage and flood-zone characteristics and compares these finding with
data near coastal structures. The team also determines the characteristics of
generated deposits or erosion from the tsunami. For deposits they measure the
extent, thickness, grading trends, and take samples for grain-size analysis. If
the soil material permits, they dig an exploratory trench to look for deposits
from past tsunamis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combined with surveys already completed
by the PIs along the US West coast, this compilation of data and observations is
the most comprehensive for a tsunami affecting all scales of modern maritime
infrastructure from small boat marinas to large commercial
ports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary RAPID proposal will
incorporate engineering characterization of tsunami damage and the flood zone
with investigations of the tsunami deposits and erosion. The interdisciplinary
character of the survey has the potential to transform how reconnaissance
tsunami field surveys will be carried out in the future due to a more coherent
and consistent assessment of man-made and natural environments. Sedimentologic
studies will also bring a geoscientific perspective to the data that will result
in a more complete characterization of tsunami event, potentially taking the
paleo-tsunami record into account. If the skill to look back into geologic
history to estimate tsunami intensity and extreme-event recurrence from sediment
deposits existed, the implications for efficient hazard planning are tremendous.
Furthermore, with some knowledge of the capacity of a tsunami to transport and
scour sediment near coastal infrastructure, we should be able to better design
for and mitigate these damaging impacts.