* 1136510
* CAREER:  Development of "Smart" Structural Nanocomposites Based on Interfacial Coupling and Local Field Enhancement
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Zoubeida Ounaies, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2013
* USD 169,467.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research grant proposes to
provide funding to investigate the electromechanical responses in polymer
nanocomposites by exploiting the increasingly dominant role of interfaces at the
nanoscale. The proposed research will explore the role of dipolar and ionic
groups in stabilizing dispersion of nanoinclusions, dictating their orientation
and affecting their percolation network in the host polymer. Control of the
nanocomposite mesostructure will be accomplished through the presence and
concentration of dipoles, nature of nanoinclusions, and morphology of the
polymer. Further, the interaction between nanoinclusions and the polymeric
functional groups will be tuned to generate either an induced or a permanent
polarization, resulting in coupling between electrical, mechanical, optical and
thermal properties. A theoretical understanding will be developed to relate the
microstructure to structural and sensing/actuation properties by exploring the
resulting phenomenological responses in the nanocomposites. The educational
component of this CAREER plan has two main projects that link the on-going
research with student-centered curriculum and mentoring projects based on a
constructivist pedagogy. The first project involves curriculum revision and
design of an undergraduate course and a graduate course, respectively. The
second project "SMARTGirls" is a multilayered mentoring program to encourage
high school girls from underprivileged rural areas to pursue careers in science
and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central task of the grant combines
experimental techniques and theoretical approaches to gain insight on inclusion-
inclusion, inclusion-matrix, and inclusion-electric field interactions in
judiciously selected nanocomposite systems. The expected benefit is that a
fundamental understanding of interfacial interactions between nanoinclusions and
polymers would constitute a major leap toward the development of polymer
nanocomposites optimized for a functional performance. Structural materials with
multiple functionalities have broad technological impact. This research plan
aims to further the fundamental knowledge of these types of materials and
advance our understanding of nanoinclusions/polymer interaction to control self-
sensing and actuation while maintaining lightweight, strength and durability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;