* 1137224
* Colloidal Excitonic Magnetic Polarons for Spin-Based Photonics
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Jillian Dempsey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2012
* USD 90,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Jillian Dempsey of the University of
Washington as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Dempsey will
work on synthesizing and characterizing new kinds of magnetic nanoparticles with
interesting, long-lived photomagnetic effects. The nanoparticles will be
Mn(I)-doped CdSe quantum dots with various shapes and internal structures. The
resulting work will help in the development of future spintronics and spin-
photonics materials. Dr. Dempsey will collaborate with scientists at Los Alamos
National Laboratory's high magnetic field laboratory to examine barriers to
magnetization reversal and antiferromagnetic superexchange interactions of
Mn(II)-Mn(II) dimer pairs in these materials at 120 Tesla. In addition to her
research, Dr. Dempsey will develop curriculum materials in nanoscience that she
will disseminate to Seattle-area students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Dempsey is aimed at
developing new kinds of materials that have interesting or unique physical
properties. The specific kinds of materials that Dempsey is working on could be
useful in new generations of computers and electronics. The efforts at
broadening participation being pursued by Dr. Dempsey are aimed at giving a
broad population of students and the public exposure to an emerging area of the
chemical sciences.