* 1137755
* AGS-PRF: Dayside Field Aligned Currents and Energy Deposition: The Effect of Magnetospheric Structure and Ionospheric Conductivity
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Frederick Wilder, Wilder                  Frederick      D
* Fellowship Award
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 172,000.00

This project will examine intense dayside field-aligned currents(FACs) in
Earth's magnetosphere. These intense FACS occur when the interplanetary magnetic
field is strong a lies primarily in the ecliptic plane. In particular the
project will examine the occurrence of these currents when the component of the
magnetic field perpendicular to the ecliptic plane is upward (positive IMF Bz).
These FACs have been shown to be associated with extreme levels of ionospheric
Joule heating and Poynting flux, which leads to upwelling of ionospheric plasma
and anomalous thermospheric density enhancements. Maps of field-aligned current
intensity, ionospheric joule heating, and the polar cap potential pattern will
be related to the magnetospheric field-line topology as well as upstream and
magnetosheath solar wind driving conditions and plasma parameters. The following
scientific questions will be addressed: (1) how is the magnitude of these
currents affected by the magnetic topology of the magnetosphere? (2) is the
source of the current magnetic merging at the dayside magnetopause or is it due
to surface currents at the bow shock? (3) how does the conductivity of the
ionosphere (including seasonal effects) affect the magnitude of the FACs, the
Joule heating and the Poynting flux. These questions will be addressed using a
large variety of ground-based and space-based data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
questions that will be addressed in this project will provide new understanding
of important space weather effects that take place under conditions that are
generally considered to be magnetically quiet. In particular the project will
improve our understanding of the effects these strong currents have on enhancing
thermospheric upwelling, which leads to increased satellite drag. The research
will be primarily conducted by a recent PhD graduate.