* 1137516
* Targeted Infusion Project: Developing a Health Informatics Security and Privacy Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Xiaohong Yuan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 357,143.00

Health informatics is one of the nation's largest growth industries. The US
Department of Labor predicts a 49% job growth in health information and health
informatics. In response to this demand, North Carolina A&amp;T State
University's Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Developing a Health
Informatics Security and Privacy Program - establishes a Bachelor of Science in
Computer Science (BSCS) concentration in Health Informatics Security and Privacy
(HISP). This is a joint effort between the Departments of Computer Science,
Mathematics and Management. News courses on health information systems and
mathematics for health informatics, as well as a modified course in management,
are being developed. Course modules on health informatics security and privacy
will be integrated in existing computer security and information assurance
courses in the Department of Computer Science. Undergraduate and graduate
students are involved in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership among
the three disciplines can improve the collaboration among these departments to
jointly improve STEM education at North Carolina A&amp;T State University, as
well as strengthen the University's Center for Cyber Defense. This project will
produce graduates from groups underrepresented in the field to satisfy the
increasing need for health informatics and health information technology
professionals.