* 1137856
* RAPID: Disasters, Resilience, and Vulnerability of Fishing Communities in Post-Tsunami Japan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Bonnie McCay, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2012
* USD 24,948.00

Dr. Bonnie J McKay (Rutgers University) and Dr. Satsuki Takahashi (Institute of
Social Science, University of Tokyo) will undertake joint research on the
rebuilding efforts in Japanese coastal fishing towns damaged by the recent
earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear power crisis. The focus of the research will be
on how combined natural and human disasters affect community responses. Previous
research on the relationships between disasters, vulnerability, and resilience
have led in different directions, depending on whether the disasters are
understood as caused by human or natural agency. In these accounts, natural
disasters encourage communities to work together to develop better systems in
the future, while human-made problems, such as air and water pollution,
disproportionally affect vulnerable communities and limit their ability to
rebuild. Building upon and contributing to social scientific theories on
resilience, vulnerability, and nature-culture relationships, this project will
investigate the cultural and political outcomes of dual (natural and human-
caused) disasters. The research will comprise historical and ethnographic
fieldwork, including archival research, open-ended and semi-structured
interviews, and participant observation, in two Japanese fishing towns for which
the researchers have baseline data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is being
supported through NSF's Rapid Response Research (RAPID) program, which is used
for projects having severe urgency with regard to availability of or access to
data, facilities or specialized equipment, including quick-response research on
natural or anthropogenic disasters and similar unanticipated events. By
addressing the responses in coastal Japan over five months shortly after the
disaster, with follow-up research several months later, this project will be
sensitive to any changes that may occur as time passes. It will investigate
early and middle-term responses to the extraordinary disaster as a way to shed
light on the complex relationships among "natural" and "human" hazards,
resilience, and vulnerability, offering important lessons for researchers and
policymakers.