* 1137366
* Collaborative Research: Climate Change Impacts on Forest Biodiversity: Individual Risk to Subcontinental Impacts
* BIO,EF
* 02/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Sean McMahon, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2018
* USD 649,383.00

Climate change is rapidly transforming forests over much of the globe in ways
that are not anticipated by current science. Large scale forest diebacks,
apparently linked to interactions involving drought, warm winters, and other
species, are becoming alarmingly frequent. Models of biodiversity and climate
have not provided guidance on if, where or when such responses will occur.
Instead models tend to provide potential numbers of extinctions, but such
forecasts are not linked in any mechanistic way to the processes that could
cause them. Both modeling and field studies rely on aggregate measures of
species presence or absence, or their relative abundance at regional scales.
However, climate acts on individuals. Aggregating data on individual trees to
the level of a whole species hides or may even change predictions of climate
effects. This study aims to link individual scale tree processes to regional
species level responses by sampling and analyzing data about individuals across
their entire range and corresponding range in climate conditions. It will use
data from existing research sites, plus the platform of sites that form the core
of the new National Ecological Observatory Network. These data will be
collectively synthesized and used to develop computer models that can help
determine when and where predicting climate impacts on biodiversity is a
plausible goal. The models will also reveal where surprises are likely to occur
and can provide feedback to expectations of individual tree health and
vulnerability to environmental changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
provide the first forecasts of the vulnerability of forest biodiversity to
changes in climate that are directly linked to the biological processes that are
most sensitive. The goal is to provide forecasts of the distribution, growth,
reproduction and risks of mortality for tree species making up the nation's
forests. These predictions will help scientists, forest managers and policy
makers anticipate the combined risks of increasing drought and longer growing
seasons. Methods and results developed during this project will be disseminated
through workshops for training resource managers, as well as graduate students
and postdoctoral associates at a number of universities.