* 1137548
* Targeted Infusion Project Grant: Developing Game-Like Instructional Modules to Enhance Student Learning in Lower Level Core Computer Science Courses
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Elva Jones, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 296,340.00

Winston-Salem State University's (WSSU) Targeted Infusion Project entitled -
Developing Game-Like Instructional Modules to Enhance Student Learning in Lower
Level Core Computer Science Courses - will develop game-like instructional
modules to enhance student learning in lower level core Computer Science (CS)
courses, namely Computer Programming I, Computer Programming II and Data
Structures. These three gate-keeper courses are the main barrier for student
retention in the CS program at WSSU.

Recently, there has been increasing demand for programmers who can develop
applications for mobile devices generated by the emerging mobile computing
technologies. This is a great opportunity for minority computer scientists to
influence the computing industry by developing apps that are targeted to not
only the African American population, but also to the general public.

The project involves implementing three components: education, assessment and
dissemination. The education component includes developing game-like
instructional modules for lower level core CS courses. The game-like course
modules will allow students to learn difficult concepts in a gaming context. The
assessment component includes establishing an advisory board of experienced CS
faculty, education faculty and professionals from the game industry to assist in
project development and the evaluation process. The dissemination component
includes developing a website for the project and organizing a workshop for
faculty from Historically Black Colleges and Universities.