* 1137007
* Workshop on Research Data Lifecycle Management
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Curtis Hillegas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2012
* USD 42,895.00

The volume of data produced by computational modeling and analysis places
increasing demands on researchers, IT staff, and IT infrastructure to store,
manage, and move data. At the same time, funding agencies are enforcing and
increasing requirements for management of data produced through grant funded
projects. These pressures come together to put our institutions in a situation
where they do not have established funding and best practices for managing this
volume of data and, in addition, researchers and IT professionals do not have
the data curation expertise to select data and create metadata to ensure the
long term preservation and discoverability of important data. There is a strong
need to bring these communities together with the library/archive community to
consider data lifecycle management and to develop long term funding and data
curation strategies that will help institutions to meet the increasing
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop is to bring together
researchers, campus Information Technology (IT) leaders, and library/archive
specialists to discuss the topic of data lifecycle management specifically as it
relates to computational science and engineering research data. This discussion
will result in a common understanding of best practices and funding models for
selecting, storing, describing, and preserving this digital data. The workshop
will also help to cultivate partnerships between these communities to foster
continued developments in the preservation and sharing of research
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recommendations and practices developed at this
workshop will enable the more effective preservation and sharing of the huge
quantity and volume of data sets produced by computational scientists and
engineers. This workshop will directly impact the intellectual capabilities of
our higher education institutions by initiating a sustained dialog into the
lifecycle management of our research data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty and
staff who attend the workshop will return to their institutions better prepared
to lead the effort to develop and improve research data lifecycle management
practices. As these practices are established on campuses across the country,
data will become more available to all institutions including those from
economically disadvantaged areas. The broader availability of data will benefit
research and education, impacting students and researchers.