* 1137466
* Research Initiation Award:Secure measurement-based IP geolocation for Cloud Auditing
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sachin Shetty, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 238,835.00

Tennessee State University's Research Initiation Award entitled - Secure
measurement-based IP Geolocation for Cloud Auditing - will enhance the cyber
security research program at the university by investigating novel security
problems in cloud auditing. The educational goal involves the integration of
cloud auditing research in select undergraduate courses. Cloud computing is one
of the most enticing technologies due to its scalable, flexible, and cost-
efficient access to computing resources. However, the increased concentration of
business data and computing power scales security risks as well. One of the
recent security concerns is attributed to the lack of sufficient transparency in
the operations of the cloud provider, leading to difficulties in cloud auditing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a critical network mapping and
measurement (NMM) technique, Secure IP Geolocation, to facilitate reliable cloud
auditing. The overarching goal is to develop a methodology based on machine
learning that will determine the geolocations of the cloud nodes containing user
data with higher reliability, robustness and sensitivity than the current state-
of-the art measurement-based IP geolocation techniques. Three separate but
synergistic research goals are proposed: 1) develop a machine learning based
approach to estimate the hop distances between arbitrary host pairs in complex
network topologies that is accurate, scalable, timely, and does not require a
significant measurement infrastructure; 2) develop a single node classifier
using delay measurements and hop distances based on machine learning to detect
forged latency results by adversarial clients in a cloud network; and 3) develop
a fusion classifier which is scalable and independent of the network latency
levels by training to pool latency and hop count data from multiple target
nodes, allowing sufficient number of training examples at any latency level.