* 1137052
* Research Initiation Grant: Interactive Learning to Stimulate the Brain's Visual Center and to Enhance Memory Retention
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Philip Allen, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This engineering education research initiation grant will support an
investigation into how new technologies for gesture and body recognition can
help students better learn engineering concepts that are strongly tied to
spatial and visual understanding. The project will engage researchers from
engineering, computer science, and psychology in a well-structured experiment
using validated instruments to test if the new technologies improve learning in
biomedical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and
importance of this project will primarily be to determine if new, affordable,
and commercially available technologies can impact learning of difficult
engineering concepts. The strong partnership between researchers in different
disciplines will build networks in cross-disciplinary research. Additionally an
outreach effort to students traditionally under-represented in STEM at local
high schools is planned, which can improve recruitment of these students to
engineering programs. This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of
transforming the frontiers by making investments that lead to emerging new
fields of engineering, or shifting existing fields. Additionally NSF's goal of
innovating for society is enabled by supporting the development of innovative
learning systems.