* 1137354
* Computational prototyping framework for power processing and energy conversion systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Ali Davoudi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2014
* USD 352,664.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is the objective of this work to develop a
computational framework for multi-rate/multi-scale modeling and simulation of
power electronics and energy conversion systems for hardware-in-the-loop testing
on multi-domain simulation platforms. Based on high-fidelity models of
components and subsystems of power and energy systems, numerically rigorous,
order-reduction techniques are used to extract several levels of interconnected
simulation resolutions from the high-order detailed model. The resulting multi-
resolution simulation offers rapid and accurate simulation of the overall
systems from a general to a detailed consideration. The computational
prototyping framework for switched linear systems, nonlinear systems, and
systems with controllers is to be developed. Thereafter, the framework will be
extended to ?systems of systems? and other concepts, like flexible nested
simulation and co-simulations. At each stage, the numerical reduction techniques
and corresponding flexible framework are to be validated with several hardware
prototypes of power electronics and energy conversion systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
methodology addresses the tradeoff between the modeling and simulation accuracy
and speed. The accuracy is provided through high-fidelity component models and
physics-based approaches. The simulation speed and stability is ensured by
numerically rigorous order reduction techniques. The resolution of the
simulation environment is adjusted arbitrarily upon user discretion, and the
signal integrity is preserved. Moreover, since this approach is systematic and
automatable, there is less need for expert knowledge. From a control
perspective, it provides a framework to implement hardware in the loop and real-
time controller concepts. Moreover, the framework comprises a multi-domain
simulation environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of this computational prototyping
framework will allow aggregated and aggressive design, analysis, and
optimization approaches in power and energy systems, in particular large solar
systems, wind farms, advanced electric ship, and hybrid vehicles. This will help
accelerate these technologies to adoption, creating energy saving and positive
impacts on environment, sustainability, and geopolitics. For educational
outreach, undergraduates from different engineering disciplines are to be
employed. The recruitment strategy will target underrepresented groups in
particular. The team will promote education as an integrated part of this
project and will publish the educational aspects of this project. The material
will also be used in an advanced power electronics course. Furthermore, a
monograph will be published on the developed techniques and will be shared
freely via the internet