* 1137757
* AGS-PRF:  Understanding the Early Growth of Atmospheric Nanoparticles
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Lea Hildebrandt Ruiz, Hildebrandt             Lea
* Fellowship Award
* Alexander Pszenny
* 07/31/2012
* USD 86,000.00

Dr. Lea Hildebrandt was awarded an Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a research project at the National
Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado and with colleagues at
Portland State University and the University of Minnesota. Her project combines
theoretical, laboratory and field measurements using newly developed instruments
to explain chemical and physical processes affecting the growth rates of
nanoparticles in the atmosphere. A main objective of the work is to understand
the processes by which organic salts formed by reactions of organic acids (e.g.,
formic or acetic acid) and bases (e.g., methylamine, dimethylamine or
trimethylamine) are taken up onto preexisting particles of known size. Seed
particles 20-50 nanometers in size will be generated from sulfuric acid and
ammonium salts, as well as from the nucleation of organic compounds. The effects
of temperature, relative humidity, pH and organics will be varied to assess
mechanisms of particle growth and the contribution of the amines and organic
acids to this growth. Outdoor measurements will be taken in Boulder and at a
rural site to learn about particle formation and growth under different
conditions. The data will be used to develop and constrain models for
nanoparticle growth rates.

Nanoparticles range in size from about 1 to 10 nanometers. These atmospheric
particles affect Earth's climate directly by scattering or absorbing solar
radiation and indirectly by acting as seeds for water condensation and thereby
influencing the formation and properties of clouds. Nanoparticles also affect
human health by, for example, damaging respiratory and cardiovascular systems.
The fundamental processes underlying new particle formation are not yet
understood and consequently particle concentrations cannot be predicted
reliably. The planned work will provide insights into the chemical and physical
processes of atmospheric particle formation. Improved understanding of
atmospheric particles will enable better prediction of cloud formation and
development of better-informed policy actions concerning health effects.

This project will also have education and training benefits because it supports
the career development of a young scientist through mentorship, an opportunity
to learn new techniques and skills, and development of a broader collegial
network.