* 1137573
* Research Initiation Award Grant: Synthesize and Characterize of Disulfonated Poly(arylene ether sulfone-tetrachlorocyclotriphosphazene) Hybrid Copolymers
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Peter Pintauro, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2013
* USD 199,993.00

Fisk University's Research Initiation Award entitled - Synthesize and
Characterize of Disulfonated Poly(arylene ether sulfone-
tetrachlorocyclotriphosphazene) Hybrid Copolymers - has the goal to synthesize
disulfonated poly(arylene ether sulfone tetrachlorocyclotriphosphazene) (PAES-
TCCP) hybrid copolymers as proton exchange membranes (PEM) for fuel cells.
Polymer membranes created to date are insufficiently proton conductive to be
useful for fuel cells. The project will combine the unique properties of
hexachlorocyclotriphosphazene (HCCP) monomer with disulfonated poly(arylene
ether sulfone) (PAES) copolymer to prepare novel hybrid polymers with increased
hydrophilicity, high proton conductivity, thermal stability, and mechanical
properties. However, harsh post sulfonation reactions typically reported to
modify HCCP preformed polymers led to both irreproducible and crosslinked
products. To overcome these limitations, a two-step method for preparing
disulfonated linear PAES-TCCP hybrid copolymers is proposed. In the first step,
hybrid monomers based on hexachlorocyclotriphosphazene and biphenols monomers
will be prepared; the phenolic endgroups of the bisphenol monomers will serve as
the reactive site for polymerization to overcome the steric hindrance associated
with the HCCP monomer, thus increasing polymer molecular weight. Secondly,
linear PAES-TCCP hybrid copolymers will be synthesized by direct
copolymerization of the hybrid monomers with disulfonated 4,
4'-dichlorodiphenylsulfone (SDCDPS) and unsulfonated 4,
4'-dichlorodiphenylsulfone (DCDPS) monomers. Retention of the chlorides on HCCP
prior to polymerization will allow post-modifications to be carried out along
the polymer backbone, providing further reactive sites to subsequently
incorporate various functional groups. The expected products will have improved
proton conductivity and controlled cross-linking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves undergraduate students from under-represented backgrounds in
state-of-the-art polymer research at Fisk University. Students participate in
all major aspects of the research, increasing their interest in polymer
chemistry through hands-on experiences. Undergraduate research by Fisk students
further prepares them to obtain M.S. or PhD degrees for careers in the polymer-
related fields.