* 1137266
* EFRI-MKS: Harnessing Intercellular Signaling to Engineer Pattern Formation
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Eric Klavins, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,118,372.00

This NSF award by the Office of Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
supports a collaboration between investigators at Rice University and the
University of Washington to engineer bacterial stem cells to grow and divide
into a wide variety of multicellular patterns and structures. In biology,
multicellular tissues and organisms arise from undifferentiated stem cells via
complex processes of embryogenesis and development. How large numbers of noisy
and error-prone biological cells precisely coordinate their actions over space
and time remains an open and challenging question. Here the investigators will
take an engineering approach to this problem, by constructing a model
multicellular "developmental" system in the bacterium E. coli. The genetics of
E. coli are well understood and the organism is therefore very amenable to
engineering. Moreover, because E. coli does not naturally form patterns, it is a
blank slate where any pattern formed can be more easily attributed to the
engineered genetic program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program combines
immediate practical impact with conceptual depth. The proposed work will enable
a potentially transformative technology for controlling the growth of tissues
and higher order cellular structures through engineered cell-cell communication.
The approach incorporates key features of biological pattern formation, such as
(i) the use of positional information encoded within gradients of extracellular
signals, (ii) intercellular communication, (iii) feedback and signal processing
and (iv) epigenetic inheritance of states. The investigators will develop and
quantitatively characterize molecular devices for implementing each of these
core functionalities and will then modularly combine those elements into
increasingly complex pattern-forming circuits. Experimental work will be guided
by mathematical modeling and will take advantage of a custom-made programming
formalism for specifying desired shapes and patterns. This group of
investigators has highly complementary expertise in signal processing, cell-cell
signaling, distributed computing and synthetic biology. This will allow the
investigators to produce a combined experimental-computational design cycle that
will accelerate the rate of progress in this challenging and important research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology will have great scientific, economic
and societal impact. The last decade of synthetic biology boasted a series of
significant advances in engineering cellular sensing and signal transduction and
constructing synthetic DNA at large scale. Harnessing these advances for the
engineering of coordinated multicellular behaviors, best exemplified in pattern
formation, is now a major goal in the field. This collaborative effort will
significantly advance the current state of the art in programmed pattern
formation by developing a rigorous framework to engineer a single stem cell to
grow and differentiate into any arbitrary pattern. The outcomes of this work
will impact developmental biology, tissue engineering, regenerative medicine,
metabolic engineering and biomaterials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
is tightly integrated with an outreach program that has two main goals. The
first goal is to develop an educational program to teach students the
interdisciplinary skills necessary to be successful in synthetic biology. To
achieve this goal, the PIs are developing a three course curriculum that is
coordinated between several departments at Rice University and the University of
Washington. The second goal is to increase the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in engineering disciplines. This will be achieved
through established outreach programs aimed at high school teachers, incoming
freshmen, underrepresented minorities and women. In particular, the PIs will
develop new biological teaching tools that take advantage of the visually
compelling experimental systems constructed here.