* 1137272
* US-Pakistani Developing Collaboration on the Current Estimation and Future Prediction of Micro-hydro Power Potential: Response to a Changing Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* David Hill, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2013
* USD 49,980.00

1137272 This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr. Kendra
Sharp, Oregon State University, Corvallis and Dr. Ahmed Sohail and others at the
National University of Science and Technology (NUST) in Islamabad, Pakistan.
They plan to study The PI will conduct preliminary research in collaboration
with. They plan to work on finding the parameters that influence the success of
micro-hydro power systems, especially for Pakistan where water networks depend
on snow melting and rapid flow because of topographical features. They plan to
develop the results into a full research proposal to be submitted to NSF or to
the US-Pakistan S&T program funded by the State Department. The long-term
research objective and expected long-term scientific contribution, is to develop
scientific tools for the assessment of current and future small-scale hydro
power potential in a defined region with an emphasis on the response to changing
(decadal scale) climate. While Pakistan is the specific geographic focus of the
proposed work, the present proposal could be viewed as a template for the study
of other regions as well.

Intellectual merit: The PI has correctly identified a need for undertaking long-
term assessment of micro-hydroelectric potential, and proposes activities for
providing technical support to undertake such an assessment. She has the
necessary background to undertake the proposed activities, and she has
demonstrated experience working in Pakistan very recently, and has developed
contacts that are necessary to completing the project. The expertise of Sharp
and Sohail are complementary, to perform preliminary analysis and long-term
evaluation of micro-hydroelectric power potential in Pakistan, seeking
sufficient and spatially high-resolution regional data regarding spatial and
temporal variation in precipitation and temperature. They want to eventually map
locations of all potential micro-hydro sites in Pakistan. Micro-hydro is an
important technology in the developing world, especially in mountainous regions
such as northern Pakistan, Nepal and Afghanistan. The proposal is timely and
points out the complexity of pinpointing micro-hydro sites, including the effect
of climate change on water resources and their distribution.

Broader impacts: The project would support of graduate and undergraduate
training, help develop a collaborative relationship between OSU and NUST with
the potential for ongoing exchange of students and faculty. The project includes
outreach in terms of a workshop, and can add to educational material for use in
undergraduate or graduate education at OSU. The students could get some
interesting experience. It will bring together, in an educational context,
aspects of the study of climate change effects and renewable energy. The impact
of electricity availability would be significant to the affected populations.