* 1137517
* Collaborative Research: Models for Dynamic Discrete Response Data with Spatial Autocorrelation: Specification and Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 03/14/2011,08/31/2012
* Xiaokun (Cara) Wang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2012
* USD 5,736.00

Many behaviors of interest involve discrete response in a temporal and spatial
context. These may be the success of plant species in a series of adjacent
fields, land-use designations across 30-meter grid cells, popular election
outcomes across counties, and levels of crime across neighborhoods and over
time. In the transportation arena, such responses include trade-flow
distributions across zones, and vehicle-ownership levels across households. All
these behaviors can be measured (and/or coded) as discrete responses, dependent
on various influential factors and exhibiting some degree of temporal and
spatial dependence or autocorrelation. Significant uncertainty generally lingers
in predictive models; unobservable yet influential factors remain. The size of
such contributions varies, often in a continuous fashion over space. In contrast
to time-series data, the dependencies are two dimensional. This added complexity
tends to limit model specifications to the use of weight matrices, smaller data
sets, and arbitrary correlation patterns. Methods are needed to capitalize on
the emergence of huge and highly detailed digital data sets. This work seeks to
address existing gaps by developing new statistical models for discrete response
data that incorporate the effects of spatial and temporal autocorrelation. The
research will develop, estimate, apply, and compare dynamic ordered and
unordered probit models for spatial processes, based on a marriage of satellite
imagery and more commonly available data bases for urban systems analysis. The
first of these models emphasizes ordered responses (such as differing
intensities of land use), while the latter recognizes unordered, categorical
data (using a latent-response optimization framework). Both sets of models will
apply over time and space, using a combination of LandSat satellite imagery and
more readily available data sets over several years. Multiple parameter
estimation techniques will be explored, including maximum simulated likelihood
estimation (MSLE), Bayesian methods, generalized method of moments (GMM), and
non-parametric techniques. Model application will be demonstrated using land-
cover/land-use data acquired via LandSat satellite imagery for Austin, Texas,
and less urbanized regions of the globe as data sets become available. The
Austin imagery will be supplemented by U.S. Census data and land-use and
transportation-systems data maintained by the region's planning agency.

Almost all data sets have a spatial dimension to them and the world is poised to
benefit from improvements in spatial econometric methods and channels of data
acquisition for a tremendous variety of applications. The first of these models
will be used to better understand and anticipate changes in the intensity of
land development (e.g., undeveloped, lightly developed, and highly developed),
while the second will be used to appreciate variations in land use over a
categorical (rather than ordered) set of designations (e.g., residential versus
commercial versus undeveloped). The focus and most challenging aspects of the
work are methodological in nature. Nevertheless, the use of land-use data sets
offers a meaningful and highly tangible application that demonstrates the value
of new spatial econometric methods and the benefits of satellite imagery in
tandem with more traditional data sets. The work's primary contributions are
specification and estimation techniques for wholly new statistical methods that
recognize temporal and spatial dependencies in discrete multiple-response data,
and the demonstration of how satellite images can be used for purposes of
metropolitan planning and transportation systems modeling. The model
specifications and estimation techniques to be developed will fill a key void in
the fields of spatial statistics and spatial econometrics, where models of
continuous response data are the norm. The generic nature of the spatial
econometric methods to be developed makes them applicable to many social,
environmental, and other issues, wherever outcomes are discrete in nature and
observed over time and space. Their application to land-cover change will
enhance current understanding of regional development and human activity
patterns, facilitating public and private policy evaluation.