* 1137153
* Collaborative Research: Dynamical Processes Driving the Genesis and Maintenance of Tornadic Vortices
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Marcus Buker, Western Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2017
* USD 179,226.00

This research will focus on an investigation of the dynamics resulting in the
genesis and maintenance of tornadic vortices. The overarching hypothesis of the
study is following: Smaller (subtornado vortex-scale) vortical structures in the
vicinity of a primary tornado vortex undergo gyroscopically driven alignment,
followed by a generalized merging process. This leads to a natural steepening of
the vorticity gradient on the outer edge of the tornadic circulation.
Ultimately, this isolates the vortex from turbulence-induced erosion processes.
The isolation process then enables the tornado vortex to achieve strengths not
easily simulated with traditional numerical models, even with resolution deemed
sufficient to resolve that vortex.

Intellectual Merit: The processes leading to vortex isolation are not well
represented in quasi-two-dimensional traditional atmospheric dynamics theory.
Instead, the study adopts a new theoretical framework based on an analogy of the
Navier-Stokes equation (hydrodynamics-HD) with electromagnetic (EM) theory. This
framework has been growing in acceptance in the computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) community, particularly over the last 15 years. One key point in this new
approach exploits the analogous behavior between the alignment of magnetic
domains within an external magnetic field, and vortical turbulence being driven
to alignment (and merging) with the tornado vortex.

The research is on two fronts: (1) numerical modeling of the isolation process
and (2) theoretical development describing three-dimensional scale interaction
processes producing that isolation. A formulation of a vorticity backscatter
process based on resolvable vorticity structure will be resulted. This new
framework will then be built into the numerical model used to enable the
simulation of a tornado without extreme resolution.

Broader Impacts The adopted methodologies embracing an EM-HD analogy will likely
enhance understanding of all atmospheric vortex dynamics, including those that
govern tropical cyclones. While this will result in a more robust comprehension
of these complex processes, it will also introduce a simple, intuitive,
overarching framework for future investigations. The two principal investigators
plan to take advantage of this simplification to create new teaching tools that
articulate the complexities of tornado formation and maintenance in a clear
manner to the general public. Additionally, this work will serve as a catalyst
for stressing the importance of a well-rounded physics background (including the
fundamentals of electromagnetism), especially for those entering the fields of
atmospheric science and fluid dynamics.