* 1137795
* CAREER: From Biomass to Liquid Fuels: Ab initio Molecular Dynamics Investigation of Glucose to 5-Hydroxymethylfurfurl Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Xianghong Qian, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2015
* USD 409,754.00

0844882 &lt;br/&gt;Qian, Xianghong &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five year CAREER
proposal focuses on the development of an integrated research and education
program in biofuels which will aid in the commercialization of biofuels as an
alternative to fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt;The research component focuses on
understanding the fundamental processes governing the conversion and selectivity
of glucose to 5-Hydroxymethylfurfurl (HMF) and improving HMF yield. The
education component will result in the training of future engineers for the
emerging biorefinery industry. Highlights of the proposed CAREER project
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Use state-of-the-art ab initio and classical
molecular dynamics simulations with advanced metadynamics (MTD) technique to
investigate the effects of solvent on the mechanisms and energetic of glucose to
HMF conversion in water, organic solvent and ionic liquids.&lt;br/&gt;-
Establish a Creative Bioenergy Cluster (CBC) for undergraduate researchers to
provide multifaceted educational and training opportunities in
biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;- Build collaborations with national laboratories and
international biofuels research community.&lt;br/&gt;- Develop a new senior
undergraduate / graduate level Computational Materials Science and Engineering
course with applications in renewable energy including
biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;Biofuels such as 2, 5-dimethylfuran (DMF) and liquid
hydrocarbons are alternative transportation fuels in the emerging biorefinery
industry. HMF is a critical and versatile intermediate for converting biomass to
DMF, liquid alkanes and many other value-added products. However, the conversion
yields from biomass carbohydrates remain critical issues, particularly from
glucose, the most abundant monomer sugar from biomass. Currently the HMF yield
from glucose is very limited and extremely sensitive to the processing
conditions, particularly the solvent. Understanding the effects of solvent on
the mechanism(s) and energetics for glucose to HMF conversion will provide
significant insights into developing the costeffective conversion processes and
improving HMF yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that solvent and
solvent structures affect both the conversion and selectivity for the acid-
catalyzed glucose to HMF conversion reaction. Protonation of the hydroxyl group
on the B-Dglucose ring (C2-OH) and the subsequent breaking of the C-O bond is
the rate limiting step for the conversion. As a result, proton affinity of the
solvent structure will have a significant impact on the reaction barrier due to
the competition for protons between the hydroxyl group on the sugar ring and the
solvent. Competing reactions are initiated by the protonation of the other
hydroxyl groups or the ring O on glucose, and the solvent's ability to extract a
proton from the reaction intermediates. Cr (II) ion promotes glucose
isomerization to fructose in ionic liquids thus catalyzing glucose to HMF
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Car-Parrinello based ab initio molecular
dynamics (CPMD) simulations with advanced MTD technique is uniquely suited to
investigate chemical reactions and processes. In this CAREER project, CPMD-MTD
will be used to investigate the effects of solvent on the mechanisms, rate-
limiting steps, free energies and reaction barriers for glucose to HMF
conversion in water, DMSO, ionic liquids and their mixtures. Successful
completion of the proposed research will help improve HMF yields from glucose
and shed significant light on sugar pathway engineering to obtain desired
intermediates and products for&lt;br/&gt;cost-effective utilization of
biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Development of biofuels
such as liquid alkanes from biomass as a replacement for fossil fuels will have
tremendous societal impacts: biofuels are renewable and sustainable energy
sources whereas fossil fuels are not; use of biofuels can help minimize
emissions of greenhouse gases to the environment thus limiting global warming.
Training of engineers for careers in future biorefineries will be achieved by
establishing a Creative Bioenergy Cluster (CBC). The CBC will provide education
and training opportunities including international research opportunities as
well as internships in industry and in national laboratories for undergraduates
at all levels. A new senior undergraduate / graduate level course in
Computational Materials Science and Engineering will be developed. The results
of the research component of this CAREER project will be integrated into the
course. Outreach activities which promote science and engineering to
underrepresented minorities are an integral part of the proposed activities. The
research and education results will be disseminated widely in peer reviewed
journals. Successful completion of this CAREER project will lead to a number of
new partnerships with national laboratories, industry and overseas universities.