* 1137170
* Student Paper Competition Travel Support for the 2011 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium in Baltimore, MD on June 5-10, 2011
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Robert Weikle, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

The objective of this activity is to provide partial travel support for 7-10
students from U.S. universities who are participating in the student paper
competition at the 2011 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium (IMS). The
IMS is the annual meeting of the Microwave Theory and Techniques Society (MTT-S)
of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE). The IMS
is also the major international symposium in the microwave field and a focus of
research results in wireless telecommunications. The 2011 IMS will be held in
Baltimore, MD, USA on June 5-10, 2011. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The main impact is primarily educational, as the travel support allows students'
participation in IMS 2011. The activity helps to bring together the most
original and impacting research done by graduate students over the past year in
the field of RF and microwave engineering and provides these students with a
venue for highlighting this work and share it with the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This activity helps
with supporting the work of the microwave community's brightest students, to
allow them to interact with the world's leading&lt;br/&gt;researchers in
microwave engineering at the premier technical conference in the field, and to
strengthen the broader technical community by assisting future researchers and
leaders in traveling to and attending the symposium.