* 1137902
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Atlantic Decadal-to-Multidecadal Variability and Predictability
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Edwin Schneider, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2015
* USD 294,631.00

Research under this award will examine the variability and predictability of
Atlantic sea surface temperatures (SSTs), with a particular focus on the role of
"weather noise" in producing decadal and multidecadal SST fluctuations. Weather
noise refers to the variability of weather patterns which is independent of SSTs
and occurs owing to the chaotic nature of air movements. Despite their short
duration, weather systems produce air-sea thermodynamic fluxes which can be a
significant source of low-frequency SST variability, through the reddening
effect of the long thermal relaxation time of the ocean mixed layer. A key tool
in the research, developed during the PIs' previous NSF grant on this topic, is
a modified version of the NCAR Community Climate System Model (CCSM) referred to
as the Interactive Ensemble CCSM (IE-CCSM). The IE-CCSM addresses the role of
weather noise by dramatically reducing it, so that the weather noise mechanism
can be seletively enabled or disabled. The procedure used in IE-CCSM is to
integrate multiple copies of the atmospheric component model of the coupled
climate model, and use the average of the surface fluxes from all copies to
force the ocean component model. Each atmospheric component model will have
different weather noise, thus the weather noise will be removed by averaging
over all the copies. The ocean component model interacts only with the average
of the atmospheric component models, and thus does not "see" the weather noise.
Experiments conducted with the IE-CCSM will examine the importance of weather
noise for four major patterns of Atlantic SST variability: a tripole SST pattern
in the northern North Atlantic which is associated with the North Atlantic
Oscillation, a monopole SST anomaly in the North Atlantic associated with
Atlantic multidecadal variability, and which may be related to variability of
the Atlantic meridional overturning circuation, and two patterns of tropical
Atlantic variability, a zonal structure resembling the Pacific El Nino
phenomenon, and a meridional structure characterized by changes in the cross-
equatorial SST gradient. The research also include experiments to understand the
impact of weather noise on the predictability of Atlantic SST variability.

The work has eduational broader impacts through its support for three graduate
students, which will help to develop the next generation of scientists in this
research area. In addition, the research may lead to insights into the
variability and predictability of the climate system over long time periods,
which would be of interest to policy and decision makers concerned with the
impacts of climate variability and change.