* 1137531
* Targeted Infusion Project: An Interdisciplinary Urban Environmental Studies Initiative (TIP-IUES)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Hong Dai, Dillard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,648.00

Dillard University's Targeted Infusion Project entitled - An Interdisciplinary
Urban Environmental Studies Initiative (TIP-IUES)- seeks to develop
undergraduate students who are well-trained in the use of multiple frames of
reference to explore linkages between natural and built ecosystems and the human
behaviors that drive environmental and natural resource changes. This initiative
will design and implement an interdisciplinary urban environmental studies
concentration which will span four disciplines: biology/biochemistry, computer
science, urban studies/policies, and applied mathematics. The project will
support the creation of two courses (an introductory urban environmental studies
course and an applied environmental microbiology course), student-driven
research projects, and an open-source platform (EnviroThursday) for exchange
between the Dillard community, city officials and city planners, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are: to develop two
courses which will orient students to current trends in urban ecosystems and
prepare them for graduate study in the field of environmental studies; to modify
URB335 Geographic Information Systems to better equip students with the skill
sets to conduct research in the field of environmental science; to design an
Interdisciplinary Urban Environmental Studies concentration that will lead to
interdisciplinary certification in conjunction with Dillard's Deep South Center
for Environmental Justice; and to engage undergraduates in environmental
research.