* 1137367
* CNH: Collaborative Research: Direct and Indirect Coupling of Fisheries Through Economic, Regulatory, Environmental, and Ecological Linkages
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Peter Jumars, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 30,317.00

The productivity and resilience of fisheries are subject to a multitude of
dynamic and interrelated influences that arise from complex coupling of fish
populations with the natural and human systems of which they are a part. With
few exceptions, fisheries currently are managed independently, ignoring
important natural and human linkages among them. The biological productivity,
sustainability, and consequently human benefits of complex fishery systems may
be substantially increased if these linkages are better understood and if this
understanding is applied to management. The American lobster (Homarus
americanus), Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus) and Northeast multispecies
groundfish fisheries in the Gulf of Maine are of major ecological, economic,
social, and cultural importance to the New England region. They are subject to
an array of natural and human linkages that have not yet been systematically
studied. This interdisciplinary research project will examine key natural and
human linkages among these fisheries and integrate them into a quantitative
framework, using numerical modeling to explore how improved understanding of
complexity can improve sustainability and increase the flow of human benefits.
An important component of the research is the translation of concepts and
results into an educational program that will teach a new generation of students
about the human and natural complexity of the Gulf of Maine ecosystem and create
a sustained interest in marine science. The research is organized by themes.
Theme 1 focuses on management of the coupled fishery system. Numerical models
will be used to integrate research undertaken in themes 2,3, and 4 and to
explore how information regarding interrelated natural and human processes can
be used to improve management of these resources. Theme 2 will use econometric
estimation and bioeconomic modeling to investigate the human connections between
these fisheries that arise through movement of labor and capital between
fisheries, regulatory interventions and markets for inputs and outputs, such as
herring used as an input to lobster harvest. Theme 3 will synthesize and analyze
existing data to characterize variability in transport and survival of early
life stages to identify exogenous processes (especially climate-related
processes) that drive variability in recruitment. Theme 4 will combine new field
studies with analysis of existing data to examine the impact of natural and
human-induced trophic interactions among lobster, herring, and groundfish on the
population dynamics of these species. Theme 5 will focus on translating research
findings into an interactive marine science education program, based at the Gulf
of Maine Research Institute, which serves fifth and sixth graders throughout the
state of Maine.

The project will make important contributions to science by improving basic
understanding of the dynamic interrelationships of physical, ecological, and
human-economic processes that determine the productivity and variability of the
Gulf of Maine lobster, herring, and groundfish fisheries. It also will help
develop concepts, research methodologies, and models relevant to fishery systems
around the world. There is general agreement on the need to take an ecosystem
approach to managing fisheries, but little concrete progress has been made in
doing so. This project will develop concepts and methodologies needed to
implement an ecosystem approach to fishery management. The project brings
together a team of researchers from a broad range of disciplines and will
demonstrate the benefits of an integrated interdisciplinary approach to
investigating natural-human systems. The research will develop new understanding
and approaches for management of important Northeast U.S. fisheries. The new
information and insights will be conveyed to fishery managers through seminars,
participation in the management process, and publications. The research will be
coordinated with an ongoing, interactive marine education activity. A broader
goal of that education program is to increase the number of students pursuing
education and informed careers in the sciences by generating interest and
excitement about science at a critical age. The project also will provide
training for graduate students and undergraduate assistants in quantitative,
multidisciplinary approaches to the study and management of coupled natural-
human systems. This project is supported by an award resulting from the NSF
competition focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

