* 1137702
* AGS-PRF: Impacts of Microphysics and Cold Pool Thermodynamics on Supercell Tornadogenesis: Comparisons of Numerical Simulations with VORTEX2 Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Daniel Dawson, Dawson                  Daniel         T
* Fellowship Award
* Edward L. Bensman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 172,000.00

The violent and ephemeral tornado remains one of the most challenging subjects
of study in the atmospheric sciences. Tornadogenesis, maintenance,
intensification and decay mechanisms are all characteristics that are still
poorly understood. Each of these issues were primary motivations for the recent
VORTEX2 (hereafter, V2) field campaign that took place during the Spring of 2009
and 2010 in the Great Plains of the United States. Unprecedented data on many
tornadic and nontornadic supercells were acquired over the length of the
project, which included rich mobile radar data, high density in situ surface
observations, and proximity soundings. Within the context of this project, the
surface in situ observations of surface temperature and moisture in the cold
pools of the surveyed storms, as well as disdrometer observations of dropsize
distributions (DSDs) coupled with polarimetric radar data, are of primary
interest.

Research over the past decade has indicated a clear empirical signal for
tornadogenesis, intensity, and longevity to be strongly influenced by the
thermodynamic properties of the associated storm cold pool. In particular,
tornadoes are more likely to form, persist, and intensify, when the surface
temperature and moisture deficits (relative to a suitable undisturbed near-storm
environment) in the cold pool are relatively small. This research aims to
investigate the causative mechanisms for this empirical correlation through an
idealized numerical modeling approach. The work will leverage several diverse
cases from the V2 field program to aid in initialization and verification of the
model simulations. As such, it will sample a fairly large parameter space that
was spanned by the V2 cases.

Intellectual Merit: The research is expected to provide new insights into the
relationship between supercell cold pools and tornado activity through the
following means: 1) Understanding the sensitivity of cold pool thermodynamics to
the microphysical processes of water loading, evaporation, and melting utilizing
sophisticated microphysics parameterization packages, and the variance across
the spectrum of cases provided by V2; 2) Assessing the impact of variation in
the thermodynamic properties of the cold pools on tornadoes, and improving
physical understanding of this connection; 3) Verifying microphysical
parameterizations through comparison with disdrometer and polarimetric radar
data.

Broader Impacts: The results of this research are expected to improve our
ability to understand supercell storm characteristics that are most likely to
produce significant tornadoes, and thus it will have a direct impact on the
lives of the millions of U.S. citizens threatened or affected by tornadoes each
year. The comparison between model representations of microphysical processes
and the rich polarimetric radar and disdrometer datasets available from the V2
will help identify avenues for improvement of these parameterizations and thus
have direct implications for forecasts of precipitation from severe convection
and the associated risks of flooding and hail damage.