* 1137082
* CRPA: Little Green Men: A Documentary Film about the Pulsar Search Collaboratory
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Sue Heatherly, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,901.00

This CRPA award deals with inspiring youth to science careers and specifically
in space science. The Green Bank Telescope in collaboration with the Pulsar
Search Collaboratory, the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, and West
Virginia University will develop a documentary film describing what pulsars are,
how they are identified, and how youths participate in these investigations and
discoveries. Through this experience youths learn aspects of space science,
mathematics, physics, and computational science. Several young students have
discovered new pulsars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The film will describe the concepts
behind pulsars, how they are identified, and how the students can participate.
The idea here is that potential students will see that other kids are
participating and they may be successful as well. In the film, several well
known scientists will be interviewed including Neil degrasse Tyson, Director of
the Hayden Planetarium and Dame Jocelyn Bell-Burnell, the lady in Great Britain
who discovered the first pulsar. Moreover, they will interview several young
scientists who discovered the most recent pulsars through this
program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this effort are to be
inspirational to young people and to engage the public with the concepts of
space science and pulsars.