* 1137186
* EFRI-MIKS: Deciphering and Controlling the Signaling Processes in Bacterial Multicellular Systems and Bacteria-Host Interactions
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Roy Welch, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,299,875.00

1137186 Ren&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria are well known to
obtain intrinsic tolerance to antibiotics and disinfectants by forming
surfaceattached&lt;br/&gt;sessile colonies embedded in an extracellular matrix,
known as biofilms, and by forming&lt;br/&gt;metabolically inactive cells, known
as persister cells. Such intrinsic tolerance also facilitates
the&lt;br/&gt;development of multidrug resistance through acquired mechanisms,
presenting a great challenge to&lt;br/&gt;microbial control.&lt;br/&gt;Despite
the well recognized significance, research on biofilms and persister cells is
still in its infancy.&lt;br/&gt;Distribution of persisters in biofilms and the
effects of environmental/host factors and cell-cell signaling&lt;br/&gt;on such
distribution and biofilm-associated stress tolerance are unknown, mostly due to
the heterogeneity&lt;br/&gt;in biofilm structure, spatial and temporal variation
in gene expression, and redundancy in persister and&lt;br/&gt;biofilm genes. The
objective of this EFRI project is therefore to understand and manipulate
the&lt;br/&gt;multicellular and inter-kingdom signaling processes in such
complex systems by addressing these key&lt;br/&gt;challenges using well
integrated multidisciplinary approaches.&lt;br/&gt;Based on recent successes in
surface engineering, patterned biofilm formation, systems biology
and&lt;br/&gt;molecular simulation, this research team will conduct the first-
of-its-kind research to: (1) systematically&lt;br/&gt;characterize persister
formation during biofilm development, (2) identify the roles of key genes
and&lt;br/&gt;signaling processes in persister formation, (3) develop an
unprecedented computational capability to&lt;br/&gt;accurately predict signaling
factor translocation through the extracellular matrix of the biofilms, and
(4)&lt;br/&gt;synthesize and characterize functional nanoparticles for
controlled release of signaling modulators to&lt;br/&gt;eliminate persister
cells. A number of important questions will be answered for the first time.
These&lt;br/&gt;discoveries will have a transformative impact in designing more
effective knowledge-based strategies for&lt;br/&gt;the manipulation and control
of bacterial multicellular behaviors and bacteria-host
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
fundamental understanding of biofilm development and persister formation, the
findings&lt;br/&gt;from this study will also improve the general knowledge of
bacterial physiology with the potential to shift&lt;br/&gt;the paradigm of
microbial control. Furthermore, the results of this research as pertains to
deleterious&lt;br/&gt;biofilms of pathogenic and corrosive bacteria can be
extended to the development of better biofilm&lt;br/&gt;systems of
environmentally friendly bacteria, which have broad applications in
bioremediation of toxic&lt;br/&gt;chemicals and economical production of
renewable biofuels. Due to the broad spectrum of problems
and&lt;br/&gt;opportunities associated with persister cells and biofilms, the
proposed work will have significant impacts&lt;br/&gt;on basic science, economy,
biosecurity and health care.&lt;br/&gt;Beyond any technical achievements, this
project will also play an important role in transforming
college&lt;br/&gt;engineering education. Unlike traditional projects that focus
on relatively narrow topics, this project&lt;br/&gt;targets multicellular and
inter-kingdom signaling, a highly interdisciplinary area. The advanced
topics&lt;br/&gt;associated with this research will provide invaluable materials
to teach modern biotechnology, molecular&lt;br/&gt;simulation, synthetic biology
and bioinformatics, providing the students with crucial knowledge and
skills&lt;br/&gt;to address the scientific, engineering and societal challenges.
This research will also create exciting&lt;br/&gt;outreach opportunities and
bring talented young people, especially underrepresented groups, into
science&lt;br/&gt;and engineering careers.