* 1137201
* Pixel-Tracking on High-Resolution Imagery Spanning the Darfield, New Zealand Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Ellen Rathje, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2014
* USD 9,540.00

This project is aimed at assessing damage to infrastructure and the potential
for aftershocks immediately after destructive earthquakes such as the two that
hit the region around Christchurch, New Zealand, during the past year. In this
case, the close temporal association of the two events resulted in a case where
we have more pre-seismic imagery from a wide range of satellite platforms before
the second earthquake than is usual. We propose to use a combination of visual
inspection and mapping of the images and automated cross-correlation (pixel-
tracking) to characterize the coseismic and postseismic damage and deformation
associated with each earthquake. We will also model the characteristics of each
earthquake in order to assess the impact of stress changes on neighboring
faults. Our primary goals are to 1) Quantify the evolving strain associated with
the Darfield and Christchurch events, 2) Identify and map any observations of
triggered slip on nearby faults, 3) Map liquefaction, landslides and detect
incipient slumps along the Banks Peninsula and around Sumner and Lyttelton, and
4) Generate a slip distribution for both earthquakes that accounts for unknown
aspects of the fault geometry and revise previous estimates of Coulomb stress
change induced on neighboring faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work in this
proposal will help advance the field of image-based satellite geodesy, which has
many demonstrated applications of interest to NSF, including earthquake science,
glaciology, groundwater management, landslide forecasting and mitigation, etc.
This particular sequence of two earthquakes occurring in close (but not
immediate) temporal and spatial proximity is of great interest to researchers
studying the modes of interaction between earthquakes on nearby faults. The use
of satellite imagery to study earthquakes at the present time is limited in
several ways ? coseismic and postseismic deformation studies rely on a small
number of platforms and sensor types (e.g. SPOT imagery, SAR, LANDSAT), while
other, often more high-resolution observation types are typically ingested into
GIS software packages and inspected visually for signs of damage (e.g., building
collapse, flooding, liquefaction). Our study may open up these data types for
use in constraining the magnitude of deformation as well, which would speed up
the potential response time for relief workers, and aid in the intelligent
deployment of instruments that can monitor adjacent sections of fault that may
be stressed by the initial earthquake.