* 1137183
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences -- Mathematical Methods of Computed Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Tuncay Aktosun, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2012
* USD 35,000.00

This award will support an NSF/CMBS regional conference to be held at the
University of Texas at Arlington in the summer of 2012 on the topic of
mathematical methods of computed tomography. The principal speaker will be
Professor Peter Kuchment from Texas A&amp;M University. This award will support
30 participants at different stages of their careers. Computed tomography
techniques used for medical imaging aim to recover the internal distribution of
various important tissue parameters such as density, water content, oxygenation,
hemoglobin content, electrical conductivity, optical properties, and mechanical
properties. These are parameters are used by medical practitioners for diagnosis
of many types of conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will survey
mathematical techniques, results, and open problems in the actively developing
and important field of computed tomography, aiming to encourage both established
and more junior mathematicians to begin research in this field. The speaker will
address both classical tomographic modalities, such as x-ray computed
tomography, single photon emission computed tomography, positron emission
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, electrical impedance tomography,
ultrasound tomography, and optical tomography, and novel hybrid methods
currently being developed, such as thermoacoustic and photoacoustic tomography,
magnetic resonance electrical impedance tomography, acousto-electric tomography,
acousto-optical tomography, and magnetic resonance elastography.