* 1137468
* Planning Grant for STEM Program Evaluation and Improvement at West Virginia State University
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Thomas Guetzloff, West Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 02/28/2013
* USD 67,551.00

The West Virginia State University (WVSU) Planning Grant for STEM Program
Evaluation and Improvement is an 18-month, two phase planning process designed
to 1) identify critical areas for improvement within the institution's
undergraduate STEM programs and 2) develop an institutional plan for addressing
those needs. The planning project represents the most comprehensive review of
WVSU's STEM programs in recent years and presents an opportunity to develop a
plan to transform the institution's offerings to better prepare students for
work and further study in STEM fields. The evaluation phase of the project
includes several data gathering activities designed to characterize student and
faculty perception of program strengths and weaknesses, characterize program
successes and challenges as demonstrated from historical student outcomes,
identify previously unrecognized barriers to student retention and success, and
compare current programs against benchmarks of success observed in STEM programs
at other HBCUs. In addition, the evaluation phase includes an extensive review
of regional STEM workforce needs that will inform the planning phase. A report
on regional STEM workforce needs and a report on evidence-based approaches for
improving STEM programs will be made available to HBCUs, other institutions, and
the public.