* 1137632
* RAPID: Recording Fault-Zone Trapped Waves from Aftershocks of the M6.3 Christchurch Earthquake Sequence in New Zealand to Document the Subsurface Damage Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Yong-Gang Li, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2012
* USD 21,076.00

The M6.3 Christchurch earthquake struck the Canterbury region in New Zealand's
South Island on 22&lt;br/&gt;February 2011, causing widespread damage and
multiple fatalities. The earthquake occurred at 5 km&lt;br/&gt;depth, 10 km
south-east of Christchurch, New Zealand's 2nd-most populous city. It followed ~6
months&lt;br/&gt;after the Sept. 4, 2010 M7.1 Darfield earthquake in the same
region. The Christchurch earthquake was&lt;br/&gt;part of a series of
earthquakes and aftershocks in the region following the 2010 M7.1 Darfield.
New&lt;br/&gt;Zealand's GNS Science describe it as "technically an aftershock"
of the earlier event while other&lt;br/&gt;seismologists from USA and Australia
consider it a separate event, given its location on a separate
fault&lt;br/&gt;system. Seismologically, this M6.3 quake is classed as an
aftershock because of its relationship to the&lt;br/&gt;ongoing activity since
September last year. However, it has generated a significant series of its
own&lt;br/&gt;aftershocks, many of which are considered big for a M6.3
earthquake. Over 200 aftershocks including a&lt;br/&gt;M5.7 were experienced in
the first week. It did not occur on the Greendale Fault, on which the 2010
M7.1&lt;br/&gt;Darfield quake occurred, but on a previously unknown blind fault
line running 17 km east-west south of&lt;br/&gt;Christchurch, at depths of 3?12
km. On the contrary, precise aftershock relocations suggest that at
least&lt;br/&gt;two north-east/south-west trending faults lie between the two
and that there is no evidence from the&lt;br/&gt;earthquake data of an extension
of the Greendale Fault. However, there are still many aftershocks of
the&lt;br/&gt;2010 M7.1 Darfield earthquake spread along the fault line of the
2011 M6.3 Christchurch earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to document the
complicated subsurface structure of the damage zones caused by
the&lt;br/&gt;sequence of the 2010 M7.1 Darfield and the 2011 M6.3 Christchurch
earthquakes in the Canterbury&lt;br/&gt;region of NZ?s South Island, the
investigator proposes to record fault-zone trapped waves (FZTWs) generated
by&lt;br/&gt;aftershocks, and use the FZTWs to image the rupture zones composed
by damaged fault rocks at&lt;br/&gt;seismogenic depths. Because the amplitude
and dispersive feature of FZTWs are sensitive to the&lt;br/&gt;geometry and
physical properties, and the location of aftershocks (within or outside) of the
low-velocity&lt;br/&gt;fault-zone waveguide formed by severely damaged rocks in
these two earthquakes, observations and&lt;br/&gt;numerical modeling of recorded
FZTWs allow us to learn more about (1) the width, velocity reduction,
Q&lt;br/&gt;value and depth extension of damage zones of the 2010 M7.2 and 2011
M6.3 earthquakes, (2) the shape&lt;br/&gt;of subsurface rupture zones with the
principal slip plans of the mainshocks, and if the two
rupture&lt;br/&gt;segments are connected at seismogenic depths, (3) the
difference in rock damage magnitude caused by&lt;br/&gt;these two earthquakes
occurring at different depths with different sizes, (4) the fault healing with
time&lt;br/&gt;after the mainshock.This RAMP experiment will be collaborated by
USC/UoA /UoC/GNS in NZ to pursue the value of&lt;br/&gt;the work proposed,
likewise with the ongoing efforts by the NZ national GEONET seismic network
and&lt;br/&gt;researchers. GNS will offer to follow the USC/UoA/UoC work and
help them keep up with other&lt;br/&gt;initiatives and projects concerning the
Darfield event.