* 1137455
* RAPID: US Geotraces N. Atlantic: Measuring the 13C-DIC distribution and quantifying the impact of organic matter export on 13C, nutrients and biologically active trace metals
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2013
* USD 28,261.00

With funding through a Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID), a research
team at the University of Washington will participate in an originally unplanned
oceanographic cruise in autumn 2011, as part of the U.S. GEOTRACES North
Atlantic campaign to study carbon and oxygen isotopic signatures in the oceanic
water column. The original, incomplete cruise (in autumn 2010) was terminated
prematurely because of failure of the ship's propulsion system. The forthcoming
follow-up cruise in 2011 will follow a track between Woods Hole, MA and Cape
Verde Islands. These RAPID funds are being will cover only the costs of
preparing for sample collection during the future cruise and not for laboratory
analysis of the seawater samples or synthesis of the data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team, originally supported through an ARRA award,
will measure the same seawater characteristics on the future cruise as was
proposed for the original cruise -- that is, the 13C/12C of dissolved inorganic
carbon and the concentration of dissolved O2 and Ar gases. The scientific
objectives have not changed; namely, they will quantify the rate of organic
matter (OM) export using two separate methods that rely on the measured air-sea
disequilibrium for del-13C and for dissolved O2 gas. The team will also
determine the impact that OM export and its subsequent remineralization on the
relationship between bioactive trace elements (BTE), del-13C-DIC and nutrient
relationships in surface waters and at depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Because these ocean carbon system data will become part of a multi-
investigator international study, they will be made available to a worldwide
community involved in the study of ocean chemistry and its relationship to
global climatic change. Project results will also be incorporated into the
principal investigator's teaching curricula, and the project itself will make
provision for the participation of idergraduate students in the laboratory
analytical work.