* 1137275
* Symposium - Adaptations for Salt and Water Balance in Vertebrates, Nagoya Japan, May 31 - June 5, 2011
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Thomas Pannabecker, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

These funds support participation of graduate students, post-doctoral fellows,
and young&lt;br/&gt;investigators at the International Conference on Comparative
Physiology and Biochemistry&lt;br/&gt;(ICCPB 2011), to be held in Nagoya, Japan.
Participants will build world-wide connections and&lt;br/&gt;gain cross-cultural
exposure to institutions interested in global environmental effects on
animals.&lt;br/&gt;Advances in understanding how animals adapt to environmental
changes will support goals of&lt;br/&gt;safeguarding biodiversity at all levels.
Funds will support individuals who have demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;exceptional
aptitude and potential for advancing the field of epithelial fluid and solute
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;and its regulation. A select group of individuals will
present talks in a symposium focusing on&lt;br/&gt;concepts essential to
understanding the role of epithelia in water and solute balance
this&lt;br/&gt;balance has an overarching role in maintaining all life's basic
functions. Epithelia are found in all&lt;br/&gt;organs, and exist as sheets of
cells, assembled together by precisely arranged junctional
proteins&lt;br/&gt;that lie between cells. Notably, the dynamics of water and
solute flows through cells of the&lt;br/&gt;epithelial sheet are highly
integrated with flows through junctions of the epithelial sheet, in
a&lt;br/&gt;regulated, but poorly understood fashion. The symposium speakers
will stress the importance of&lt;br/&gt;how and why cell-to-cell contact and
plasticity of these systems are fundamental to appropriate&lt;br/&gt;tissue
water and solute dynamics for all vertebrates. Other individuals supported by
this grant&lt;br/&gt;will have the opportunity to present their research
findings, face-to-face in poster sessions, with&lt;br/&gt;scientists from nearly
every continent who work in widely diverse biological fields. A major
goal&lt;br/&gt;will be to identify and select women and individuals of
underrepresented ethnic minority&lt;br/&gt;background as recipients of these
travel funds. Funding for student and trainee initiatives at&lt;br/&gt;ICCPB
2011 will play a key role in attracting and retaining the brightest and best-
trained&lt;br/&gt;comparative physiologists.