* 1137555
* Research Initiation Award Grant: Advancing Bioinformatics through Services Computing
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Shiyong Lu, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 199,661.00

Prairie View A&M will engage in a Research Initiation project entitled -
Advancing Bioinformatics through Services Computing. With the completion of the
human genome, Bioinformatics became a major force to drive the advancement of
molecular biology research during the last ten years. Data extracted through
advanced techniques, such as Microarray and next-generation sequence machines,
are accumulated exponentially. To respond to this challenge, new computer
technologies are extensively sought, especially in two major areas, high
performance computing and data management. Services Computing, a cross-
discipline technology that bridges the gap between business services and IT
services, provides a solution to meet those requirements. This project will
directly address two problems: provenance management and efficient readmapping
algorithm for metagenomics analysis under a Services Computing environment.

The goal of this project is to develop a Services Computing based workflow
provenance model and a MapReduce based read-mapping algorithm to support the
design and execution of interactive metagenomics analysis workflows. Based on
the proposed provenance model, interactive and collaborative provenance
information can be captured and managed. The proposed suffix index tree based
read-mapping algorithm employs the "divide and conquer" mechanism, which
significantly reduces the search space, and thus improves the performance of the
algorithm. The performance of the algorithm will be further improved by scaling
as a cloud computing service using MapReduce framework.

The project seeks to 1) develop workflow provenance model which will be
incorporated into a scientific workflow system to support interactive
bioinformatics workflows and provenance capability; 2) develop a MapReduce based
readmapping algorithm to support metagenomics analysis; 3) involve minority
undergraduate students in Services Computing and Bioinformatics research; and 4)
introduce a new Services Computing course at Prairie View A&M University.