* 1137484
* Targeted Infusion Grant: Development of a Undergraduate Bioinformatics Program for Enhancing Research and Education at Tennessee State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Wei Chen, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 297,899.00

Tennessee State University's (TSU) Targeted Infusion Project entitled -
Development of an Undergraduate Bioinformatics Program for Enhancing Research
and Education at Tennessee State - has the goal to develop an undergraduate
Bioinformatics program at the university. This project will initiate
interdisciplinary research in the areas of bioinformatics, database design and
data mining, development of data structures and algorithms for bio-information
processing, and development of novel high-performance computation techniques for
analyzing the structures and functions coded in molecular sequences. TSU has
demonstrated growing research strength in genomics. The project will provide
resources for further development of genome research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be an integral part in preparing a workforce of minority students
who can compete with their peers in industry or academia in various areas of
bioinformatics. The activities will enhance integration of research and
education in disciplines such as biology, mathematics, and computer science. The
addition of a Bioinformatics Laboratory will equip TSU with facilities that can
host outreach opportunities. These activities are expected to increase interest
in science and engineering, therefore increasing the recruitment and retention
rates at TSU.