* 1137676
* Fluctuation Theories for Complex Biological Systems
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Johan Paulsson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 441,277.00

Intellectual Merit: This project addresses the roles of random fluctuations in
biology, how they arise and spread, and how they can be controlled and
exploited. Life at all levels of complexity is a battle between randomizing and
correcting statistical tendencies. Births and deaths of individual cells or
organisms create spontaneous fluctuations in population sizes that can spread
through interaction networks and potentially randomize other parts of the
system. The project will focus on the derivation of theorems that hold for large
families of processes, to rigorously understand the broader design principles of
biological systems, rather than constructing detailed models for specific
systems. The theory will be applied to molecular systems to elucidate, for
example, how genes are reliably expressed to produce protein and RNA molecules,
as well as to populations of cells and organisms to account for the natural
fluctuations in population sizes. The project is technically and experimentally
innovative in that results from traditionally separate areas of applied
mathematics will be synthesized to provide a framework for isolating and testing
individual assumptions regarding the behavior of experimental systems. It is
anticipated that the results of the project will be broadly applicable to
quantitative analysis of arbitrarily complex biological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed extensions of fundamental
theory for fluctuating complex systems will provide a better understanding for
how biological systems ranging in size from molecular networks in individual
cells to populations of organisms can be driven to extinction through
fluctuations in population sizes. To ensure that the results and methods have
maximal impact on the broader scientific community, appropriate courses will be
developed for advanced undergraduate and graduate levels, that are designed to
be accessible to students from all areas of natural science. In addition,
conferences will be organized to bring together scientists from very different
disciplines, primarily from molecular biology and ecology. Finally, the PI will
provide lectures at a lay level for the family program of the Harvard Museum of
Natural History, demonstrating to the general public how the same dynamic
principles appear at all levels of biological complexity from molecules to
viruses, cells or even large organisms.