* 1137651
* RAPID: Carbonate Measurements for the US GEOTRACES Zonal North Atlantic Survey Section
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Frank Millero, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2012
* USD 52,000.00

With funding through this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID), a research
team at the University of Miami, in collaboration with another team in Bermuda,
will provide critical measurements of the carbonate parameters on the upcoming
North Atlantic GEOTRACES cruises. These results will be vitally important in
interpreting the trace metal studies. A secondary scientific objective is to
provide additional measurements of salinity and density in the Atlantic Ocean.
Similar measurements, made in the Pacific and Indian oceans, have been used in
the 2010 International Thermodynamic Equation of Seawater (TEOS-10). This data
will provide additional information on the study of the impact and influence of
the carbon cycle on climate change and the workings of the ocean?s
biogeochemical cycles. This research is part of a larger international effort to
monitor the ocean's response to climate change. The originally proposed work was
delayed because of the termination of the R/V Knorr cruise. RAPID funding is
requested in order to complete the research and to prepare for a unique cruise
that sails around the 5 November 2011 aboard the R/VKnorr.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of these continuing measurements
provide dissemination of data to enhance scientific and technological
understanding to assess climate change. This work will be part of the
dissertation research of a Ph.D. students. It will promote training and learning
of graduate students as well as undergraduate students. Outreach activities will
continue as opportunities arise. The results will be disseminated throughout the
scientific community through resulting publications and the presentation of
results at national and international meetings