* 1137247
* WORKSHOP: UIST 2011 Doctoral Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Steven Feiner, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research symposium (workshop) of
approximately 8 promising doctoral students along with 4 distinguished research
faculty. The event will take place in conjunction with and immediately preceding
the 24th ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST 2011), to
be held October 16-19, in Santa Barbara, California, and sponsored by the
Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Human Computer
Interaction (SIGCHI). The annual UIST conference is the premier international
forum for presenting innovative research results as well as implementation
experiences in the software and technology of human computer interaction. It
brings together researchers and practitioners from diverse areas that include
traditional graphical and web user interfaces, tangible and ubiquitous
computing, virtual and augmented reality, multimedia, new input and output
devices, and computer-supported cooperative work. More information about the
conference may be found at http://www.acm.org/uist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
year's doctoral research symposium will be just the 9th such workshop associated
with the UIST conferences (NSF has offered support for these events from their
inception). The three goals of this full-day event are to increase the exposure
and visibility of the participants' work within the community, to help establish
a sense of community among this next generation of researchers, and to help
foster their research efforts by providing substantive feedback and guidance
from a group of senior researchers in a supportive and interactive environment.
To these ends, student participants will each make formal 20-minute
presentations of their work to the group, to be followed by an extensive
discussion lasting approximately 30 minutes during which they will receive
feedback from a faculty panel; the feedback is geared to helping students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to other
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The students will also
present their research to a wider audience through posters at the conference
poster reception, brief overviews during the conference overview session, and
short papers in the Conference Companion and DVD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The doctoral symposium will help expand the participation of young
researchers pursuing graduate studies in the field of user interface software
and technology, by providing them an opportunity to gain wider exposure in the
community for their innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance from
senior members of the research community. It will further help foster a sense of
community among these young researchers, by allowing them to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development. Because the students and faculty constitute a
diverse group across a variety of dimensions, the students' horizons are
broadened to the future benefit of the field. The organizers of the event will
make special efforts to attract students from institutions not historically
heavily represented at UIST and to foster diversity across under-represented
groups.