* 1137624
* CAREER: Factors that Shape the Evolution of Multimodal Signals in the Chesnut-Bellied Flycatcher Monarcha castaneiventris
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2013
* John Uy, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2013
* USD 203,184.00

Animals use a diverse set of signals of different sensory modes ("multimodal
signals") to facilitate social interactions. For instance, most birds use unique
acoustic (song) and visual (colorful plumage) signals in attracting mates or
defending territories. Recent studies indicate that these multimodal signals are
important in distinguishing and maintaining species; however, the underlying
reasons why signals are so diverse among species remain little understood. Using
a combination of observational, genetic and experimental approaches, this
research aims to uncover the processes that generate signal and species
diversity. Populations of the chestnut-bellied flycatcher Monarcha
castaneiventris show dramatic variation in song and plumage color throughout its
range in the Solomon Islands. The work will test if island groups differ in
forest habitat, social structure and abundances of feather-degrading bacteria,
and whether this variation is linked to the observed differences in song and
color among the flycatcher populations. The scientific component of this work
will be linked to education and conservation by the development of a field
course that will partner undergraduate students with Solomon Island biologists,
and the implementation of outreach programs aimed at conserving the endangered
habitats of the Solomon Islands. In sum, the research program will provide a
unique understanding of the factors that shape biodiversity in nature, which
will be used as a platform for conservation outreach, and to train Solomon
Island biologists and undergraduate students, especially those from groups
underrepresented in the biological sciences.