* 1137471
* PLANTS (Preparing Leaders and Nurturing Tomorrow's Scientists):  Increasing the diversity of plant scientists
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Ann Sakai, Botanical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2016
* USD 99,850.00

The PLANTS (Preparing Leaders and Nurturing Tomorrow's Scientists) program will
support attendance of undergraduate students at the annual meeting of the
Botanical Society of America (BSA). The goal is to increase the number of
undergraduates from underrepresented groups who attend these meetings, and to
increase their level of academic excellence and motivation to pursue advanced
degrees in the plant sciences. It will build upon the success of past and
current activities of the BSA in outreach and in promoting the involvement of
students from underrepresented groups. The activity will include a supporting
mentoring network of graduate students, post-docs, and faculty who will assist
the students before, during and after the meetings. The mentors will work not
only to interpret the content of scientific talks to the students, but also to
point out the broader relevance and application of the discipline to the
students, and pass on to the students the genuine intellectual excitement and
involvement of the conference participants. Students will attend sessions
designed for advanced undergraduates that discuss preparation for advanced work,
such as preparation for graduate school and factors influencing success in
graduate school and science careers. The students will have opportunities to
explore their academic and research interests in the plant sciences and to
broaden their career opportunities. Involvement of the BSA and engagement of
members in these activities will address the critical need for continued
diversity recruitment for the vitality of the discipline and will emphasize the
importance of year-long individual involvement. These activities also will
promote development of a set of best practices to support outreach and minority
mentoring in research activities in the plant sciences.