* 1137269
* EFRI:MIKS: NOTCH Signaling in Colon Cancer Stem Cells
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Xiling Shen, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 12/31/2015
* USD 2,000,000.00

This NSF award by the Office of Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
supports work to understand how dynamic signaling and cell fate decision
circuits in individual cells give rise to multicellular system-level behaviors
such as developmental pattern formation and how perturbations to these circuits
lead to undesirable consequences such as cancer. These questions will be
addressed using three integrated methods: (a) Physical devices for tracking stem
cell behaviors in a physiologically relevant environment; (b) Mathematical
modeling of cell fate decision circuits; and (c) Engineering of synthetic
genetic circuits capable of elucidating fundamental design
principles.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The team will study the role
of intercellular Notch signaling in intestinal colon crypt formation and
colorectal tumorigenesis. In Goal 1, an integrated platform including in vitro
microscale devices and in vivo mouse homing models will be developed to track
signaling dynamics and cell fate decisions in a physiologically realistic
environment. In Goal 2, signaling dynamics will be characterized to develop
mathematical models of pattern formations in colon crypts. These models will
help interpret experimental data and predict perturbation results. In Goal 3,
synthetic circuits based on Notch signaling and bacterial quorum sensing
components will be implemented in colon cancer stem cells to form de novo
patterns, which will be tested using the integrated platform from Goal
1.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;This work will have three main broader
impacts: (a) facilitating biomedical applications, (b) generating broadly useful
tools for the exploration of multicellular patterning systems, and (c) direct
impacts on science education through specific activities of the principal
investigators and other team members.&lt;br/&gt;Facilitating development of
therapeutics. The model system, colon cancer stem cells, is resistant to
conventional chemotherapies. Developing effective therapeutics that specifically
target cancer stem cells without damaging normal stem cells will require a
deeper understanding of the underlying circuits that control self-renewal,
differentiation and homeostasis in normal and cancer stem cells.&lt;br/&gt;Tools
for understanding differentiation and patterning. The physical devices developed
here can be further developed into high throughput drug screening platforms; the
synthetic constructs can be used to study signaling mechanisms in diverse cell
types; and the mouse homing models enable in vivo studies of human colon stem
cells and CRC tumorigenesis.&lt;br/&gt;Educational activity. Using materials
from the proposed study, the PIs will work together to teach synthetic biology
and mathematical modeling for mammalian systems in systems and synthetic biology
courses. The materials will also be included in a synthetic biology textbook in
development. The proposed project will be used as an example for K-12 outreach
lectures. Finally, simplified versions of the physical devices and the
mathematical model from this project will be used as teaching tools for the
CURIE Academy, which is a one-week summer residential program focused on
creating an interactive atmosphere to engage female high school students in
engineering.