* 1137671
* Chinese American Network Symposium 2011 (CANS 2011): One Network - One World
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Donald Riley, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2012
* USD 49,200.00

OCI 1137671&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will support funding of travel
for US researchers, scientists and CIOs to attend the 2011 Chinese-American
Network Symposium (CANS) to meet with Chinese counterparts to discuss design and
use of high-performance research networks; explore areas for collaboration; and
present results from prior collaborations. CANS meetings promote understanding
between the US and China research networking communities, interoperability
between research infrastructures from each country, and international
collaborations across a broad range of disciplines. In China, CANS is organized
by the Chinese Academy of Sciences? (CAS) Computer Network Information Center
(CNIC) unit which operates the CSTNet research network, and by the Chinese
Education and Research Network (CERNET), the Chinese Ministry of Education-
supported organization that provides and operates the major national research
and education network for over 700 universities in China. Internet2 - the
national research and education networking organization in the US that
interconnects all US research universities and many US national laboratories in
addition to other research and educational institutions ? is the US organizer
along with the Chinese Association for Science and Technology USA (CAST-USA).
CANS 2011 will be held in Kunming, China, co-hosted by CERNET and Yunnan
University. The symposium will promote interoperability, seamless networking,
and collaboration and emphasize network research and ?clean slate? efforts (NSF
GENI initiative, IPv6, videoconferencing and telepresence, federated identity
and authentication, integration of smart phones and tablets into university
infrastructures, CCN, and advanced applications.) A special track will also
feature US and Chinese CIOs. These areas and the symposium are consistent with
Internet2?s global strategy, including supporting Internet2 members deploying
campuses and global programs in China; fostering distributed educational
capabilities on an international scale; timely deployment and joint development
of applications supporting IPv6 globally; and transformative applications that
leverage networks. CANS also is likely to complement NSF?s larger efforts
promoting global networking.