* 1137597
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Information Diffusion and Opinion Formation in Networked Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Yong Tan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2012
* USD 43,700.00

Fueled by the ubiquity of communications access, networked systems have become
pervasive and given rise to behaviors whose evolution depends on both individual
decisions and the interactions on the network. Examples of such behaviors
include media sharing websites, where user recommendations influence product
adoption decisions of other users, or more generally public discussion forums
where past voting records of users provide indications on how they may influence
each other and, therefore, how initial opinions may determine the outcome of
future votes. Understanding the evolution of decisions in such connected
settings can, therefore, be of significant social and economic benefit. For
example, this can help predict the adoption of new social policies, or more
pragmatically the commercial success of a new shared application. The importance
of those questions has attracted much recent attention, but due to the
complexity of networked interactions, much remains to be done. This project
takes a multi-disciplinary approach to tackling these challenging questions, and
seeks to build on models from statistical physics developed to capture the
interactions of charged particles, which interact with each other in a manner
akin to how users influence each other in a social network. If successful, the
work can both expand the set of tools available to explore the behavior of
networked systems, and offer insight into specific problems of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores two fundamental aspects of
networked systems, namely, the formation of opinions in networks, and how
adoption decisions are made when they are influenced by network neighbors.
Networked systems can be of many different forms, including communication
networks, social networks, political networks, geographical networks, etc., and
are characterized by the fact that connections between network members influence
their interactions. Characterizing these interactions is a complex task. The two
main goals of the project are to (i) extend models from statistical physics to
apply them to fundamental problems in networked systems; and (ii) empirically
validate the predictive abilities of these models. Specifically, the project
seeks to leverage and extend the Ising spin glass model, and apply these
extensions to problems of opinion formation and adoption decisions in networked
systems. Empirical validation of the results will then be sought through
comparison to data collected from social media websites.