* 1137974
* Honorary Symposium for Prof. K.K. Chawla: Fibers, Foams and Composites Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Nikhilesh Chawla, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2012
* USD 5,000.00

The Honorary Symposium for Prof. K.K. Chawla: Fibers, Foams, and Composites -
Science and Engineering, to be held at the Materials Science &amp; Technology
2011 Conference and Exhibition (MS&amp;T 11) October 16-20, 2011 in Columbus,
OH, was selected by the MS&amp;T programming committee as the only symposium at
MS&amp;T 2011 to be designated as an "honorary" symposium. It is a tribute to
Prof. Krishan Chawla's longstanding and distinguished contributions to all types
of composite materials. The MS&amp;T conference is expected to have an
attendance of approximately 3,500, including participants from the Americas,
Europe, and Asia. All types of research institutions (academia, government, and
industrial research laboratories) will be represented. The symposium will bring
together researchers in an informal setting with ample time for discussion and
interaction. The annual MS&amp;T conference is organized cooperatively by four
leading materials societies, including The Minerals Metals &amp; Materials
Society (TMS), Association for Iron and Steel Technologies (AIST), American
Society for Metals (ASM) International, and The American Ceramic Society
(ACerS), bringing together professional members of the materials community to
interact. This international symposium will involve experts who will present the
latest developments in processing, interfaces, mechanical behavior, and
properties of composites and foams. Participation by students will be
encouraged, in order to help foster future generations of composites scientists
and engineers.