* 1137441
* EAGER: Magnetic Carbon Nanocomposites for Heavy Metal Removal from Polluted Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Zhanhu Guo, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 129,000.00

1137441 Guo

Magnetic carbon nanocomposites (MCNCs) combining magnetic properties and the
superior adsorption capability can play an enormous role in environmental
remediation. The premise of this proposal is that MCNCs with a controlled
intrinstic structure have enormous promise as novel adsorbents for purifying
wastewater containing low concentrated heavy metals, which challenges the
current existing technologies including the adsorption by sole activated carbon.
Almost nothing is currently known about the performance of MCNCs for
environmental remediation, especially with different carbon structures. Equally
importantly, almost nothing is known regarding which MCNC is best for heavy
metal removal. Our preliminary results have demonstrated, however, that the
manipulated MCNCs can be used to purify wastewater by removing trace heavy
metals to satisfy EPA requirements.

The objective of this proposed research is to manipulate intrinsic structures of
MCNCs with different organic-inorganic hybrids and to evaluate their heavy metal
removal performance. A magnetic field assisted process with the aid of novel
MCNCs to tackle the central environmental remediation technique challenge is
proposed. This process would be amenable to easy-recycling MCNCs and heavy
metals. The challenge of the proposed project is to determine the optimum MCNCs
for heavy metal removal. The research efforts are grouped into three closely
coupled research thrusts: (1) synthesis of different organic-inorganic hybrids
from both commercial and lab-made nanoparticles: both thin films and nanofibers
will be prepared, with various physicochemical structures, (2) preparation of a
new family of MCNCs with controllable nanostructure (solid, porous and semi-
permeable) by the obtained optimum fabrication process (stabilization and
carbonization temperature and time), and (3) heavy metal removal performance
test. This will advance the knowledge required to provide next-generation
multifunctional adsorbents and provide transformative environmental remediation
nanotechnology.

Our work will make a significant impact on the rapidly developing field of
adsorbents. The field assisted separation process with the aid of MCNCs will
make the treatment of the wastewater containing lowly concentrated heavy metals
satisfying the EPA requirement for the released Cr(VI). The intimate connection
with the companies will foster quick commercialization of the new environmental
nanotechnology and expedite the techniques in serving society/community. The
fundamental studies provide a basis to explore novel MCNCs in an engineering way
integrating the chemistry, chemical/environmental engineering, materials science
and engineering, and electrochemistry into one research topic. This
interdisciplinary project will create many noteworthy opportunities for
education and training. K-12 outreach, undergraduate education, international
impact and curriculum development are detailed. Strong bondage with industry
will bring job opportunity. Underrepresented and female students will be highly
emphasized.