* 1137774
* CSUB Center for Climate Change and Carbon Sequestration
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Eduardo Montoya, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2018
* USD 5,190,562.00

California State University at Bakersfield (CSUB) will initiate a new Center for
Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) to conduct important
research related to water resources in the southern San Joaquin Valley of
California as well as to study potential sites and technologies for carbon
sequestration in that region. The Center activities, both research and
educational, will lead to enhancements in student-involved, state of the art
research and faculty productivity at a major California state university that
serves student populations that are historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. Students will be recruited from the southern San Joaquin Valley as
part of their education and developing aspirations to continue into Ph.D.
programs in the geosciences, mathematics, and/or engineering. The goals will be
realized principally through ample student financial support, the release of
faculty from a heavy teaching load, enhanced laboratory facilities/equipment,
and a center organizational structure that will foster research productivity and
networking of subproject faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
research activities will be conducted through four synergistic subprojects, that
include&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) runoff forecasts for the four Sierran rivers
that are responsible for most of the natural water supplies of the southern San
Joaquin Valley, a globally important agricultural center,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) statistical modeling of timing of Sierran snowpack
accumulation and melt to better understand its spatial distribution with respect
to historical changes in temperature and precipitation, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;c)
subsurface mapping of available storage space and baseline physical
characteristics (i.e., lithology) associated with three declining petroleum
reservoirs that are candidates for carbon sequestration and enhanced recovery
using carbon dioxide, and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;d) laboratory injections of
supercritical carbon dioxide into samples of the candidate reservoir rocks to
constrain expected chemical reactions and their effect on the success of
sequestration efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will be strongly
committed to educating and graduating B.S. and M.S.-level scientists effectively
recruited from a abundant pool of minority students already enrolled at CSUB, in
local junior colleges and high schools. In doing so, the center will leverage
existing, successful recruitment programs already set up by the host department
and school that are funded by the National Science Foundation, the Department of
Education, and local industry, principally Chevron, USA. Finally, the center
will serve as a focus of research in a critical agricultural and petroleum
resource area and, as such, will collaborate with a large population of
researchers in industry, Ph.D.-granting institutions, and government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The CSUB CREST will develop
model pathways of how basic research at a regional comprehensive university such
as CSUB can directly contribute to important societal decisions regarding water
resource planning and site selection for carbon sequestration projects. The
investigators of all four projects are published in the relevant disciplines and
have experience with similar projects either at CSUB or at their Ph.D.-granting
institutions and have a strong track record of involving students in research.
Creative approaches are being proposed that may very well lead to transformative
concepts such as the application of functional data regression models to space-
time measurements of continuous processes in several of the other sciences and
the use of connections between paleo-lake level and regional sea surface paleo-
temperature records to make meaningful estimates of changes in river discharge
in response to anticipated climate change. The instruments and lab facilities
required for the proposed research are already present in the well-equipped CSUB
Department of Geological Sciences, or are available at cooperating research
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Approximately 100 students
from the San Joaquin Valley will be directly involved in the research
subprojects as an integral part of an instructional program, after which most
will emerge from CSUB eligible for matriculation into graduate school at the
Ph.D. level. The best performing students will be awarded research
assistantships, tuition and travel funds. With these resources, a vanguard of
CSUB students involved in the research projects associated with this award will
perform at a high academic level and will graduate on time because they will be
freed from working long hours at jobs unrelated to their career aspirations
while going to school, a common problem for the socioeconomically disadvantaged
students of the CSUB service region. Also as a result of this support many
bright students will be attracted to the program, who otherwise would choose
non-STEM majors to avoid the extra time commitment demanded by lab-intensive
science and mathematics courses. The enhanced research environment and the
resultant increases in productivity and dissemination of results will foster
networks and partnerships with employees and owners of agricultural and
petroleum companies and government officials. This will lead to additional
funding opportunities, and hence, contribute to center sustainability.
Scientific results important to society will result, including estimates of
amount and timing of snowmelt/runoff into a major agricultural center and the
volumetric, baseline rock characterization and predicted geochemical evolution
of reservoir rocks from the region that have been proposed for carbon
sequestration.