* 1137255
* A Workshop on a New Cross-Directorate Program on Disaster Resilience, Vulnerability, and Risk Reduction
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Gregory Tripoli, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2014
* USD 85,751.00

Despite significant advancement in our understanding of natural hazards and
disasters within specific scientific disciplines, the United States continues to
experience increasing losses. There is much evidence to suggest that our
communities are becoming more vulnerable and less disaster resilient. The
scientific consensus is that disasters result from the interaction between
physical, built, and social systems and yet the science is generally funded and
conducted within disciplinary areas. To explicitly promote and advance our
knowledge of the fundamental physical, social and engineering processes
associated with natural and technological hazards, the proposed project will
conduct an interdisciplinary workshop of leading natural hazard and disaster
researchers to identify the scientific advances from new cross-directorate
activities focused on disaster resilience, vulnerability, and risk reduction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will draw together leading hazard
and disaster researchers from engineering, geosciences, and social, behavioral
and economic sciences to provide input to the National Science Foundation about
the nature, goals, and structures of new activities. The workshop will take
steps toward the development of a framework for such a cross-disciplinary
program. The framework will identify the core research themes and research
questions related to resiliency, vulnerability, and risk reduction. Some key
issues to be addressed include: 1) the identification of interdisciplinary
research agendas involving engineering, geoscience, and social, behavioral and
economic sciences and 2) the potential need for new research and data collection
approaches to enhance longitudinal research capable of modeling and monitoring
processes associated with changes in resiliency, vulnerability, and risk
perceptions. The workshop will be held at the National Science Foundation in
early June of 2011.