* 1137986
* Bathymetric Survey: Completion of Coverage of the Cascadia Subduction Zone in Support of the Cascadia Initiative OBS Array Deployment
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* John Barth, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2014
* USD 169,907.00

As part of the 2009 ARRA (American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) spending,
NSF?s Earth Sciences (EAR) and Ocean Sciences (OCE) divisions each received $5M
in facility-related investment. The funds were targeted toward the creation of
an Amphibious Array Facility to support EarthScope and MARGINS science
objectives. The first of these studies will take place in Cascadia (offshore
northern California, Oregon, Washington and southern British Columbia), where
there is significant risk of a major subduction zone, ?megathrust? earthquake
that will affect population centers including Vancouver, Seattle and Portland.
With the primary aim of improving our understanding of seismicity and seismic
risk in this region, 60 or more Ocean Bottom Seismographs (OBS) will be deployed
across the region over a period of four years beginning in the summer of 2011.
The recent earthquake and tsunami in northern Japan, a setting not unlike
Cascadia, provide fresh impetus for this study. Good bathymetric data are
essential for choosing OBS station locations. Because many of the deployments
occur in and near active canyon systems and very seismically active areas, site
selection will be difficult, and good bathymetric data are required to minimize
the loss of instruments. The proposed cruise will fill in poor bathymetric
coverage in Cascadia, particularly along the Washington and Canadian margins. In
addition to its obvious contribution to the overall objective of the Cascadia
Initiative, broader impacts of this effort include improvements in regional
bathymetric coverage that will significantly improve our understanding of the
Cascadia subduction margin, and have implications for seismic hazards in the
western U.S. Additionally, the project will provide training and support for a
graduate student.