* 1137950
* EAGER:   Developing a Fluorescent Biosensor to Enable Real-Time Analysis of MAP Kinase Signaling Pathways in Living Arabidopsis Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Patrick Krysan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 299,720.00

Intellectual Merit. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of signal
transduction constitutes an important research goal for biological scientists.
Work with the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana has revealed that a given
signaling molecule has the potential to process information in response to a
wide range of different stimuli. For example, the MAP kinase protein MPK6 from
Arabidopsis is known to be involved in signaling pathways related to biotic
stress, abiotic stress, cell fate determination, and cell division. This
observation raises the important experimental question of how one protein can
properly interpret and process information from a variety of different inputs.
One proposed mechanism for achieving this type of pathway specificity invokes
the concept of spatial compartmentalization. In this model, molecules of the
MPK6 kinase that are activated by a biotic stressor would be restricted to one
subcellular location, while MPK6 molecules responding to cell division cues
would be located in another. To directly test the role that spatial regulation
plays in MAP kinase signaling, it is necessary to have some type of tool for
visualizing the spatial and temporal dynamics of MAP kinase activity within
living cells. Fluorescent biosensor molecules that monitor MAP kinase activity
provide one solution to this challenge, and they have recently been developed
for monitoring human MAP kinases. For this project a fluorescent biosensor that
will be able to measure the activity of the Arabidopsis MAP kinase MPK6 will be
developed. With Arabidopsis, it is possible to observe with a confocal
microscope an intact, living organism. In addition, with Arabidopsis the full
power of genetic analysis can brought to bear on future experiments involving
the type of kinase activity sensor that will be developed. An MPK6 biosensor
will, for the first time, provide researchers with a tool for monitoring at the
subcellular level the spatial and temporal dynamics of protein kinase activity
in a living Arabidopsis plant. Because MPK6 plays a role in a large number of
signaling pathways, such a tool would be of wide interest to the scientific
community. Broader Impacts. The MPK6 biosensor that it is planned to produce has
the potential to be widely used by members of the plant signal transduction
community. In addition, this project will provide training opportunities for two
post-doctoral fellows, one PhD student, and one undergraduate. The postdocs
hired to work on this project will serve as the mentors for the undergraduate
student, which will provide the postdocs with valuable mentoring experience.