* 1137835
* The Evolution of Dynamic Response Strategies: Optimal Control and Evolutionary Dynamics
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Joao Hespanha, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 608,274.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will develop theoretical approaches based on
optimal control theory and population genetics to understand how living
organisms, ranging in size from single cells to large animals, sense changes in
their environments and respond to them dynamically. To survive, living organisms
must constantly respond to changes in their surroundings, including changes in
food supplies and the numbers and types of predators. For example, animals
compete with other members of their species for food; thus the foraging
strategies of other individuals cause random fluctuations in food availability.
The dynamic changes in conditions over time contain information that individual
organisms must sense, process, remember, and act on to their advantage. However,
these internal processes are subject to noise due to incomplete or inaccurate
sensing and processing. This is just as true at the cellular level as it is at
the level of whole organisms, for example when humans plan for the future by
observing the changing conditions around them. Because organisms have evolved
sensory processing strategies in response to the historical fluctuations that
the species has experienced, systematic changes in the way that the environment
fluctuates can cause the organism to misinterpret change and behave
maladaptively.

This project considers the genetically encoded dynamic response strategies that
enable living organisms to produce a response given a time series of sensed
inputs. These dynamic response strategies can take into account the limited
reliability of sensory input and changes in the frequency and size of
environmental fluctuations. The project focuses on cellular dynamic response
systems including simple gene regulation, regulation of interacting genes in a
network, cellular sensory mechanisms, and competitive foraging. The mechanistic
details of the dynamic response will be modeled using engineering methods and
evolutionary outcomes will be determined using population genetic techniques.

This project will combine powerful computational techniques from the engineering
sciences with detailed knowledge of the constraints on evolving populations from
the biological sciences. The engineering solutions will provide upper bounds on
the range of improvement in dynamic response strategies that evolution can
achieve. These limits will be used to evaluate whether non-optimal mechanisms
are adequate for organisms to extract most of the resources available in the
environment. This project is potentially transformative because the methods to
be developed are expected to be broadly applicable across biological scales and
to developmental, physiological, as well as behavioral responses.

Broader Impact: One broader impact of this project involves training high school
students in the scientific method and engineering principles. Four high school
students enrolled in the Dos Peublos High School Engineering Academy will be
recruited each year to participate in a summer internship program in co-PI
Hespanha's lab. These students are already involved in an intensive engineering
program where they learn calculus and computer programming. The student interns
will learn to program robots to carry out cooperative and competitive tasks
using use the iRobot Create platform. Students will learn to apply the
scientific method to refine the performance of their algorithms. Students will
apply the skills they learn in the summer as members of their scholastic
robotics team.

A second aspect of this project involves training undergraduate biology students
from UCSB in theoretical biology. PI Proulx has already developed an
undergraduate course on modeling behavioral dynamics using the Mathematica
programming environment. Funding will support visits by world-class faculty to
enrich this course with workshops in mathematical modeling of biological systems
based on their own current research and provide participating students with
immediate feedback on their modeling studies from visiting experts.

The final broader impact of this project involves a Summer Internship Program
for undergraduate students. This program provides opportunities for UCSB
undergraduates and minority students from local community colleges, including
Santa Barbara City College, to work together during the summer on research
projects under the supervision of co-PI Hespanha and his graduate students.
Participating graduate students will gain valuable mentoring experience.