* 1137472
* Implementation Grant--University of the Virgin Islands' Comprehensive Approach to Retention and Persistence in STEM
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Camille McKayle, University of The Virgin Islands
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,029,727.00

The University of the Virgin Islands (UVI) HBCU-UP project is designed to
increase retention and persistence in STEM and strengthen student preparation
for graduate school and the workforce. The project intends to build a strong
foundation for incoming UVI STEM students through activities to increase pass
rate in developmental courses and to increase student preparedness for Calculus
by a Math Behind the Science Summer Bridge Program including course-taking in
computer programming and mentoring and training of students to understand the
expectations for success in STEM education and careers. Strategies selected to
achieve these objectives resulted from a thorough literature review of
evidenced-based practices and tailored for the specific context of the
institution. Peer Led Team Learning (PLTL) will be employed as a strategy to
increase pass rate in developmental courses. The project has specific targets
for STEM retention and graduation rate increases. A comprehensive set of
strategies to achieve the retention and graduation rate goals include creation
and/or delivery of 1. A special STEM freshman development course, 2. Summer
Sophomore Research Institute (SSRI), 3. Summer Undergraduate Research Experience
(SURE), 4. Academic year HBCU-UP Research Scholar (AHRS), 5. Faculty
professional development in STEM student advising and mentoring, and 6. A STEM
Resource Center.