* 1137336
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Training for Continental Ecology (ITCE): Bridging Scales and Systems with Isotopes
* BIO,EF
* 02/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Thure Cerling, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,188,333.00

Providing innovative approaches in graduate and postdoctoral training that
encompass emerging opportunities in continental ecology is the critical focus of
this project. Thirty-two faculty from nearly two dozen universities will combine
efforts to develop such a training program that addresses ecological challenges
at regional to continental scales. The approach will include the integration of
stable isotopes with other datasets and computer models. Stable isotopes play a
critical role in evaluating scalable temporal and spatial data streams and allow
underlying processes and patterns to be identified and quantified across scales
of space and time. Key themes to be addressed include gas exchange between
ecosystems and the atmosphere, animal migration, ecohydrology, and pathways of
photosynthesis and consequences for animal diets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes four elements of training across the participating
universities: (1) multidisciplinary and multi-university instruction through two
week lecture and laboratory courses, with the first focusing on principles and
practices and the second on linking isotopes, processes and patterns, modeling,
and scaling; (2) extended hands on training after the courses, where graduate
students will obtain additional training and expand their theses through visits
and collaborations with course instructors at other universities; (3) inter-
university postdoctoral training, focusing on modeling and syntheses across the
thematic research areas of migration, carbon cycle, water cycle, and
disturbance; and (4) developing, integrating, and disseminating over the web
databases, data analysis tools, and training modules to be used by others.
Training of cohorts will be sustained through workshops in advance of major
scientific meetings and participation with postdocs at the host institutions.
Students will also organize sessions at national meetings as a component of
their professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
training and network building opportunities to more than 150 graduate students
and postdocs over five years, preparing future generations of ecologists to use
existing and new isotopic data streams from regional to continental scale
ecology programs. Recruitment will emphasize diversity and inclusion of women
and members of underrepresented groups in these opportunities. Teaching modules
and web products developed by the instructors will be incorporated into courses
at their respective home institutions. Data and model synthesis efforts will
greatly increase the accessibility of existing large scale isotopic datasets and
data analysis tools within and beyond the ecological research community to
further help develop the discipline of macrosystem biology. A formal evaluation
framework will guide the improvement of our data and educational products in
each of the five years of this project.