* 1137279
* EFRI-M3C: Distributed Brain Dynamics in Human Motor Control
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Gert Cauwenberghs, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,889,656.00

Intellectual Merit: This project aims at combining cognitive and computational
neuroscience, neuroengineering and system identification towards a
transformative understanding of the way distributed brain dynamics interact with
motor activity in humans. 3-D body and limbs movement kinematics, eye movements
and electroencephalographic (EEG) spatiotemporal brain data will be recorded
simultaneously during motor control and adaptation in healthy and Parkinson?s
disease patients. In particular, altered and real world motor tasks will be
simulated in 3-D immersive virtual reality technology with force feedback robots
providing proprioceptive interaction and feedback. Cognitive, behavioral and
kinematics data will constrain the design of large-scale computational models of
motor control and adaptation based on known anatomy and physiology of the basal
ganglia. Neuromorphic engineering will guide the design of mobile embedded
computational systems for real-time emulation of the brain-body models and
closed-loop sensory-motor control for Parkinson?s patients. We expect that the
development of new machines for neuro-rehabilitation will result in a threefold
synergetic interaction between engineering and neuroscience: human-machine
interactions will transform the notion of movement control and provide new
contexts to study embodied cognition that will benefit neuroscience; in turn,
new knowledge in neuroscience and motor control will accelerate the development
of adaptive machines for rehabilitation and/or enhancement. Finally,
comprehensive and predictive mathematical models of motor control implemented in
neuromorphic hardware are expected to lead to new intelligent neuroprosthetic
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Outcomes of this research will
contribute to the system-level understanding of humanmachine interactions and
motor learning and control in real world environments for humans, and will lead
to the development of a new generation of wireless brain and body activity
sensors and adaptive prosthetics devices. This will advance our knowledge of
human-machine interactions, stimulate the engineering of new brain/body sensors
and actuators, and have a direct influence in diverse areas where humans are
coupled with machines, such as brain-machine interfaces, prosthetics and
telemanipulation. We anticipate that the confluence of cognitive and
computational neuroscience, control theory and wearable, unobtrusive
bioinstrumentation will provide novel non-invasive approaches or the treatment
and neuro-rehabilitation of Parkinson?s disease and will potentially transform
our understanding of brain/body interactions. The project draws graduate and
undergraduate students across divisions and in the NSF Temporal Dynamics of
Learning Center (TDLC) and Institute of Neural Computation (INC) at UCSD
participating in interdisciplinary engineering and neuroscience aspects of the
design, optimization, and training of largescale neuromorphic systems and their
human interfaces. Through outreach channels on campus supported by the TDLC and
the NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU), the program will actively
pursue increased participation in research and education of the next generation
of scientists and engineers.