* 1137345
* Catalyst Design for Isotactic Polycarbonates as Lithium-Ion Transport Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* William Ellis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports William Ellis of Cornell University as an
American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Ellis will work on developing
Zn-based catalysts for the copolymerization of epoxides and carbon dioxide. He
will collaborate with scientists at SEEO, a Berkeley, California-based battery
company. The ultimate goal of this research is to develop polycarbonate highly
isotactic polycarbonate materials for use as lithium-ion transport membrane
materials in Li ion batteries. For his plan for broadening participation, the PI
will develop a hands-on science kits to engage rural students in science. In
this activity, the PI will collaborate with educators at the Cornell Center for
Materials Research.

Research like that of Dr. Ellis is aimed at developing new kinds of materials
for lithium ion batteries, an increasingly important technology. The particular
chemistry that Dr. Ellis is developing is "green" in that it uses an earth-
abundant element (zinc) that has low toxicity as the transition metal in his
catalysts, and one of his feedstock chemicals is carbon dioxide. The efforts at
broadening participation being pursued by Dr. Ellis are aimed at giving
underrepresented students in rural areas hands-on activities in important areas
of science.