* 1137625
* EAGER: Experimental Verification of a Transformative Calibration Method
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Majid Keyhani, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 57,503.00

1137625 Frankel

A novel calibration method is under development that produces accurate surface
heat flux predictions in highly hostile thermal environments without requiring
surface instrumentation. This concept has substantive merit for investigating:
a) the effectiveness of thermal protection systems associated hypersonic flight
vehicles or for understanding thermal efficiencies in hypersonic combustors; b)
heat transfer on unreachable surface structures such as found in combustion
liners, small chambers, and containment walls as a result of a hostile thermal
event; and, c) heat transfer on structures emanating from pool fires or
explosions.

A comprehensive method is proposed that integrates physical, experimental,
mathematical and computational principles. The resulting formulation implicitly
possesses full-sensor characterization, probe positioning, host material
thermophysical properties, diffusion physics, and mathematical constants
required for stable and accurate surface heat flux predictions. A second novel
feature of the approach lies in the acquisition of the stabilizing parameters
though multiple calibration experiments. The proposed methodology is applicable
to one-, two-, and three-dimensional geometries involving either isotropic or
orthotropic materials in one or multi-region configurations.

Laboratory calibration will be performed using a fiber-optic, diode laser
system. The new calibration method leads to a Volterra integral equation of the
first kind; and, thus the coupon or specimen can be interpreted as a transducer
ready for practical implementation.

Intellectual Merit: The multipronged strategy weaves analysis, computations,
sensor development, instrumentation and experimental methods throughout the
complete solution process and addresses critical US applications in a
responsive, aggressive and timely manner. New material development is expected
to continue at an impressive rate. Responsive state-of-the-art accurate methods
for estimating surface heat flux and temperature that includes sensor
characterization still requires resolution for many application involving highly
hostile environments. It should be noted that the novel calibration view to
inverse heat conduction could impact other areas involving inverse estimation.

Broader Impact: Success of the proposed research will impact aerospace, energy,
fire, combustion, geophysical, defense and national security research and
developments The multifaceted nature of the study enhances the research
experience of our undergraduate and graduate students by providing an integrated
view to problem solving. The research findings will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate courses. Short course development will be pursued for
presentation at universities; conferences; and, national laboratories. We
propose an aggressive outreach plan for motivating HS students to strongly
consider engineering as a career through a first-hand, and highly exciting
laboratory experience.