* 1137883
* Workshop:  Princeton-CEFRC Summer School on Combustion Summer Workshop, June 26-July 1, 2011, Princeton, NJ
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2011
* Chung Law, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 09/30/2011
* USD 10,000.00

1137883&lt;br/&gt;Law&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Princeton's Combustion Energy
Frontier Research Center's Summer School in Combustion is an intensive one-week
seminar series held annually at Princeton University, during which advanced
graduate students and researchers in combustion and energy will take two courses
of 15 hours each. The participants are outstanding senior graduate students sent
by their respective supervisors, from all across the country, as well as faculty
members and research staff from government and industrial labs. These
participants hold strong potential to be leaders in the combustion and energy
R&amp;D community. Scholarships are available to students enrolled in U.S.
academic institutions to cover local expenses. The 2010 session drew in more
than 120 participants. Videos of the 2010 lectures by Professor Norbert Peters
on Combustion Theory, and by Drs. Stephen J. Klippenstein and Charles K.
Westbrook on Combustion Chemistry are available at iTunes University and the
Princeton University website at:&lt;br/&gt;http://deimos.apple.com/WebObjects/Co
re.woa/Browse/princeton.edu.4746982603.04746982605 and
http://www.princeton.edu/engineering/video/combustion-2010/
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2011 session is scheduled to be held on
June 26 to July 1. This year the number of applicants has surpassed last year?s
and we have thus far admitted 133 with a growing waiting list, which we intend
to accommodate. We shall continue to offer the two foundation courses of
Combustion Theory and Combustion Chemistry, but have commissioned alternate
lecturers so that returning students can get a different perspective of the same
topics. Furthermore, we have added a third course, on Combustion Laser
Diagnostics. The lecturers are Professor Moshe Matalon from University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign on Combustion Theory, Professor Michael J. Pilling
from the University of Leeds, UK on Combustion Chemistry, and Professor Marcus
Ald√©n from Lund University, Sweden on Combustion Laser Diagnostics. The week-
long lecture series will again be professionally videotaped and made available
to the public. Lecture notes and course materials will be prepared and
distributed to the participants for advanced reading before commencement of the
Summer School. More information on the Summer School is available at:
http://www.princeton.edu/cefrc/combustionsummer-school/.