* 1137182
* Pre-SUSY 2011 School conference to be held on Aug. 24-26th 2011 at the University of Chicago
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Richard Hill, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 07/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

This grant award is made to Professor Richard Hill at the University of Chicago
in support of the Pre-SUSY 2011 School. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of the
central importance of supersymmetry in modern particle physics, the annual SUSY
conferences have grown over the past 20 years to become the dominant annual
international physics conferences focused on physics beyond the Standard Model.
These conferences are typically attended by a large number of young postdocs and
students each year, and as a result a tradition has developed wherein each SUSY
conference is preceeded by a "school" dedicated to providing these future young
researchers the background to fully profit from the contents of the conference,
as well as to educate them in state-of-the-art methods of experimental and
theoretical high-energy physics. This objective is fulfilled through a series of
high-level lectures and talks by well-known active researchers in the field of
high-energy physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the pre-SUSY 2011 School
will also have significant broader impacts. The pre-SUSY school will help young
scientists to interact with theoretical and experimental colleagues, and to
broaden their knowledge of particle physics. These educational goals are
important to the integration of young scientists into the community, and to
maintain the vibrancy of the field. Moreover, a fund will be made available to
help cover the expenses of students from underrepresented institutions, as well
as underrepresented minorities and women.