* 1137681
* CREST: Center of Excellence in Nanobiomaterials Derived from Biorenewable and Waste Resources
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Anil Netravali, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2018
* USD 5,200,000.00

Tuskegee University will initiate a 5-year Center of Research Excellence in
Science and Technology project to develop new nano-bio-materials derived from
bio-renewable and waste resources. The research focus areas of the center are:
(a) synthesis of nanofibers; (b) production of bacterial cellulose fibers from
soy waste products (c); synthesis of nanoparticles from biodegradable sources
like egg shells and their use as nano-fillers in advanced composites; (d)
synthesis of biopolymers; (e) development and characterization of advanced green
nanocomposites using these materials with natural fibers; and (f) product
design, prototyping and commercial feasibility studies. The project will include
a robust education and outreach program to train/educate K-12 and community
college students and teachers. The proposed Center will also provide significant
boost to the PhD program in Materials Science and Engineering at Tuskegee
University. The program will include active partnerships with Cornell
University, the University of Alabama at Birmingham, and Auburn University.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will be organized around the following
subprojects:&lt;br/&gt;1. Synthesis and characterization of
nanobiomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;2. Synthesis and characterization of biopolymers and
nanobiocomposites&lt;br/&gt;3. Processing, Performance Evaluation, and
technology transition of Advanced Green Nanobiocomposites to
products&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs and their students will extract bacterial
cellulose fibers from waste sugars obtained from defatted soy flour and calcium
carbonate nanoparticles from egg shells. They then make use of them along with
biopolymers to make composites. Calcium carbonate nanoparticles have many
potential applications in polymer composites as fillers and property enhancers.
They are also considered as materials for biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current generation of composites
materials utilize petroleum based polymers and man-made fibers like glass and
carbon which are energy intensive to produce. These materials have two
significant disadvantages. First, they are based on petroleum feedstock, a non-
renewable resource. Second, they are not biodegradable. At the end of their
service life, about 95% are discarded in landfills while a small fraction is
incinerated or crushed into powder for use as filler. These alternatives energy
intensive and potentially environmentally hazardous. Another class of materials
that end up in land-fills includes egg shells. Hence, there is an attractive
potential to develop materials that are environment-friendly and biodegradable
at the end of their design life. The materials so developed will provide
alternative to the current generation of high performance "advanced" composites
materials, which could have a positive impact on landfill use and lead to a wide
range of new green technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits
lie in the fact that the development of biodegradable nanofibers, nanoparticles,
nanobiopolymers and their characterization, processing and characterization of
advanced green composites will provide significant knowledge that can be used to
develop new applications in automotive and building industries. The processes
and knowledge developed through the three subprojects will help in diversifying
the research portfolio into other fields like drug delivery, packaging, wound
healing, and pharmaceuticals that will result in sustaining the center beyond
the funding period. The materials developed will provide an environment-friendly
alternative to currently used synthetic, non-biodegradable, petroleum based
fiber reinforced composites. A diverse group of nationally and internationally
recognized scientists and engineers has been assembled to pursue state-of-the-
art research and education endeavors through three synergistically linked
subprojects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
production of a large number of graduates with BS through PhD degrees,
including, a significant number of minorities and women. These graduates will be
adequately trained in emerging areas of nano-bio science and technology with
excellent communication and interpersonal skills. They will interact with
researchers outside of USA through participation in international conferences
abroad and working in the laboratories on partnering institutions in Brazil and
India. Such graduates will become excellent role models for many young students
and help bring much-needed diversity to the nation's advanced technological
workforce. Broader societal impact includes reduced dependence on petroleum
products, utilization of waste products to produce engineering materials and
products, and a partial solution to landfill problems.