* 1137836
* RAPID: Continuation of US GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section: The fractional solubility of aerosol iron in seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Ana Aguilar-Islas, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,046.00

In the fall of 2010, the US GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section cruise began its
survey of the distribution of trace metals and isotopes across a basin where
there is an enhanced influence from atmospheric deposition. Due to damages to
the ship's (R/V Knorr) propulsion system, the cruise was halted at an early
stage when less of a third of the cruise track was completed. The completion of
this section has been rescheduled for the fall of
2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support through this Grant for Rapid Response
Researcher, a GEOTRACES researcher at the University of Alaska at Fairbanks will
be able to continue participation in this expedition to complete work originally
proposed and funded by NSF through an ARRA award. This work addresses the
guiding mission of GEOTRACES: "to identify processes and quantify fluxes that
control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and
to establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental
conditions". Iron is a key trace element in the GEOTRACES program, and this
study investigates the fractional solubility of aerosol Fe using a novel field
approach. Results will improve our understanding of how aerosol deposition
affects the surface distribution of Fe in the North Atlantic. Information
obtained from this work will also help establish how changing environmental
conditions (e.g. increased dust flux) may affect the distribution and speciation
of Fe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuation of the GEOTRACES North Atlantic
section cruise will traverse over surface waters with significantly different
chemical and biological characteristics, and with aerosol deposition from
natural and anthropogenic sources. This portion of the cruise offers the
complementary setting needed to complete the investigation of factors affecting
aerosol Fe dissolution in the North Atlantic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Essential information concerning the dissolution of Fe in seawater will
be generated and incorporated into the GEOTRACES database. This project presents
a unique approach for investigating the fractional solubility of aerosol Fe in
seawater that will result in important information for models of global carbon
cycling and climate change that incorporate the aeolian supply of Fe. The
project will support an early-career, female principal investigator at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF), and helps build research infrastructure at
UAF. An undergraduate student at UAF will receive support from this study.
Information gained from this research will be incorporated into materials for
web dissemination and public outreach events.