* 1137535
* Broadening Participation Research Grant: Improving Minority Student Mathematics Performance and Persistence in STEM Majors Through Cognitive Training
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Milton Faison, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 411,295.00

Virginia State University's Broadening Participation Research in STEM Education
Project entitled - Improving Minority Student Mathematics Performance and
Persistence in STEM Majors Through Cognitive Training - is a joint effort among
investigators from the departments of Psychology, Biology, and Mathematics &amp;
Computer Science. The overall goal of this research project is to develop and
assess the efficacy of cognitive training interventions on working memory
performance in minority STEM students which leads to improved mathematics
performance. Specific aims include the following: institute and assess the
impact of cognitive skills training on working memory and mathematics
performance in minority STEM students; develop a model of the mediating and
moderating effects of psychosocial and cognitive variables on treatment effects
among these students; assess neural changes brought about by each of these
interventions through pre- and post- f-MRI scans; and assess the sustainability
of the gains through scans one and two years after the initial
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct training of cognitive skills such as
attention, working memory, and processing speed, represents a unique method of
developing the underlying cognitive architecture needed for success in STEM, and
this research will both demonstrate the efficacy of these interventions, as well
as allow for a more detailed mapping of the neural correlates of the training
for mathematical performance. This project will provide the necessary data to
facilitate the dissemination and implementation of these unique educational
interventions, and will have an impact on increasing the number of minority
students prepared to enter a STEM career. It will also allow for the training of
a large number of minority undergraduate and graduate assistants, which will
impact the number of minority students pursuing a research career in
neuroscience.