* 1137368
* Collaborative Research: Geologic, Tectonic, and Geodynamic Processes  of the Eastern North American (ENAM) Passive Margin Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Julia Morgan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 51,809.00

Earthscope and GeoPRISMS represents research communities of geologists,
geophysicists, and geodynamicists who study the processes that build continents,
open ocean basins, erode, transport and deposit sediment, and the associated
natural hazards of earthquakes, tsunamis, sea level rise, and landslides both on
land and under water. Earthscope science is done primarily, but not exclusively
on land and involves a large transportable array of seismometers that are able
to look down into the crust and mantle in assembling an image of the geologic
foundation of the United States. GeoPRISMS research is done primarily, but not
exclusively in the ocean, specifically in the coastal regions surrounding the
country. It includes facilities and instruments able to image and sample the
sedimentary packages preserved beneath coastal waters. Collectively, Earthscope
and GeoPRISMS research spans the coastline and in doing so, provides an
integrated framework for understanding not only natural hazards, but also the
nation's natural resources including traditional and alternative sources of
energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project is to convene two workshops open to
the broader Earthscope and GeoPRISMS research communities interested in the
processes of lithospheric formation, rift initiation, passive margin evolution,
and interactions with dynamic mantle and surface processes for the east coast of
the United States. The eastern United States encompasses the Appalachian
Mountains and the archetype Atlantic passive margin and as a result is a source
of formative thinking related to continental assembly, mountain building,
continental rifting, and post-rift passive margin evolution. Key paradigms such
as the Wilson cycle and global sea level change are based on data and research
in this geographic area. A small planning workshop is to be held in Austin, TX
in concert with the May, 2011 EarthScope meeting. The science workshop is to be
held at Lehigh University in the Fall, 2011. Our goal is to focus community
effort on cross-discipline learning and approaches, targeting a national and
international forum of scientists from universities, national labs, federal, and
state agencies including early-career scientists and graduate students. The
transportable array of EarthScope arrives in the eastern United States in
2012-13 and GeoPRISMS has identified the same region as a key place to
understand the processes of continental rift-initiation and evolution.
Therefore, the timing is now perfect to organize both communities and identify
the crucial science targets. We envision the workshops to serve as a forum for
self-organization in the subsequent science proposal submission process.