* 1137396
* Automated Analysis of the Reproductive Response of Two Panamanian Forests to ENSO Climate Variation - A Machine Learning Pilot Study
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2012,09/30/2015
* David Tcheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* timothy kratz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 236,907.00

Contained within the fossil pollen and spore record is one of the most
comprehensive histories of vegetation and its response to long term
environmental change. However, scientists have been unable to efficiently use
this record because pollen is still studied much in the same low technology way
it was a century ago: by a highly trained expert using a transmitted light
microscope. The proposed research intends to transform the study of pollen and
spores into a high throughput and precise science by developing an automated
system capable of identifying and classifying extremely diverse pollen and spore
samples. This system will establish standards approaches for automated
classification and be based on recent advances in machine learning and computer
vision. The system will be developed and tested on 900 samples of pollen
material collected over seventeen years from pollen traps placed in two tropical
forests in Panama. Automation will allow, for the first time, a detailed study
of the seasonal production of pollen in response to multiple El Nino-Southern
Oscillation, or ENSO, events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed
research will increase the quantity and quality of tropical pollen data and
promote needed research on the large scale dynamics of plant communities that is
recorded in fossil pollen records. This research represents a fundamental
transformation in the way scientists think about and approach the analysis of
pollen data. The machine learning software that will be developed will be
publically available, with the hope that other researchers will then adopt the
methods and standards and establish objective measures for consistent and
reliable pollen identifications. Educational goals of this project include
undergraduate research training for underrepresented and first generation
college students.