* 1137701
* AGS-PRF:  Modeling Water Content and Solute Activities of Atmospheric Aerosols at Extremely Low Relative Humidities
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Cari Dutcher, Dutcher                 Cari           S
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 172,000.00

Dr. Cari S. Dutcher was awarded an Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a research project with Anthony
Wexler at the University of California at Davis (UCD). Dutcher will employ a
statistical thermodynamic approach to the uptake of atmospherically important
species onto particles that are important in the air, such as black carbon,
organics and water-containing aerosols. The thermodynamic treatment of aerosol
properties will be extended to conditions found in the upper troposphere, with
low temperatures (relevant to higher altitudes and latitudes) and at low
relative humidity (relevant to arid climates and some higher altitude
situations). Results will enhance thermodynamic predictions of the Extended
Aerosol Inorganics Model (E-AIM) and will improve understanding of (1) the
interactions of gases, particles, aerosols and water in the earth's atmosphere,
(2) the modification of thermodynamic properties in the cold, dry arid
conditions found in the upper troposphere and (3) the impact, both direct and
indirect, sorption processes have on the role of particles in climate.

Dutcher will also develop a web-based model calculator to enable those who are
not experts in atmospheric thermodynamics to make effective use of models for
practical calculations. Dutcher will integrate research and education through
mentorship of undergraduate researchers and by engaging in interactive
environmental and conservational demonstrations at local schools. The project
will also support the outreach programs currently underway at the Air Quality
Research Center at UCD, hosting activities from high-school group tours to
international conferences in air quality and climate change. Several activities
would be aimed at young girls.