* 1137506
* Mirror Symmetry in the Midwest Conference to be held at Kansas State University; Winter, 2011
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Yan Soibelman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2012
* USD 23,050.00

A conference entitled "Mirror Symmetry in the Midwest" will be held November 3-6
at Kansas State University. Mirror symmetry is an exciting and rapidly
developing field that is concerned with duality between the complex and
symplectic geometry of certain Calabi-Yau manifolds. The search for the
underlying principles at work in mirror symmetry has driven a great deal of the
research in symplectic and complex/algebraic geometry over the past two decades.
Many of the ideas and techniques used to study mirror symmetry have become
interesting areas of research in their own right. Examples include Gromov-Witten
theory, Floer theory, Fukaya categories, derived categories, Lagrangian torus
fibrations, special Lagrangian geometry, Donaldson-Thomas invariants, and
tropical geometry. The breadth of ideas involved and number of approaches to the
subject make it fertile ground for collaboration. The conference will exploit
this by bringing together researchers studying a wide variety of the geometric
and algebraic aspects of mirror symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
conference is to advance mirror symmetry by opening and strengthening lines of
communications between researchers, finding areas for collaboration, and
educating participants. The conference will have several important features in
order to achieve these goals. To further the educational aims, the conference
will feature a mini-course designed to educate participants on a particular
topic at a high but non-expert level. The mini-course will be useful to graduate
students as well as to more senior participants, both as an educational
experience and as an opportunity to find areas for collaboration. There will be
a poster session that will allow graduate students to show off their work. This
will provide an opportunity for young researchers to communicate with more
senior researchers and will provide an excellent opportunity for the transfer of
knowledge. The conference will feature participants who are experts in both
geometric and algebraic aspects of mirror symmetry and thus will provide an
opportunity to find ways to integrate diverse ideas. Finally, mirror symmetry
has its roots in string theory and high energy physics and today is an important
branch of theoretical physics. The conference will increase communication
between mathematicians and physicists by inviting both types of people to
attend.&lt;br/&gt;More information can be found on the conference
website:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.ksu.edu/~galston/conference/