* 1137067
* Support for Student Travel to 55th International Conference on Electron Ion and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication,to be held, May 31-June 3,2011.
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Henry Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Support for student travel to 55th International Conference on Electron Ion and
Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication, Proposal 1137067

This project, funded at $10,000, will help support the travel of 20 graduate
students, from universities around the USA, to attend the 55 th International
Conference on Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication,
2011, to be held at the J. W. Marriott Resort, Las Vegas, Nevada, May 31 to June
3, 2011. In the fields of nanofabrication, electron and ion-beam lithographies,
photon and imprint lithographies, particle-beam optics, and forefront
applications of nanofabrication, this conference is preeminent. The requested
travel aid will enable students to present their research to a high level
international scientific community. They will observe how scientists and
engineers exchange innovative ideas and other information at conferences, and
they?ll hear firsthand presentations of up-to-date research results in
nanotechnology.

Learning how a technical conference serves as a venue for conveying information
to other is an important element of a student?s education. Also important is
leaning how to present, in a cogent and understandable way, the results of one?s
research. The requested support will help to accomplish these ends. At the
conference, students will make important personal contacts and learn of
employment opportunities. At a special breakfast for the funded students, the
conference organizers will discuss optimal techniques for presenting scientific
information and how the conference program is put together.