* 1137353
* Collaborative Research: Building Analytical, Synthesis, and Human Network Skills Needed for Macrosystem Science: a Next Generation Graduate Student Training Model Based on GLEON
* BIO,EF
* 02/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Paul Hanson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2018
* USD 843,246.00

Collaborative Research: Building analytical, synthesis, and human network skills
needed for macrosystem science: a next generation graduate student training
model based on GLEON

Ecology is on the cusp of new continental-scale science. Enabled by emerging
science networks, there is now a tremendous promise for understanding the
effects and consequences of global environmental change on ecological systems
across regions and among continents. Data from environmental sensor networks, as
well as ever-growing, publically available data from research and monitoring
programs around the world will underpin this understanding. However, scientific
advances require people who can make creative use of technology and data, and
who can work together to promote transdisciplinary understanding. Tackling large
scale science will require a generation of scientists trained to work in teams
to effectively use/create the cyber infrastructure necessary to deliver relevant
data, to explore, analyze and synthesize those data using a variety of
techniques and tools, and to communicate their findings to the scientific
community and the public.

The creation of a Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network (GLEON) Graduate
Student Fellows Program (GGSFP) is proposed to build the essential skills
necessary for a new generation of scientists to quickly assume productive roles
in macrosystem syntheses, and network science organizations. GLEON is an
international, grassroots network of scientists, information technology experts,
and engineers who have a common goal of building a scalable, persistent network
of lake ecology observatories (www.gleon.org). GLEON has over 300 members (95
students) from 34 countries and has multiple data repositories, including near-
continuous high frequency data from lakes. This work will combine the extensive
resources and experience of GLEON with expertise in pedagogy, organizational
sociology, leadership training, and assessment to create an innovative training
program. Two cohorts of fellows, along with their advisors, will participate in
a series of 5 collaboratories that form its core. Asking and answering
continental-scale questions will be the scientific goal. A final workshop with
other major network education colleagues will help communicate successes and
lessons learned to other Ecological Observatory Networks. Dozens of additional
students will participate in shorter training sessions through GLEON all hands
meetings. Central to this training program will be (1) development of technical,
conceptual and analytical skills critical to carrying out macroscale biology and
network science, (2) development of communication skills for collaboration,
education and public outreach, (3) active participation in existing networks of
people, data, and technologies, and perhaps most important (4) training and
guidance by experts in how to build and sustain human networks through pedagogy,
organizational structure, and leadership training. Ongoing assessments will be
used to refine the program and to measure success and guide future programs.

Broader Impacts: The GLEON GGSFP will develop scientists' capabilities to build
and maintain the human infrastructure that is necessary to understand complex
environmental system function under global change. Students will emerge from the
program with significant skills in working within and utilizing networks of
people, infrastructure, data and equipment, and the ability to ask and answer
complex, large scale questions. Dozens of students will be engaged through
GLEON, and intensive, focused training for two cohorts of ten fellows will be
provided. Student cohorts will be selected to reflect gender, cultural and
disciplinary diversity balance, following the practices fostered, and lessons
learned with the GLEON Graduate Student Association. Coincident with the
development of students will be a training exemplar for the ecological
community. The outcomes and impact of this program will be extended throughout
the community via web-distribution of collaboratory training and through social
networking tools. In addition, primary graduate student advisors will experience
new training models and tools; fellows will develop a network of mentors in
addition to those at their home institution; and fellows and primary advisors,
together, will develop outreach materials and/or curricula. Advances in
scientific understanding through peer reviewed publications, including those
having to do with organizational management will also result. The program will
become part of the infrastructure of GLEON, providing new expertise in pedagogy,
organizational theory, and leadership training, resulting in continued
production of a highly trained work force with the dimensionality required to
realize the promise of network science.