* 1137462
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enrichment of the B.S. Chemistry Program through the Implementation of Forensic Science Concentration at North Carolina Central University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Diane Szaflarski, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

North Carolina Central University's Targeted Infusion Project entitled -
Enrichment of the B.S. Chemistry Program through the Implementation of Forensic
Science Concentration at North Carolina Central University - has the goal to
transform the curriculum and to increase enrollment in the B.S. Chemistry
program by implementing a forensic science concentration. The increasing public
visibility of state-of-the-art forensic methods is reflected by the growing
number of inquiries regarding the forensic science concentration from
prospective and incoming students at NCCU. In response to these external
demands, the Department of Chemistry established the forensic science
concentration within the Chemistry degree program in
2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities to accomplish the project's goal are:
to develop and implement a capstone forensic science course which encompasses
integrated scenario-based lecture and laboratories; transform the current
Chemistry curriculum by infusing modern forensic analytical, physical, and
bioanalytical techniques into various courses; expand research and internship
opportunities for undergraduate students; and implement outreach activities for
high school students centered around the forensic science concentration to
increase the enrollment in the B.S. Chemistry program. The outcome expected from
this project is that the students graduating from this program, who are mostly
from groups underrepresented forensic chemistry, will be trained in forensic
science and will be able to transition into either graduate and professional
schools or the workforce.