* 1137865
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Ancestor Coalescent Theory For Cultural Evolution
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Stefano Ghirlanda, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 02/28/2015
* USD 447,994.00

What are the origins of our culture, customs, and traditions? Who were our
ancestors? These questions arouse great interest in the public, and are also
debated among scientists and humanists. In the last 50 years, genetics has
yielded numerous insights into human prehistory and history. Events such as
migrations and epidemics leave traces in the DNA that can be decoded with the
help of modern biological and mathematical methods. Humans, however, possess
cultural heritage as well as genetic heritage, and cultural histories may differ
radically from genetic histories: Genes come from just two parents, but ideas
can come from anyone. This project will extend mathematical methods used in
genetics so that they can be applied to study the cultural history of
populations. In a similar way that biologists use genetic differences between
individuals and groups to estimate their genetic histories, the new theory will
use cultural differences to deduce cultural histories. This will allow to
address such question as: How long ago did the cultural ancestors of a
population live? How much contact has there been with other cultures? Is culture
transmitted mostly by elites or by the general population? The project will thus
add powerful instruments to the toolboxes of such disciplines as archeology,
anthropology, history, and linguistics, advancing understanding of human history
and helping to integrate science with the humanities. The work will be carried
out by a diverse team of evolutionary biologists, physicists, and experts in the
mathematical theory of cultural change, including key personnel and research
assistants from underrepresented minorities.