* 1137587
* Research Initiation Award: Multiscale modeling of the mechanical behavior and deformation mechanisms in small scale metallic structure exhibiting epitaxial interfaces
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Firas Akasheh, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 198,881.00

Tuskegee University's Research Initiation Award entitled - Multiscale Modeling
of the Mechanical Behavior and Deformation Mechanisms in Small Scale Metallic
Structure Exhibiting Epitaxial Interfaces - has the goal to initiate a research
program in multiscale modeling of the mechanical behavior of small scale
metallic structures, with a focus on the treatment of interfaces and boundaries.
Interfaces play a critical role in governing the mechanical behavior of
structures at those length scales. However, a complete understanding of the
underlying physical mechanisms is missing due to their complexity and dependence
on all length scales: atomic, defect, and microstructure. To this end, the
project initiates computational materials research at two scales: nanoscale,
using molecular dynamics, and mesoscale, using crystal plasticity. The work will
create and validate physically informed micro and mesoscale computational models
for interfaces. The research objectives are to create and validate a dislocation
dynamics (DD) framework which accounts for the interaction of interfaces with
dislocations in epitaxial heterogeneous structures, including dislocation
absorption, transmission, nucleation, and core spreading; and to use the
"interface-enhanced" DD framework to perform carefully controlled virtual
experiments to evaluate the ability of the viscoplastic self-consistent
polycrystalline plasticity model to account for the same type of interfaces
addressed in this research. To help accomplish these objectives, a collaboration
with the experienced multiscale modeling team at the Center of Advanced
Vehicular Systems at Mississippi State University has been forged with a long-
term relationship in mind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to
establishing a computational mechanics program, providing synergistic research
activities to undergraduate students, and infusing modeling and simulation into
the mechanical engineering curriculum at Tuskegee University. The project will
also document the mentoring practices and collect data to set the stage for
future research on broadening the participation of minority students through
intensive research in engineering.