* 1137948
* EAGER - Development of a Flagellar Motor Biosensor Prototype for Trace Level TNT Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Steve Tung, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2013
* USD 79,953.00

Continuous threat of terrorist attacks has rendered the detection of explosive
compounds a crucial component of homeland security. The primary goal of the
present project is to design, fabricate, and test a flagellar motor biosensor
prototype that will provide sensitive, fast, and specific trace-level detection
of trinitrotoluene (TNT), one of the most widely used explosive materials.
Flagellar motors are nanoscale biological motors commonly found in many
bacterial species such as Escherichia coli and Salmonella. Their rotational
behavior is extremely sensitive to slight changes in the level of environmental
chemical compounds such as nitrate and nitrite, two key components of explosive
materials. The proposed biosensor integrates E. coli flagellar motors with a
microfluidic system to detect the presence of TNT by monitoring changes in the
rotational behavior of a single flagellar filament attached to an immobilized
cell body. Based on an in-house preliminary study, the sensitivity level of a
non-optimized flagellar motor biosensor is about the same as the existing
explosive detection systems, including both the conventional electrochemical and
the new biological based designs. However, the proposed biosensor has a much
shorter detection time due to the fact that the sensing mechanism is controlled
by the fast chemotactic process of the cell' sensory system. The proposed
biosensor will be fabricated based on the core flagellar motor assembly
techniques developed by the PIs' research groups. The PIs will utilize the one-
year EAGER support to develop a complete prototype of the flagellar motor TNT
biosensor. The following are the specific objectives of the proposed
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Optimize chemotaxis signaling sequence for TNT
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop a single-cell tethering technique using PDMS micro
sieves.&lt;br/&gt;3. Fabricate biosensor prototype and evaluate performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposed Activity &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed flagellar motor biosensor is an unconventional technique for explosive
detection. It uniquely combines molecular biology with MEMS microfabrication to
realize a hybrid microsystem that can provide fast and sensitive TNT detection
in a compact package. Successful development of this project is not only
important to the field of explosive detection; it also represents a significant
step towards the application of flagellar motors for trace-level detection of a
wide variety of chemicals. The proposed project will face many science and
engineering challenges, including optimizing the signaling process of bacterial
chemotaxis for TNT sensing, single-cell tethering in a microfluidic system, and
developing an effective interface for delivering TNT samples into the biosensor.
Results of the project are expected to provide a wealth of information for
future designs of biological and biomedical microsystems. The proposed research
team has extensive experience in the handling and processing of flagellar
motors. Their work will be carried out in well-equipped biological processing
laboratories and large-scale microfabrication facilities at the University of
Arkansas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed Activity
&lt;br/&gt;The ability to detect trace level TNT is critical to homeland
security, as well as forensics science, environmental monitoring, and landmine
detection. Successful development of the proposed biosensor will lead to the
development of a hand-held tool for on-site TNT detection which can be used in
real-time sample analysis so that subsequent remediation, when necessary, can be
carried out in a timely manner. The proposed research will generate significant
learning opportunities for students at the University of Arkansas. Students
supported under this effort will have a rare opportunity to be cross-trained in
MEMS microfabrication and biological processing. The fabrication techniques and
recipes developed by this project will greatly enhance the technical capability
of the High Density Electronics Center (HiDEC), a multi-user microfabrication
facility at UA, in the areas of MEMS, BioMEMS, and NEMS.