* 1137024
* Tunable isotropic metamaterials in the optical regime based on metal nanoparticle cluster assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Sassan Sheikholeslami, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Sassan Sheikholeslami of Stanford University
as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Sheikholeslami will work
on synthesizing new kinds of materials with unusual physical properties (e.g.
materials with negative refractive index) using a bottom-up approach. Materials
will be synthesized using self-assembly of metal nanoparticles with a DNA
scaffolding. The PI will collaborate with scientists at the Molecular Foundry of
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The ultimate goal of this research is to
develop efficient, inexpensive methods for making interesting 'metamaterials'.
For his plan for broadening participation, Dr. Sheikholeslami will collaborate
with a San Francisco Bay Area artist to develop an exhibition on nanoscience to
help educate the public about this important area of technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Sheikholeslami is aimed at
developing new materials with interesting and unusual properties. The specific
materials that Dr. Sheikholeslami is concentrating on ('metamaterials') have
remarkable optical properties, unlike any other common optical materials.
Similar materials have been created in the laboratory with elaborate and
expensive lithographic methods. Dr. Sheikholeslami is developing methods that
will create these materials in a flask, at a much lower cost. Work like this
enables scientists to develop materials that may lead to revolutionary
technology that can have impacts in optics, solar energy, and defense. The
efforts at broadening participation being pursued by Dr. Sheikholeslami are
aimed at giving a broad cross section of the public exposure to an important
area of the chemical sciences.