* 1137641
* Career Outcomes of Engineering Bachelor's Degree Recipients
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Catherine Didion, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2014
* USD 176,048.00

Intellectual Merit: Women are less likely than men in similar bachelor's degree
cohorts to be retained in engineering (Frehill 2007a). This study will analyze
existing, nationally-representative data to answer several questions about this
gender difference in post-bachelor's retention in engineering. Are women less
likely to stay in engineering because of work/family issues? Gendered reactions
to the increasing uncertainty of engineering workplaces? Gender-based
discrimination? Or do women have better success than men in moving from
technical to managerial work in engineering? Researchers will analyze data from
the NSF?s Science and Engineering Statistical Analysis System (SESTAT) for 1993,
1997, 1999, 2003, and 2006, a compilation of three constituent surveys that
provide the most comprehensive data about the U.S. STEM workforce. A second
dataset includes the National Center for Education Statistics' Bachelors and
Beyond panel study for the 1992/93 and 1999/2000 degree cohorts (base year plus
three follow-ups for the 1992/93 degree cohort covering the 1993-2003 period),
which will provide a closer examination of how individual engineering careers
progress throughout the 1990s and early part of the 21st century. Finally, these
nationally-representative data will be supplemented by information from two
studies of U.S. engineers sponsored by the Society of Women Engineers. These
latter two studies, one completed in 1993 and the other in 2005, provide data
focused explicitly on career issues for engineers. This study is interested in
understanding retention within the engineering workforce, which has been the
subject of little systematic research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The proposed research will examine the extent to which women and under-
represented minorities--especially the often-overlooked intersection of these
groups (women of color)--are retained in engineering after earning bachelor's
degrees. The research will enable engineering educators, employers, and policy
makers to develop strategies for enabling retention in engineering after
graduation. Retention is important because the best ambassadors of jobs are
often incumbents (Hira 2007): such role models are essential to conveying to
young people that they can have long-term, meaningful careers within a
particular discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach strategy for the
findings includes presentations at conferences and papers in traditional
academic journals. In addition, the researchers will reach a wider audience
through articles in relevant engineering disciplinary magazines, read by
millions of engineers and other practitioners that will benefit from an
understanding of how to make the engineering workplace a more welcoming place
for diverse people.