* 1137529
* Targeted Infusion: Enhancing Undergraduate Programs in Environmental Science and Sustainability
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Lily Liang, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 298,421.00

The University of the District of Columbia (UDC) will conduct a Targeted
Infusion Project entitled - Enhancing Undergraduate Programs in Environmental
Science and Sustainability. This project will enable UDC to improve the quality
and scope of the undergraduate environmental sciences and sustainability
programs. In this project, three comprehensive core strategies that include
seven project activities will be developed and
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first strategy includes updating the
undergraduate curriculum and course contents by creating and integrating new
modules, by enabling interactive online course for mobile delivery, and by
including data mining and infusing sustainability into all courses. The second
strategy focuses on the development of a hands-on multidisciplinary summer-
bridge program designed for high school students in Washington DC to boost their
interest and to increase enrollment in UDC's undergraduate programs in
environmental science and engineering. The third strategy is to develop two
team-oriented experiential and problem-based learning multidisciplinary courses
- sustainability and urban water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal
is to increase the participation of underrepresented minority students in
undergraduate STEM education, especially in the environmental sciences and
sustainability programs. The short term goals of this project include: increased
program quality by incorporating lab and field experiments, increased enrollment
and retention in the undergraduate environmental sciences programs, and
preparation of students for graduate school and the workforce.