* 1137716
* AGS-PRF:  Estimating the Dust Climate Feedback by Developing and Using an Improved Parameterization of Dust Aerosol Emission
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Jasper Kok, Kok                     Jasper         F
* Fellowship Award
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2013
* USD 172,000.00

This award provides funds for a 2-year Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for the
PI, who will work under the mentorship of Professor Natalie Mahowald at Cornell
University. During the Postdoctoral Research Fellowship the PI will develop and
evaluate a physically-based parameterization of the emission of dust, primarily
from deserts and semi-arid regions. The parameterization is based on a formal
equivalence between the saltation process, through which dust aerosols are
ejected from the surface as a result of impacts with bouncing sand grains, and
the fragmentation of brittle materials such as glass. The project has three
broad tasks: 1) Developing an improved dust emission parameterization that
rigorously accounts for the dependence of the dust flux emitted by an eroding
soil on wind speed, soil properties, and vegetation; 2) Implementing the dust
emission parameterization into the NCAR Community Earth System Model (CESM), and
using simulations of the present day dust cycle to further evaluate the
parameterization against a wide range of ground-based and satellite
measurements; and 3) Using the dust module to quantify the dust climate feedback
in transitions from the preindustrial to the present day climate, and from the
present day to a future climate in which carbon dioxide concentrations rise to
twice their pre-industrial values.

The work will have broader impacts both practically and scientifically, as dust
plays an important role in establishing the earth's climate, and the radiative
effects of dust may constitute an important feedback for climate change. Thus,
better representation of dust emission in climate and weather models may lead to
better climate and weather predictions. In addition, dust emission plays an
important role in cloud formation, drought physics, and atmospheric chemistry,
and research in all these fields would be enhanced by better representation of
dust emission in atmospheric models. Finally, the postdoctoral research
fellowship, under the mentorship of an established scientist, will help to build
the career of the PI, thereby providing support for the future workforce in this
scientific discipline.