* 1137483
* (EAGER) Transforming STEM For Women and Girls: Reworking Stereotypes &amp; Bias
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mary Flanagan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2014
* USD 318,542.00

Intellectual Merit: Dartmouth College proposes an exploratory project meant to
offer testable proof of concept activities that enact some practical approaches
to create an environment of encouragement for girls in STEM through games. The
activities will take into account the context of families, schools, communities,
and peer groups. The researchers hypothesize that well-designed game activities
may disrupt negative stereotypes about women's capabilities in STEM fields.
Through fostering and supporting girls' confidence in their abilities in STEM,
they may be more motivated to become interested in STEM fields. Using the
theoretical frameworks of Critical Play, where the design process mirrors the
values to be integrated into the design of the artifact, and informed by Design-
Based Research, the project team will address the research questions by
iterating and testing novel approaches to these issues. The proposed project
explores, prototypes, iterates, and assesses interactive experiences designed to
connect research findings in gender and STEM areas to girls in their own
contexts. The research team proposes to prototype 10 games with the goal to
finalize 4 for production. No one has yet used a game platform to explore
mitigating bias and stereotypes, and this is a new approach to challenging
social norms that have been shown to decrease girls' interest in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A recently released AAUW report points to
recent research findings that identify the social and environmental factors in
the underrepresentation of women in STEM areas. Much research has pointed to the
specific ways in which girls might further succeed in STEM areas if particular
social and cultural aspects were to improve. Small game activities are a
powerful vehicle for a much broader discussion, social interaction, and
collaboration, and offer a ripe platform for STEM exploration. Discovering a set
of design principles that foster change with the social and environmental
factors involved in the perception of STEM fields promises an extraordinary
proof-of concept contribution to the field. The successful completion of this
research has great potential to show proof of concept in the disruption of
gender stereotypes using games. Some of these barriers might be changed through
well-designed, collaborative game activities that can engage and energize the
issues.