* 1137982
* Rapid Response: Spreading The Word About Japan's Earthquake, Tsunami And Nuclear Crisis
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Robert Flynn, MacNeilLehrerProductions
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 06/30/2012
* USD 200,000.00

MacNeil Lehrer Productions, producer of the PBS NewsHour, is awarded a RAPID
grant to cover the research that is ongoing as a result of the unanticipated and
disastrous earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis in Japan. The team of
experienced producers and correspondents will produce at least 8 segments for
broadcast, along with extensive material for online. All the stories will
revolve around scientists (geophysicists, oceanographers) and engineers
(structural, seismic, civic, nuclear) as well as social scientists and the work
they are doing in wake of the disaster. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The online
material will include blogs and web-only video reports that will deliver content
to augment broadcast coverage. The coverage will include not only what is being
learned in Japan but how that knowledge will impact earthquake, tsunami and
nuclear engineering and science, as well as social impact studies, in the United
States. The NewsHour will encourage user engagement through regular posting of
stories on social media outlets, including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, UStream
and Discus. The online/on-air correspondent Hari Sreenivasan will conduct web-
exclusive interviews with scientists on the forefront of the related research.
The NewsHour Extra, the website that reaches 170,000 educators per month, will
use the science coverage on its Daily Video Clip Tool to provide educators
resources and lesson plans to help initiate discussions with students about the
science, environmental and engineering issues raised by the on-going
story.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reach of the PBS NewsHour is significant. PBS
NewsHour is seen five nights a week on more than 315 PBS stations across the
country and is also available online, via public radio in select markets and via
podcast. The national daily broadcast delivers an audience of approximately 1.1
million viewers and the Online NewsHour visitors reached 5.4+ million monthly
page views in January 2011. The NewsHour public radio broadcasts reach an
average of 63 thousand listeners daily across the U.S. Outside the U.S., the PBS
NewsHour television broadcast is available on the American Forces Television to
more than 800,000 U.S. military and State Department personnel around the world.
In addition, audiences across Canada, Australia, Japan and Europe, Asia, Africa
and Latin America tune into the service via various channels and satellite
services. The deliverables produced under this award will be consolidated on the
NewsHour website where they will create a permanent record of these resources.