* 1137725
* Puerto Rico Center for Environmental Neuroscience
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Joshua Rosenthal, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2017
* USD 4,985,003.00

Human activities are altering the environment at an alarming rate. A
multidisciplinary approach is essential to understand the complex interplay
between molecular, cellular, and behavioral responses by organisms under these
increasingly stressful conditions. The nervous system is the interface between
an organism and its environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Puerto Rico Center
for Environmental Neuroscience (PRCEN) will combine neuroscience (the study of
the nervous system and behavior) and environmental science (the study of local
ecosystem environments) to tackle environmental issues in Puerto Rico's tropical
setting. The Center will combine neuroscientists from the Institute of
Neurobiology and the Dept. of Anatomy of the University of Puerto (UPR) Medical
Sciences campus and environmental scientists from the Environmental Sciences
Program and the Depts. of Biology and Chemistry of the UPR Rio Piedras. The
alliance will bring together cutting-edge techniques normally associated with
cellular and molecular neuroscience with expertise in local ecosystems and
environmental science to create a novel field that will require participants to
move outside of their comfort zones and learn about entirely new areas of
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of the center will be to: (1)
establish research programs in the new field of environmental neuroscience, (2)
enhance research productivity through faculty and infrastructure development,
(3) increase the numbers of minority students attaining advanced degrees in
interdisciplinary science, and (4) generate community understanding of the work
being done in the Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research subprojects focus
on four local ecosystems: terrestrial, freshwater rivers, estuaries, and marine
systems. The habitats under study are intimately connected: contaminants in the
mountains make their way into rivers, pass through the estuaries, and end up in
the sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oceans subproject is designed to understand
the consequences of environmental pressures on tropical corals, using state of
the art molecular-cellular techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The estuaries
project will focus on the blue crab, which supports one of the largest fisheries
industries in the United States. This project will use high resolution
monitoring to track the presence of contaminants and other environmental
stressors, and correlate the resulting environmental data with physiological
monitoring of heart and endocrine functioning in this crab.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The freshwater studies will monitor contaminants in three
representative Puerto Rican rivers. Four animal models (zebrafish, mosquitofish,
and two types of prawn) will be exposed to pollutants found in the three rivers,
and a range of physiological and behavioral parameters will be examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the terrestrial project will use sophisticated
molecular biology and electro-physiology to examine the nervous systems of fruit
flies from different habitats in Puerto Rico. The standard laboratory-reared
fruit fly (Drosophila) is a prized and widely-used model system in neurobiology
laboratories throughout the world. However, there is a paucity of studies
examining this animal in the wild, especially with respect to the specific
habitats in which they are living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The conceptual linchpin of the PRCEN is that the nervous system
is the interface between an organism and its environment; a multidisciplinary
approach is essential to understand the complex interplay of molecular,
cellular, organismal, and ecosystem dynamics faced by organisms under the
increasingly stressful conditions created by human impacts on the environment.
We refer to this approach as environmental neuroscience. The program will be
unified by the central hypothesis that a full understanding of the consequences
of pollution and climate change requires dialogue between investigators
monitoring environmental conditions and organismal biologists using that
information to determine how environment affects function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The PRCEN center will change the
way we look at environmental problems, and will create a new category of
scientists prepared for the environmental challenges developing from human
activities. The Center will impact a large number of minority students by
tapping into the collective student population of over 19,000. Our undergraduate
participants will integrate closely with ongoing NSF sponsored mentorship
initiatives such as the Lewis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, the
Research Experience for Undergraduates Program, and the Undergraduate Research
Mentoring Program. Our graduate students will have access to broad training
here, and will also be given the opportunity to take courses and train stateside
at places like the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, MA. Finally, our
studies will integrate with local organizations such as the San Juan Bay Estuary
Program to coordinate community outreach targeting K-12 education.