* 1137763
* JSU-RISE:  Research Infrastructure and Student Development through the Chemical Design of Multifunctional Carbon Nanotubes
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Ashton Hamme, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2015
* USD 999,130.00

The Jackson State University HBCU-RISE (Research Infrastructure for Science and
Engineering) project will utilize an interdisciplinary approach to develop a
research and educational program that will prepare chemistry undergraduate (RISE
Scholars) and graduate students (RISE Fellows) to be competitive in a global
market. The research activities of the project will bring together faculty
members from different scientific disciplines with these students to develop
multifunctional carbon nanotube hybrid materials for the possible detection of
several waterborne pathogens (e.g. Escherichia coli, Salmonella, and Shigella)
selectively and simultaneously, which will be suitable for potential
applications for water purification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Waterborne pathogens are an emerging threat worldwide in
hospitalized children and adult patients. These pathogens are responsible for an
increase in mortality rates and additional financial costs. Computationally
driven synthesis of the proposed multifunctional CNTs with multimodal sensing
capabilities would selectively and simultaneously sense and identify several
pathogens in real time and purify the water supply.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The human resource objectives of
the project are (a) to improve and expand JSU's research and educational
capability in order to prepare African Americans and women to become effective
future scientists for the nation and (b) to increase the number and quality of
underrepresented minority STEM students through interdisciplinary research and
effective mentoring. The research and educational goals of this project align
well within the ongoing developmental plan of Jackson State University to become
one of the region's foremost centers for nanoscience and nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the Jackson State-RISE program are
&lt;br/&gt;(1) to establish an interdisciplinary research team to address water
contamination problems; &lt;br/&gt;(2) to expose students to the collaborative
nature of the scientific enterprise by bringing together a core group of
interdisciplinary faculty with complementary scientific pursuits; &lt;br/&gt;(3)
to develop leadership skills of students: this includes the active roles of
students in decision making concerning their research projects, summer
internships, seminar speakers and other programmatic issues; &lt;br/&gt;(4) to
create a JSU-RISE educational/research atmosphere that includes journal clubs,
seminars, workshops on scientific writing, presentation and research ethics,
research skill development, teaching experiences, and strategies for competing
for national pre-doctoral and postdoctoral fellowships; &lt;br/&gt;(5) to
increase the candidate pool for future JSU-RISE students by involving highly
qualified undergraduate and K-12 students in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate aim for the JSU-RISE program is to positively
impact a large quantity of underrepresented minority K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students who will enter, remain, and exit the STEM pipeline with a
terminal STEM degree.