* 1137764
* Direct Numerical Simulation of Monodisperse and Polydisperse Particulate Flows
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Zhi-Gang Feng, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2012
* USD 96,067.00

This is a collaborative research program between the Center for Simulation,
Visualization and Real Time Computing (SiViRT) at the University of Texas at San
Antonio (UTSA) and the Department of Computer Science at the University of Texas
Pan American (UTPA). The proposal aims to bring together faculty members and
graduate students of the two institutions for the purpose of enhancing existing
research and improving the education of minority and women graduate students.
The objectives of this collaborative research proposal are: a) to develop a
highly efficient and reliable Direct Numerical Simulation method (DNS) that can
characterize particle-particle and particle-fluid interactions in both
monodisperse and polydisperse particulate flows; b) to apply the DNS as a tool
to develop constitutive equations and closure laws that can be used for the Two-
Fluid Model (TFM); and c) to establish strong connections and ties between the
two minority Institutions and integrate educational activities within the
proposed research by attracting under-represented minority students to
engineering research programs. Particulate flows are involved in many natural
and engineering processes. Examples are: colloids in chemical engineering
processes; dust and aerosols in the atmosphere; particulate and droplet
transport associated with sediments in rivers; fluidized bed reactors; and drugs
and supplements delivered through the human circulatory system. The size and
properties of particles in a particulate system have wide ranges (polydisperse
system). Numerical simulations have been a very effective tool for understanding
the nature of the particle-particle and particle-fluid interactions. However,
the primary challenge in modeling life-sized particle-fluid systems is the large
separation of scales, ranging from macro-scale (device scale) to micro scale
(particle scale). The DNS provides detailed information on particle-particle and
particle-fluid interactions; it can be used to study many poorly understood
phenomena in particulate flows, such as particle "bubbling", segregation, and
agglomeration.