* 1137237
* EFRI-M3C: Robust Decoder-Compensator Architecture for Interactive Control of High-Speed and Loaded Movements
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2011,09/30/2017
* Nitish Thakor, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,000,000.00

Objective: Brain-machine interactive control (BMIC) of prosthetic limbs for high
speed and natural movements is a major challenge. The current BMIC paradigm
employs a feedforward interface between the brain and prosthetic, referred to as
the "decoder", whose success relies heavily on the ability of the brain to adapt
appropriately utilizing visual feedback information in a "certain" environment.
Such decoders are trained using data from healthy subjects but are implemented
as interfaces for spinal cord patients. The motor cortical output of the healthy
subject is substantially different from that of an injured patient, and decoders
do not account for spurious signals generated in the cerebellum due to the loss
of proprioceptive data. Thus, the key challenge is to design robust decoders for
BMIC of the future that take into account both cerebellar and cortical
contributions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: We propose a novel
Robust Decoder-Compensator (RDC) architecture for interactive control of fast
movements in the presence of uncertainty. The RDC is a feedback interconnection
that 1) decodes cortical signals to produce actuator commands that reflect motor
intent, 2) corrects for spurious cerebellar signals generated in the absence of
proprioceptive feedback, and 3) makes robust the interconnection to account for
mismatches between models and reality. Multi-site intracranial EEG recordings in
motor areas obtained from epilepsy patients executing fast and loaded movements
will facilitate system identification of cortical structures in healthy and in
spinal cord patients. The cortical models and the RDC architecture will belong
to a class of linear parameter varying systems, and the RDC will be synthesized
to maintain performance over a wide range of movements and environments.
Finally, we will implement the interactive system on patients with implanted
electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: We provide a unified framework
aimed at understanding human motor control, which incorporates cerebellar and
cortical models and builds a BMIC for fast and natural movements, allowing
patients with spinal cord injuries and cerebellar ataxia to execute rapid
natural trajectories. Powerful extensions of closed-loop system identification
and robust control synthesis techniques for LPV systems will be developed. This
program will also give students rare opportunities to address challenges at the
interface between systems engineering and neurobiology.