* 1137087
* Workshop:  China-US Workshop on Barriers to Sustainable Photosynthetic Production of Biofuels, September 2011, West Lafayette, IN
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Pankaj Sharma, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Proposal ID: 1137087 PI: Nathan S Mosier

This award will support participant travel to a China-US Workshop titled
Barriers to Sustainable Photosynthetic Production of Biofuels to be held as part
of the China-US Joint Research Center Symposium in September 2011 at Purdue
University.

Intellectual Merit

Direct conversion of reduced carbon from photosynthesis to energy-rich
hydrocarbons and lipids is one approach that may successful for the sustainable
production of biofuels. Autotrophic organisms that directly produce biofuels in
scalable systems through the photosynthetic fixation of atmospheric carbon have
significant potential to enable drop-in biofuel production. The workshop will
focus on identifying the critical knowledge gaps in photosynthetically driven,
biocatalytic production of drop-in biofuels. The workshop will examine issues
with biofuels from phototropic microorganisms (e.g. algae) and not on
lignocellulosic biomass conversion. The workshop will have three research and
education objectives: 1) Identify the critical knowledge gaps in
photosynthecially driven synthesis of reduced carbon biomolecules for drop-in
biofuels and bioproducts; 2) Identify potential research collaborations and
partnerships between US and China institutions; and 3) Develop recommendations
for areas of funding needs to enable the bio-economy.

Broader Impacts

The outcome of the workshop will be a report that outlines the knowledge gaps
and identifies specific areas where joint US-China research efforts could be
most effective in algae-based biofuel production. The report will also list
potential research collaborations that are enabled by partnerships between US
and China institutions affiliated with the China-US Joint Research Center for
Ecosystem and Environmental Change. The inclusion of graduate students in the
workshop will foster a greater global understanding of the impacts of their
research, and a greater appreciation for the global community of scientists
working in the area of sustainable energy production.