* 1137595
* Conference/Collaborative Research: First International Conference on Phononic Crystals, Metamaterials and Optomechanics; Santa Fe, New Mexico; May 29-June 1 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Zayd Leseman, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,000.00

This grant provides funds for a student paper competition and travel fellowships
for graduate students from US universities to attend and participate in
Phononics 2011: The First International Conference on Phononic Crystals,
Metamaterials, and Optomechanics, to be held in Santa Fe, New Mexico, May 29
through June 2, 2011). The study of phonons - although a core discipline in the
conventional condensed matter physics literature - is currently being viewed in
a new light. Whether examined at the nanoscale, microscale or larger scales, the
analysis and manipulation of phonons (aka phononics) is opening up a new
technological frontier with a potential impact that could match that of
electronics almost half a century ago. This conference is the world's first
conference to bring together the various sub-disciplines related to the study of
phonons across the various length scales. The conference covers the following
seven themes: (1) phononic crystals, (2) phononic metamaterials, (3) wave
propagation in periodic structures, (4) nanoscale phonon transport, (5) phononic
MEMS and RF applications, (6) optomechanics, and (7) characterization and
fabrication for phononics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this grant NSF supports
the conference by (1) provision of travel fellowships for graduate students from
US universities to attend and participate in the conference; and (2) sponsorship
of a student paper competition, coordinated by the conference organizing
committees, for Best, Second Best and Third Best Paper. This support helps the
conference in its mission to establish links among the broad and
multidisciplinary US and international scientific communities working in
phononics, and enhances the educational mission of the conference by encouraging
the participation of numerous US-based students pursuing graduate studies in
areas directly related to this emerging field.