* 1137138
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Examination of Shoshone Collective Action
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Bruce Huckell, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,608.00

Under the direction of Dr. Bruce B. Huckell, Matt O'Brien will conduct
dissertation research that centers on the socioeconomic organization of
cooperative hunting. Humans evolved in a hunting and gathering milieu and the
multiple forms of social organization that characterize modern groups all derive
from this underlying base. How the transformation from egalitarianism to complex
social stratified societies took place constitutes a central archaeological
question and this research project focuses on this issue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. O'Brien's dissertation research addresses the question
of socioeconomic inequalities in communal hunts from an archaeological
perspective. The Co-PI will focus the analysis on the faunal assemblage from the
Eden Farson site. Eden Farson is a Protohistoric period (AD 1350 - 1750)
Shoshone campsite with the skeletal remains of over 220 pronghorn antelope. The
site itself was occupied by 12 separate family units and the antelope remains
were found in association with all of them. By determining how individual cuts
of meat -- some choice and some less so -- were distributed, Mr O'Brien can gain
insight into the relative status of each household. Shoshone social structure is
considered a classic example of egalitarianism with a limited gerontocracy and
fluid group affiliation. Yet, there are limited ethnohistoric accounts of
temporary leadership during seasonal fishing along the Snake River. Although the
Shoshone were known for their diverse diet, pronghorn played an important
subsistence role in the pre-horse Shoshone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project contributes to Shoshone prehistory of the Rocky Mountains and High
Plains, but also extends to anthropological theory into past social
organization. First, this study will begin to fill in the gaps of the Late
Prehistoric Period to Protohistoric Period in the western High Plains and Rocky
Mountains. Second, it will provide an opportunity to bridge the archaeological
evidence to the existing ethnographic record of Shoshone culture. This research
provides a case study to test whether sharing concepts, or models, developed
from empirical observations of contemporary foragers can be applied to the past.
The combination of traditional faunal analysis with an innovative approach
provides a more holistic interpretation of past life-ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research also provides broader impacts
beyond those focused on prehistoric food sharing. This research will provide the
Co-PI a crucial opportunity to perform independent research that will aid in his
professional development. The results from this study will be accessible to the
anthropological community through future peer-reviewed publications and
presentations at nationally recognized conferences. From a logistic standpoint,
this research will result in the curation of the Eden Farson collection
according to Wyoming state standards, which will provide access to this
assemblage for future research.