* 1137827
* RAPID: GEOTRACES: Determination of Copper Distribution, Speciation, and the Relationship to Picoplankton Community Structure for the U.S. GEOTRACES Zonal North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* James Moffett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2013
* USD 58,626.00

The U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic zonal section cruise was scheduled for 15
October through 5 December 2010. Because of a major irresolvable mechanical
failure of the ship's propulsion system, the expedition had to be terminated in
the Cape Verde Islands on 4 November after completing about one third of the
planned track. This required on-the-spot changes in return travel for all sea-
going investigators as well as in shipping arrangements for all their samples
and equipment. The funds requested in this proposal address the PI's need to
cover a graduate student, travel, and supplies costs associated with his
participation in the continuation of the North Atlantic section cruise scheduled
for autumn 2011. Graduate student and travel support are needed to ensure a
student at the University of Southern California can participate in the
conclusion of the cruise and collect samples to finish his dissertation.
Additional travel costs are included to demobilize the ship at the end of the
cruise. Funds for supplies replace those lost during the initial leg of the
cruise. At the end of this project, the relationship between Cu cycling and its
speciation over a wide range of oceanographic regimes will be documents, as well
as the influence of this element on the community structure of Prochlorococcus
at the eco-type level.