* 1137546
* Travel Grant for Seventh Mediterranean Chemical Engineering Conference, Greece
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2017
* Steven Cramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2017
* USD 48,000.00

PI: Cramer, Steven M. Proposal Number: CBET - 1137546 Institution: Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute Title: Travel Grant for Seventh Mediterranean Chemical
Engineering Conference

This proposal requests for travel funds for U.S. academic representatives to
attend the 7th Eastern Mediterranean Chemical Engineering Conference (EMCC7) to
be held in Greece in late 2011 or 2012. Professor Maria Klapa, Head of the
Metabolic Engineering and Systems Biology Laboratory at the Foundation for
Research and Technology (FORTH) in Patras will be the Chair of the Conference.
The participating countries will be Greece, Turkey, Greece, Israel, Italy,
Bulgaria, Rumania and the United States. Academic chemical engineers from other
Eastern Mediterranean countries will also be invited.

Intellectual Merit: The majors goals of this conference are to (1) promote
contacts and potential research collaboration between the participating
countries (2) enhance research and teaching in chemical engineering in the
participating countries by providing a forum for interaction among the
participants (3) have significant industrial/societal impacts on the
participating countries through the extensive scientific and personal exchanges.
As has been the case for the previous conferences in this series, it is expected
the participants will be made up of approximately 25 academic chemical engineers
from the U.S., 50 from the host country (Greece), at least 20 from Italy,
Turkey, Israel and participants from Bulgaria, Romania and Jordan. In addition,
it is expected that a large number of graduate students will attend from the
participating Eastern Mediterranean Countries. This conference will be the
seventh conference of a series. The US EMCC coordinating committee consisting of
Steve Cramer (Rensselaer), Nick Abbott (Wisconsin) and Alex Katz (Berkeley) will
put together a team of first rate U.S. investigators who are both excellent in
research and very committed to establishing and continuing collaborations with
investigators from the other participating countries. It is expected that
approximately 25 U.S. presenters will be invited. This will include a blend of
senior researchers and promising young investigators. Special travel supplements
will also be provided to five US participants to visit and lecture in Greece and
the other countries (Israel, Turkey, Italy, Bulgaria or Rumania) to develop
and/or promote collaborations.

Broader Impact: It is expected based on past conference results that there will
be a significant and broad impact on the U.S. engineers attending this EMCC
conference. The first three EMCC Conferences have had major impacts in
acquainting US, Turkish, Israeli, and Greek academics with their research
interests and capabilities and in fostering research collaborations. The fourth,
fifth and sixth conferences provided further opportunities, by expanding the
conference to include Italy, Bulgaria and Rumania. An added benefit of these
conferences is the exposure they have provided for large numbers of graduate
students from the Eastern Mediterranean to interact directly with both seasoned
and young faculty researchers from the U.S. and other countries. These
conferences have provided excellent forums for fruitful discussions on
curriculum issues among faculty of the participating countries. In addition to
the personal contacts that the U.S. participants will make with people from the
other countries, it will be beneficial to U.S. interests to foster exchanges of
research and teaching ideas and of personnel, and establish research
collaborations between chemical engineers from the U.S. and chemical engineers
from the Eastern Mediterranean countries. Significant efforts will be made to
include both young and underrepresented faculty in the group of U.S.
participants. It is also likely that recruitment of potential graduate students
may occur informally.