* 1137541
* Targeted Infusion Project: Increasing Expertise of Minority Students by Development of a Virtual and Augmented Reality Laboratory for Research and Education at Bowie State Univ.
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sadanand Srivastava, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 299,489.00

Bowie State University's (BSU) Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Increasing
Expertise of Minority Students by Development of a Virtual and Augmented Reality
Laboratory for Research and Education at Bowie State University - will enhance
the computer science and mathematics curriculum and increase research
opportunities for undergraduate students by deploying Virtual and Augmented
Reality (VAR) as a research and educational vehicle to immerse students in
research and critical thinking challenges. The Department of Computer Science
enrolls about 250 undergraduate majors, most of whom are African-
American.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this proposal are to: 1)
enhance the Virtual Reality course curriculum with more inquiry based problem-
solving activities and hand-on experiences based on Virtual and Augmented
Reality educational modules; 2) develop the Virtual and Augmented Reality
Laboratory for research and education in the Computer Science Department to
provide undergraduate students with realistic immersive learning environments;
and 3) acquire instrumentation to further develop the teaching and research
infrastructure in VAR laboratories. The project seeks to prepare computer
science majors at BSU to be competitive to enter graduate programs and the
workforce.