* 1137981
* EAGER/Collaborative Research:  Exploratory Study of Nano Ultrasonic Machining Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Kamlakar Rajurkar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Collaborative research: EAGER: Exploratory Study of Nano Ultrasonic Machining
Process&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract. This collaborative research work will
study the feasibility of vibration assisted target specific nanoscale machining
of brittle material. The goal of the research is to generate fundamental
knowledge of nano ultrasonic machining process by conducting rigorous analytical
and experimental investigations to understand the mechanism of material removal,
the range of machinable feature sizes, effect of machining parameters on the
productivity of the machined feature, and the uncertainty and sustainability of
the nano ultrasonic machining process. A commercial atomic force microscope
(AFM) will be used in this exploratory research as an experimental platform to
perform ultrasonic nano abrasive machining, as well as nano measurement. The
scope of the research includes a process model formulation to predict the
material removal, based on appropriate set of process parameters. The scientific
barriers such as lack of knowledge base of ductile and brittle mode erosion at
nano scale models, and technical barriers such as behavior of abrasive powder at
ultrasonic frequency and nanoscale, form the main risks of this study. However,
if successful, this project will lead to a new and very effective process for
the accurate nano scale machining of brittle materials used in electronic,
medical, automotive and aviation industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of
this research is expected to have a transformative effect on the target specific
nanomachinability of a wide variety of both conductive and nonconductive
materials. Potential applications include high precision DNA detection devices,
interconnects nano packaging, and low cost mask correction for electronics
manufacturing. Results of this study may serve as prelude to abrasive based
picofinishing technology. Outcome of this project will be synergized with our
other nano machining activities to educate graduate and undergraduate students
in manufacturing courses offered at University of Cincinnati and University of
Nebraska-Lincoln. This experience will be used to nurture training and learning
within underrepresented minorities and to augment the ongoing partnership with
area school community. The results of this research will be disseminated through
peer-reviewed publications, presentations and university?s websites, short
courses at professional society meetings and reports to NSF.&lt;br/&gt;