* 1137419
* EAGER/RUI: Defect &amp; Surface Related Novel Phenomena in Oxide Semiconductor Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Alex Punnoose, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,969.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Magnetic materials are widely used for information
storage while semiconducting materials are essential for high speed processing
of information, thus these two materials form the most important components of
the vast majority of electronic devices today. Developing ferromagnetism in
conventional semiconductor materials is highly desired to make electronic
devices faster, smaller, cheaper, and more energy efficient. This project
investigates ways to develop stable above-room temperature ferromagnetism in
oxide semiconductors using multiple approaches, most importantly using the
unique and novel properties of oxide materials when prepared in nanoscale size
range. By engaging graduate students in the research, this project provides
significant support for the new doctoral programs at Boise State University in
the areas of Materials Science and Engineering, and Biomolecular Sciences
(starting in Fall 2012). Significant aspects of this research project are
integrated into several existing as well as new interdisciplinary graduate
courses in the Materials Science and Engineering, and Physics programs. Also,
this project provides research opportunities for several undergraduate students,
and students and science teachers from local high schools. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: In spite of the lack of success in producing
stable, reliable and reproducible room temperature ferromagnetism in
conventional semiconductors using dilute level doping of 3d cations(dilute
magnetic semiconductors) during the past 10 years, research in this direction
remains even more exciting due to its potential to make electronic devices
faster, smaller, more energy efficient and less expensive. Most of the
experimental data reported so far indicate the presence of ferromagnetism in
transition-metal doped oxide semiconductor nanoparticles. However, several
recent findings such as the lack of a systematic dependence of the magnetic
moment with dopant concentration, observation of ferromagnetism even in undoped
oxide semiconductors, and absence of properties expected from spin-orbit
interaction do not convincingly support it as a true dilute magnetic
semiconductor system. Thus, a new mechanism to understand the novel
ferromagnetism is needed and this is one of the major goals of this project. A
novel approach is being undertaken where the oxide semiconductor nanoparticles
are capped with various organic molecules to investigate if charge transfer
between nanoparticles and these linked molecules modifies the electronic
structure and thereby produces ferromagnetism in these oxides. X-ray absorption
near edge structure (XANES) studies in collaboration with Professor Steven
Bernasek at Princeton University is being utilized to evaluate the charge
transfer between the nanoparticles and the organic molecules. Other surface
sensitive techniques including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy are also available for additional studies.
Finally, modification of the physicochemical properties, especially fluorescence
emission, of the surface bound organic dyes due to their interaction with oxide
semiconductor nanoparticles and charge transfer are also being investigated
based on the PI's recent observation of a 90-fold increase in the fluorescence
emission of fluorescein isothiocyanate dye when chemically bound to ZnO
nanoscale tripod structures. Graduate, undergraduate and high school students
are being trained on cutting-edge research techniques such as XANES,
transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,
superconducting quantum interference device magnetometry and X-ray diffraction.