* 1137527
* Workshop: Graduate Student Symposium at ACM Creativity &amp; Cognition (C&amp;C 2011) Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Yi-Luen Do, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2012
* USD 22,020.00

The 8th Association for Computer Machinery (ACM) Creativity &amp; Cognition
Conference (C&amp;C 2011), to be held November 3-6, 2011 at the Georgia
Institute of Technology, will convene a diverse group of researchers working in
the areas of creativity, cognition, and computational thinking. As information
technology is increasingly prevalent in creative thinking and problem solving
activities, there is a growing need to study and understand creativity and
computing through synergistic cross-disciplinary methods and models to advance
computer science and information technology, cognitive science, engineering,
design, the arts and education. The ACM C&amp;C 2011 conference theme is
Creativity and Technology: to understand human creativity in its many
manifestations, to design new interactive techniques and tools to augment and
amplify human creativity, and to use computational media technologies to explore
new creative processes and artifacts in all human
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring and involving young scholars is the
key to seed and encourage interests and interactions across diverse disciplinary
boundaries in the field of creativity and cognition. The C&amp;C 2011 Graduate
Student Symposium is a full-day event for a group of twelve young scholars, in
the areas of study that contribute to understanding creativity and cognition.
The symposium is a forum to discuss and receive feedback and guidance from a
panel of senior researchers and practitioners in a supportive setting. The
recruitment of a diverse set of student participants is critical to broadening
the participation and research perspectives discussed during the symposium. To
attain this goal student eligibility for the symposium includes promising
senior-level undergraduates. The symposium leaders have also put into place a
proactive plan to recruit participants from minority-serving and undergraduate
institutions. Graduate Student Symposium papers are included in the conference
proceedings to integrate their research into the larger canon of research
presented at the conference.