* 1137977
* RAPID: Liquefaction and Its Effects on Buildings and Lifelines in the February 22, 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Thomas O'Rourke, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 99,554.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award provides funding to
investigate the effects of liquefaction on the built environment during the 22
February 2011, Mw=6.1 Christchurch, New Zealand, earthquake and the 4 September
2010, Mw=7.0 Darfield, New Zealand, earthquake with the goal of capturing
perishable data that would lead to the development of enhanced analytical
procedures for evaluating the hazard holistically. The intense ground shaking
and resulting soil liquefaction from the Christchurch earthquake damaged many
buildings, lifelines, and engineered systems. The Central Business District
(CBD) of Christchurch is still in ruins. The 22 February event is particularly
meaningful, because it occurred just 5 months after the Darfield earthquake, the
epicenter of which was approximately 40 km from the CBD. Whereas the 22 February
event killed almost two hundred people, the September event resulted in no
deaths. Additionally, although the 4 September event caused widespread
liquefaction-induced damage in the Christchurch area, it did not produce
significant liquefaction-induced damage within the CBD. There is much to learn
from comparing the different levels of soil liquefaction from these two
earthquakes and from evaluating the differing seismic performance of buildings,
lifelines, and engineered systems during these two earthquakes. It is extremely
rare to have the opportunity to learn how the same ground and infrastructure
responded to two significant earthquakes. The magnitude and distances of these
two earthquakes are two of the scenarios often considered in US cities.
Capturing details of lateral spreads and the impacts of liquefaction on well-
built structures, such as office buildings and their interconnecting buried
utilities, are critically important. Understanding how local geologic conditions
influenced the observed damage patterns is also important. Field reconnaissance
is focusing on capturing perishable data and characterizing the subsurface
conditions through: (1) trenching of liquefaction features, (2) performing
dynamic cone penetration tests, and (3) measuring shear wave velocities
(Vs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of soil liquefaction on the built
environment in the Christhurch area were pervasive. The New Zealand building
code is similar to that used in the U.S., and with much recent construction,
there is much that can be learned that is directly applicable to seismic regions
across the U.S. This study is being coordinated through the Geoengineering
Extreme Events Reconnaissance (GEER) Association and in collaboration with the
Univ. of Canterbury and the New Zealand government. Documenting and learning
from observations after design level earthquakes are invaluable to advancing the
state-of-practice in earthquake engineering. Surveying the re-occurrence of
liquefaction, documenting cases of liquefaction-induced ground movements, and
evaluating the effects of liquefaction on buildings and lifelines provide
invaluable information that will serve as benchmarks to the profession's
understanding of the effects of earthquakes. These earthquakes involve also
multi-hazard effects. The combined settlement caused by liquefaction during both
earthquakes has exposed many Christchurch neighborhoods to increased threats
from river and ocean flooding, including tsunami. Collection of data on
liquefaction-induced ground movement will form the basis for flood risk
assessment as well as earthquake vulnerability. The study combines the efforts
of several leading researchers to examine the effects of liquefaction
holistically. The team also includes a junior faculty member and graduate
students who are in the early stages of their careers, so it will help develop
their capabilities in earthquake engineering and allow them to establish
research contacts in New Zealand.