* 1137821
* Laboratory Studies of Multicomponent Aerosol Nucleation Involving Organic Amine Compounds
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Shan-Hu Lee, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

Laboratory studies of multi-component aerosol nucleation involving organic amine
compounds under conditions relevant to the lower troposphere will be carried out
to investigate (1) the effects of amines on sulfuric acid aerosol nucleation,
(2) how ammonia and amines together enhance sulfuric acid nucleation compared to
ammonia or amines alone, (3) the effects of amines on sulfuric acid aerosol
nucleation in the presence of organic acids (e.g., acetic or oxalic acids), (4)
whether organic acids and ammonia/amines can produce new particles without
sulfuric acid, and (5) how amines play different roles in the initial formation
of molecular clusters and their subsequent growth to aerosol particles. The
composition of these laboratory-generated aerosols will be compared with that of
ambient aerosols in various atmospheric environments to understand the roles
that organic compounds play in the aerosol nucleation processes.

Climate change is one of the most important scientific and socioeconomic issues
of the day. Aerosol-cloud-climate interactions are not well enough understood to
make reliable predictions about future climate. Nucleation is a predominant
source of new particles and thus is an important process that controls aerosol
concentrations, cloud condensation nucleus (CCN) populations and, ultimately,
cloud abundance. New particles may also have significant indirect effects on
climate through their modification of cloud properties such as albedo, lifetime,
and precipitation efficiency. Indeed, aerosols represent the greatest source of
uncertainty in climate modeling, and thus understanding the nucleation and
growth processes that govern aerosol formation are a high priority in
atmospheric research. The results of this project will help to reduce the
uncertainties in the current aerosol nucleation theories and the uncertainties
in the predictions of CCN concentrations in regional and global aerosol models.
Through involvement in this project a postdoctoral fellow, a PhD student, and
several undergraduate students will gain valuable knowledge and experience in
atmospheric chemistry, aerosol technology, and climate science.