* 1137729
* AGS-PRF: Towards a Dynamical Understanding of Climate Induced Disaster in Mongolian: Identifying Mechanisms, Change and Vulnerability
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Nicole Davi, Davi                    Nicole         K
* Fellowship Award
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2015
* USD 172,000.00

Under the aegis of the AGS-PRF (post-doctoral research fellowship) solicitation,
the researcher aims to use modern and paleoclimate data to examine the
occurrence of extreme weather and climatic events in Mongolia such as the dzud.
A dzud event is characterized by summer drought followed by a harsh winter. The
impact of such severe events on nomadic persons and the landscape they occupy
could be profound since environmental conditions dictate resource availability.
By examining the climatology and spatial and temporal variations of the dzud,
the researcher seeks to better understand the relationship between climate and
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researcher aims to: 1)
identify and quantify the spatial and temporal changes in the landscape (e.g.
vegetation abundance, drought stress and desertification) that increase
vulnerability to climate change; 2) evaluate the spatial coherence of dzud and
other extreme events and identify and map vulnerable regions; 3) evaluate the
ocean/atmosphere dynamics during known events and identify any patterns or
commonalities; and 4) model and reconstruct dzud and extreme events using data
and knowledge gained from objective 1, 2 and 3, as well as historical,
meteorological, satellite, and paleoclimatic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts involve enabling greater interface between climate science and
economics, internationally, and creating partnerships with risk management
professionals regarding issues surrounding climate dynamics.