* 1137811
* RAPID: Workshops to Facilitate Engineering Research Related to 2011 Tohoku-Kanto Earthquake and Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Stephen Mahin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 04/30/2012
* USD 39,989.00

The Tohoku-Kanto earthquake of March 9, 2011 and the tsunami that followed it,
though unfortunately devastating, are very unique events of unparalleled
scientific and engineering interest. This earthquake has caused extensive damage
to built environment, yet there are examples of structures that have survived
the strong shaking. Apparently, Japanese researchers have already collected some
information about the damaged and undamaged structures and are willing to share
this information with their US counterparts. Much can be learnt from further in-
depth analysis of this information to understand the causes of failures and
survivals of these structures with the objective of preventing this from
happening in future events. This project will support the travel to Japan of a
team of researchers to enable them to meet with Japanese engineers and
researchers to gather data and information about the damage caused by this
earthquake and tsunami that can be shared with US researchers. The team will
hold workshops and meetings with Japanese researchers to gather information
about what data of research interest is available, and disseminate this
information to the wider research community in the US through webcast seminars,
Webex-type workshops, and meetings. This is expected to lead to future
international research collaborations between the US and Japanese researchers
for in-depth scientific investigations about the performance of the built
environment during strong earthquakes, with the final objective of mitigating
the impact of such mega-events and disasters.