* 1137682
* NSF-RISE: Enhancement of Research and Educational Infrastructure in Materials Science and Engineering at Tuskegee University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

Through a new HBCU Research Infrastructure in Science and Engineering award,
Tuskegee University (TU) proposes to elevate its Materials Science and
Engineering (MSE) program to a higher level so that its impact may considerably
be broadened. The project will implement a three-part program that will
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a) Enhance research capability in synthesis and
characterization of nanoparticles for biomedical and pharmaceutical
applications; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(b) Develop a cohort of students not only at
the Ph.D. level but also at the Master's level so that they can be nurtured and
motivated to continue their studies in the Ph.D. program; and
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(c) Provide seed funds for younger faculty members to
enable them to become active in research and education in MSE.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through earlier Center for Research Excellence in Science
and Technology (CREST) and other grants funded through the National Science
Foundation, Tuskegee University (TU) has developed a robust research and
educational program in Materials Science and Engineering and initiated its first
Ph.D. program in MSE. TU has now become the largest producer of African American
PhDs in MSE. In an effort to provide sustained support for and commitment to
this program, the TU administration has established the Department of MSE, which
is the only department at a Historically Black
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research activities include chemical synthesis and analysis, surface analysis,
processing, and performance evaluation of a variety of nanobiomaterials. The
processes and knowledge developed through this research will help in fields such
as drug delivery and pharmaceutical applications. These research activities are
expected to generate new knowledge about the interaction of nanoparticles with
biological systems and compatibility in developing new drug delivery systems.
Another outcome of this research is in developing the new multifunctional
polymer composites. Implementation of a Master's degree program in MSE will
allow Tuskegee to serve a larger number of students who wish to complete a
Master's degree in MSE before joining the Ph.D. Program. This will also enhance
the quality of students entering the Ph.D. program. Offering start-up funds to
junior STEM faculty and pairing them with seasoned faculty members for effective
mentoring will enable them to develop their research expertise in
nanobiomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project include production of a large number of African
Americans with baccalaureate through doctorate degrees with a strong background
in the emerging areas of materials science and engineering. These students will
be trained to have excellent communication and interpersonal skills as well.
Such graduates should become role models for many young minority students in
years to come. Moreover, these graduates will help bring much-needed diversity
to the Nation's advanced technological workforce. The "Start-Up Funds for Junior
Faculty" program will address the issue of shortage of minority faculty in MSE,
particularly, in nanobiomaterials science and engineering. The research findings
are expected to contribute significantly to the science and technology knowledge
base of nanobiomaterials. Broader societal impact includes improved capabilities
in biomedical and pharmaceutical fields.