* 1137482
* Targeted Infusion Project:  Educational Partnership in Climate Change and Sustainability (EPiCCS)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Maurice Crawford, Elizabeth City State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 01/31/2015
* USD 88,240.00

Hampton University's Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Educational
Partnership in Climate Change and Sustainability (EPiCCS) - seeks to enhance the
continuing partnership among the Marine & Environmental Science Department at
Hampton University, the Biology Department at Elizabeth City State University,
and the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, which is part of the College of
William & Mary, by supporting integrated cross-institutional research and
educational experiences centered on sustainability and the effects of global
climate change. These three institutions have had a long history of successful
synergistic collaborations that train underrepresented undergraduate students
and provide conduits and trajectories to graduate training in the geosciences.

EPiCCS proposes to support the recruitment, development, and retention of
talented students at two Historically Black Universities and Colleges (HBCUs) to
participate in interdisciplinary training and education on sustainability and
global climate change; to improve technology and cyber infrastructure at the two
HBCUs to enrich experiential inquiry-based learning, support the development of
new course offerings, and modernize current offerings; to emphasize curricular
training that fuses practical applications and inquiry-based research
experiences to provide new opportunities for hands-on learning; to promote
collaborative cross-campus cyber and peer-learning; to build essential
competencies in oral and written scientific communication in the next generation
of geoscientists; and to guide students toward post-graduate STEM degrees via
peer and faculty mentorship.

The EPiCCS network will form a model of sustainability that may later be
extended to other HBCUs and research partners.