* 1137404
* Laboratory Investigations of the Chemistry of Newly Formed Atmospheric Aerosols
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Christopher Johnson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Christopher Johnson of Yale University as an
American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Johnson will work on studying
the structure and dynamics of the gas-phase clusters that are thought to be
important precursors in the formation of atmospheric aerosols. The PI will
collaborate with scientists at the Center for Aerosol Impacts on Climate and the
Environment. The ultimate goal of this research is to develop a better
understanding of the fundamental chemistry and physics of atmospheric aerosol
formation and growth. For his plan for broadening participation, Dr. Johnson
will develop simple hands-on models for use by students and members of the
public, which make clear how modern chemical instrumentation works.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Johnson is aimed at developing
an improved understanding of the chemistry and physics behind the formation of
atmospheric aerosols. This is an area of research for which there is currently a
great deal of uncertainty. This uncertainty hinders the development of e.g. more
accurate models of the climate. The efforts at broadening participation being
pursued by Dr. Johnson are aimed at educating young people from underrepresented
groups about modern chemical instrumentation, in the hopes of encouraging these
young people to consider careers in science.