* 1137732
* Center for Research on Complex Networks
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2019
* Christopher Tymczak, Texas Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2019
* USD 5,000,000.00

Texas Southern University (TSU) will establish a CREST Center for Research on
Complex Networks to address some of the most challenging problems of network
science, network optimization and network control. The three research sub-
project areas of the Center are (1) Energy Efficient Wireless Sensor Networks,
which is to develop energy efficient schemes by integrating secured data
aggregation and dynamic power management, investigating efficient multiple
adaptation algorithms for uncertainty-aware sensor networks, and exploring
dynamic control and optimization strategies; (2) Urban Transportation
Environmental Networks, which is to develop and implement vehicle emission
models and real-time intelligent network control methods to reduce greenhouse
gas and pollutant emissions, thereby improving urban air quality; and (3)
Distributed Computational Networks, which is to develop and implement algorithms
for computing on networks for which the resource allocation is uneven. The
research activities in the Center will involve the disciplines of computer
science, mathematics, physics, chemistry, engineering technology, environmental
science, and transportation. They will be strongly integrated with the science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education programs at Texas
Southern. An critical outcome of the Center will be to increase the number of
under-represented minority students who pursue advanced graduate degrees,
contributing to meeting the future critical workforce needs of the Nation in
STEM fields.

Intellectual Merit The intellectual merit of the Center will be the development
of novel theoretical models, advanced simulation tools, and efficient physical
test-beds for the study of complex networks through a multi-disciplinary
approach. Moreover, the outcomes of the research will advance the knowledge of
complex networks; integrate knowledge from diverse scientific areas to focus on
the understanding of complex networks; and target their practical applications
in real-world complex networks. The Center will have a transformative impact on
TSU's effort to become one of the top research universities among Historically
Black Colleges and Universities and will promote the University's collaboration
with its partners from academia, industry, and government.

Broader Impacts The broader impacts that will result from the Center's
activities will be an increase of the number of under-represented minority
undergraduate and graduate students, including Ph.D. students, who will be
motivated to pursue cutting-edge interdisciplinary research in STEM fields.
Partnerships between TSU and leading research universities in the region as well
as with national laboratories will be developed. The activities in the Center
will enhance the existing Ph.D. program in Environmental Toxicology in the
College of Science and Technology at TSU, and will develop a new Master's degree
program in the multi-disciplinary Computational Science and Engineering (CSE) at
TSU. Beyond these local broader impacts, the research of the Center will provide
a knowledge base for the understanding of complex networks that could allow for
the development and implementation of policies for global environmental
sustainability.