* 1137443
* Research Initiation Award Grant: SONAS: Social Network Analysis and Simulation Systems
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Justin Zhan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 198,482.00

North Carolina A&amp;T State University's project entitled: Research Initiation
Award - SONAS: Social Network Analysis and Simulation Systems, proposes to study
different social networks and develop a web-based Social Network Analysis and
Simulation (SONAS) system. The goals of this research are: to develop a social
network analysis and simulation system, construct a large national input-output
(IO) financial network based on Bureau of Economic Analysis data; utilize the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Health Statistics data to
create a National Health Statistics Network; develop a network reduction
algorithm to enhance the performance of the SONAS system; and investigate
network dynamics by developing a self-evolving network environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will increase the understanding of social
network properties of people and computers from both computational and social
perspectives. The national health statistics network will lay a foundation for
detailed analysis in matrix formulations with corresponding network flows. The
merger of the national health network with the national economic network will be
of importance not just for the network analysis in this project, but also to
connect the continuous group theory, Markov theory, and network topology to a
well-defined mathematical foundation and structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational objectives of the project are: to establish a modern Social Network
Simulation Laboratory at North Carolina A&amp;T State University; to recruit,
train, and mentor motivated undergraduate students in social network analysis
and simulations; and to attract underrepresented students to pursue a career in
computer science.