* 1137960
* GeoClaw Validation against the Great Tohoku Tsumani of 11 March 2011
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Randall LeVeque, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,911.00

The Great Tohoku Tsunami of 11 March 2011 has generated massive quantities of
data that will be invaluable in helping to validate tsunami models such as the
GeoClaw software being developed by the PI and his collaborators. This RAPID
project will provide short-term support for two postdoctoral fellows and two
graduate students to assist in collecting data and performing simulations. The
main goals are to further validate the software and constituent numerical
algorithms as tools for tsunami modeling, and to compare a variety of proposed
earthquake source mechanisms for this event that have been developed by
different groups of seismologists. Data sources will include NOAA DART buoys,
tide gauges, videos and photographs, and post-tsunami surveys, both in the near
field and far field. The postdoctoral fellows are experts in tsunami science who
have experience in working with a variety of tsunami data, also have experience
working with the GeoClaw software in their thesis work. The software implements
high-resolution finite volume methods for the nonlinear shallow water equations,
with provisions to robustly model inundation. Adaptive mesh refinement is
incorporated to allow the efficient solution of the problem over the vast range
of spatial scales required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tsunamis pose a severe threat
to many coastal regions of the United States, particularly in the Pacific
Northwest. The offshore Cascadia Subduction Zone (CSZ) running from Northern
California up to British Columbia periodically produces a magnitude 9
earthquake, generating a tsunami of magnitude similar to that seen in the Indian
Ocean in 2004 or from the Japanese tsunami of 2011 (The last major CSZ tsunami
was in 1700). The entire West Coast, Hawaii, and Alaska are also at risk from
tsunamis arising from many other potential sources. Hazard mitigation and early
warning systems require accurate computer simulation tools based on mathematical
models of the generation and propagation of tsunamis and the subsequent flooding
and inundation along the coast. It is important to test these models against
real events, and the 11 March 2011 Great Tohoku Tsunami provides a wealth of
data from a variety of sources. Performing a careful series of computational
experiments will assist in validating the computational model developed at the
University of Washington and will guide the development of further improvements
to the model.