* 1137900
* Collaborative Research: The Dynamics of the Innate Immune Systems: A Study of the Toll-like Receptors (TLR) Network
* BIO,EF
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2014
* Calin Belta, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 11/30/2014
* USD 142,512.00

Intellectual Merit: The first line of defense to microbial infections or tissue
damage is the innate immune system, which responds to harmful stimuli by
triggering inflammation, a defensive response that is essential for tissue
repair and pathogen removal. However, excessive inflammation is harmful because
it can produce further tissue damage; inflammation must therefore be countered
by anti-inflammatory responses. Hence, it is crucial to understand how the
dynamics of the pro- and anti-inflammatory responses of the immune system are
regulated. The overarching aim of this project is to elucidate the regulation
dynamics of the Toll-like family of receptors (TLR), which are components of the
innate immune system that recognize microbial pathogens. The project constitutes
a pilot study exploring the use of systems and control theory and formal methods
to study the dynamics of the innate immune system. Formal methods is a branch of
mathematics and theoretical computer science that has been developed to verify
the execution of complex engineering systems. The investigators will use
existing published experimental data from TLR excitation experiments, to develop
an integrated mathematical model combining the dynamics of signaling and
transcription networks. Further, they will develop novel formal methods to
analyze this model. Because of the anticipated complexity of the TLR network,
the investigators will initially test their framework using data generated in
silico, as well as existing, smaller data sets from other signaling networks,
such as the NF-kB network. It is anticipated that successful completion of this
project will create a framework capable of producing testable predictions that
can be used in subsequent studies of the TLR.

Broader Impacts: While the project focuses on quantitative study of the
dynamical properties of the TLR network, the theory that will be developed is
expected to be broadly applicable to other phenomena related to the innate
immunity, including, autoimmunity, chronic inflammation, and obesity.
Furthermore, because of its generality, the framework developed in this project
should lend itself to the study of other cellular signaling mechanisms and the
related transcriptional regulation systems, for example, the growth-factor
signaling system and the cell-cycle regulatory system. As part of this project,
graduate and undergraduate students will be trained and prepared for academic
and industrial careers at the leading edge of the interface between biology and
engineering. The investigators will integrate the research activity into
graduate and undergraduate curriculum. Outreach activities to K-12 students and
teachers, particularly targeting students from underrepresented minorities, will
be carried out under the auspices of BU Academy at Boston University and the
Center for Initiatives in Pre-College Education (CIPCE) at Rensselaer.