* 1137770
* Student travel support for DNA17
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Niles Pierce, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Student travel support for DNA17&lt;br/&gt;Conference title: 17th International
Conference on DNA Computing and&lt;br/&gt;Molecular Programming
(DNA17)&lt;br/&gt;Location: California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
California, USA&lt;br/&gt;Dates: September 19?23, 2011&lt;br/&gt;Website: http:/
/dna17.caltech.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;
This is an unsolicited proposal for 12,000 USD for student travel support for
the 17th International Conference on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming
(DNA17). The primary purpose of the proposal is to give travel assistance to
students who are giving oral or poster presentations at the conference. The
selection procedure for travel awards is described in detail below and is
designed to give priority to women and underrepresented minorities, and to
research quality. Approximately 20 successful student applicants, from US
institutions (excluding Caltech), will be funded for travel and accommodation,
with an expected average award of 600 USD per
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The annual
International Conference on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming (DNAx) is
the premier forum where scientists with diverse backgrounds come together with
the common purpose of advancing the engineering and science of biology and
chemistry from the point of view of computer science, physics, and mathematics.
Continuing this tradition, the 17th International Conference on DNA Computing
and Molecular Programming (DNA17), under the auspices of the International
Society for Nanoscale Science, Computation and Engineering (ISNSCE), will focus
on the most recent experimental and theoretical results that promise the
greatest impact. A steady stream of papers in the field appear in Nature and
Science, as well as other top journals such as Nature Nanotechnology, Nature
Chemistry, Nature Biotechnology, Angewandte Chemie, JACS, Physical Review
Letters, Physical Review Letters, SIAM Journal on Computing ? and the authors of
these papers regularly attend DNAx conferences to present their work in a
preliminary form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;By
funding travel to students we are actively encouraging and incentivizing a new
generation of researchers to attend the conference. We are giving special
priority to women and minority applicants whose papers or posters were accepted
at the conference. Students who attend DNA17 will get exposure to early versions
of work that will go on to be published in top venues and, furthermore, they
will have the opportunity to interact with, and potentially collaborate with,
researchers who are producing work of the highest quality.