* 1137148
* TRAVEL Fund Request for Invited Speakers and Junior Scientists to attend seismic imaging conference in Hainan, China
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Ru-Shan Wu, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2012
* USD 18,200.00

This is workshop travel support for 14 junior scientists (mostly graduate
students, with a few postdoctoral researchers) from the USA to travel to Sanya,
Hainan China for the Symposium in geophysical imaging. The NSF of China has some
co-funding to support the local accommodations for the invited speakers, and for
the registrations and other conference expenses. IASPEI (International
Association of Seismology and Physics of the Earth?s Interior), SEG (Society of
Exploration Geophysicists) and EAGE (European Association of Geoscientists and
Engineers) have endorsed and listed the Symposium as their formal symposium or
workshop.

Geophysical imaging is the key for subsurface structural delineation, target
detection and property inversion. It has a wide range of applications to
subsurface resources exploration, crust and mantle structures, earthquake
rapture process and fault structure, and shallow target detection. Due to the
increasingly high complexity of the geological environments for oil/gas
exploration and other imaging targets, such as for monitoring CO2 sequestration
and pollution control, and the explosively increased data amount collected by
the new acquisition system, highresolution, high-fidelity and high-efficiency
imaging methods are highly in demanding. For highresolution, high-fidelity
imaging, we need much more phase-space information, such as the main direction
of the local energy flux, instant frequency of the wavefield, rather than a
straightforward space-domain solution. In other words, we need accurate and
efficient propagators with phasespace localizations. Such phase-space
information is crucial in modern true-amplitude, truereflection imaging and
parameter inversion. With phase-space localized wave propagators, local AVA
(amplitude variation with angle), local inversion for reservoir parameters can
be performed and the close link between imaging and inversion can be
established. Recently emerged seismic imaging methods using fast beam, fast
wavepacket and other localized waves, such as beamlet, curvelet, have brought up
broad interests in the study of imaging using localized waves. The relevant
researches have been spread to many branches of physics, acoustics, seismology,
engineering and mathematics.The symposium is different from other geophysical
conferences and workshops in its broad scope and interdisciplinary interactions.
The intensive invited speeches serves as introductory lectures by the experts of
different fields.