* 1137021
* Research Initiation Grant:   Improving Problem Solving in Electric Circuits using Cognitive Task Analysis
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* David Feldon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2014
* USD 131,093.00

This engineering education research initiation grant will create a partnership
between engineering and STEM education faculty to investigate how to more
efficiently teach engineering students how to become experts in their
discipline. The project will use cognitive task analysis, drawing from knowledge
of expert engineers, to teach students how better to solve common engineering
problems. A solid experimental design is proposed to determine if cognitive task
analysis can help transition students more quickly to expert status.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of this project is
twofold. First, researching how to identify and correct the difficulties
students have in applying engineering knowledge to problems, particularly
interdisciplinary problems, engineers are more able to address the needs of
society. The project also build partnerships between engineering faculty and
researchers in learning sciences, which can have broad impact on informing
engineering education with more effective practices. This project overlaps with
NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through preparation of an
engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's
goal of innovating for society is enabled by creating results and research that
are useful for society by informing educational policy and practices.