* 1137544
* Targeted Infusion Grant: Vertical Integration of Concepts, Laboratory Experiences and Research Training in Cyber Security across the Undergraduate Electrical and Computer Engineeri
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,805.00

Tennessee State University's Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Vertical
Integration of Concepts, Laboratory Experiences and Research Training in Cyber
Security across the Undergraduate Electrical and Computer Engineering and
Computer Science Curriculum - is a joint initiative between the Departments of
Computer Science (CS) and Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE). The project
fosters interdisciplinary research and education in cyber security. The project
vertically integrates concepts, laboratory experiences and research training in
cyber security across the undergraduate CS and ECE programs, thus enhancing the
CS and ECE curricula and increasing research opportunities for undergraduate
students. Vertical integration refers to a series of laboratory exercises in a
given topical area that starts as well-structured experiments at the lower
levels and proceeds as increasingly complex open-ended design projects at upper
levels of the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are
to 1) offer vertically integrated curricular material in coursework and research
training opportunities to cyber security scholars; 2) strengthen the CS and ECE
programs by the infusion of vertically integrated multi-year curricular
material; and 3) strengthen the university's ongoing undergraduate and outreach
programs in science, technology, mathematics and engineering by the availability
of education, research and facilities targeted to cyber
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering the rapid market growth of cyber
security and a critical shortage of qualified cyber security engineers, the
focus of this project is a significant step in training future system designers
with a strong appreciation for the complexity, implementation and performance
evaluation of cyber security technologies. This project addresses the under-
representation of African Americans in the cyber security workforce and in
competitive cyber security graduate programs.