* 1137679
* 11th International Workshop on the Interrelationship between Plasma Experiments in Laboratory and Space (IPELS) held in Whistler, British Columbia, Canada
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Hantao Ji, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides support to the 11th International workshop on the
Interrelationship between Plasma Experiments in the Laboratory and in Space
(IPELS), to be held at Whistler, British Columbia, Canada on July 10 to 15,
2011. The IPELS Workshop is a leading international meeting that began in 1991,
and in the past 20 years the research topics covered at the meeting have
expanded to include almost all plasma phenomena common in space and laboratory.
At the heart of the workshop is the close interaction and cross-fertilization
between international working groups from laboratory, space and astrophysics
that occurs at the meetings. The Workshop has been held alternately in Europe
and the US every two years for most of its history. However, the last three
workshops were held either in Europe (Tromso, Norway in 2005 and Djuronaset,
Sweden in 2009) or in Australia (Palm Cove in 2007). The 2011 meeting will mark
the first return of the meeting to North America since 2003, eight years ago.
The award will provide support for defraying travel and conference expenses for
(1) U.S. students and young researchers with priorities for women and minorities
and (2) attendees from developing countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following
is a list of topics to be covered: Collisionless shock and particle
acceleration; Magnetic dynamo and angular momentum transport; Reconnection and
explosive phenomena; Plasma waves and wave-particle interactions; Instabilities
and turbulence; Physics of dusty plasmas and sheaths; Jets and
winds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop organizers are Hantao Ji of PPPL, Tai
Phan of UC Berkeley, and Ellen Zweibel of U.&lt;br/&gt;Wisconsin Madison.