* 1137611
* Workshop: Tsunami sedimentology and its role in hazard awareness, preparedness, assessment and mitigation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Robert Weiss, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 05/31/2012
* USD 47,818.00

This interdisciplinary workshop will bring together researchers who study
tsunamis from different perspectives, such physical and social sciences and
engineering, to develop priorities for interdisciplinary research on tsunami
deposits, and how this research can be employed to increase awareness of and
preparedness for tsunami hazards, as well as help to develop better hazard
assessments and mitigation designs. The 2004 Sumatra and 2011 Tohoku earthquakes
and their associated ocean-crossing tsunamis underscore the importance of these
topics, even in technologically advanced countries. Anticipated outcomes of the
workshop include recommendations to NSF on tsunami research priorities and
preliminary collaborative NSF proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
be organized around the following questions, which range from basic science to
applications in the public sphere:&lt;br/&gt;- What causative processes are
recorded in deposits and erosional features of tsunamis?&lt;br/&gt;- How can
geologic information about tsunamis be compared to data collected during modern
post-tsunami surveys?&lt;br/&gt;- How can tsunami deposit studies be
incorporated into engineering designs of marine and coastal infrastructure,
and&lt;br/&gt;- How can tsunami deposit information be used to increase tsunami
hazard awareness and preparedness of communities and
individuals?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Tsunamis happen
often in the world's oceans, on both human and geologic time scales. Most
tsunamis result from fault displacement under the sea; others are set off by
submarine landslides, volcanic eruptions, and meteorite impacts. Barely two
decades have passed since geologists began using onshore sedimentary deposits to
identify areas at risk to tsunamis. The work has produced startling discoveries,
particularly in the northwestern United States. But basic questions remain, such
as how to distinguish tsunami deposits from storm deposits on coasts with large
storm surges. Tsunami deposits also have enormous potential as recorders of flow
depth and velocity? parameters of importance to coastal engineers. Working
together at this frontier are geologists, sediment-transport experts, numerical
tsunami modelers, experimentalists, engineers, and social scientists. The
workshop provides a timely venue for these various specialists to weigh
priorities and plan collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;There are three avenues to addressing tsunami hazard:
assessment, mitigation, and warning. One of the major means for assessment is to
quantify recurrence intervals and size estimates of past events, and tsunami-
deposit studies are an important means for doing so. Moreover, tsunami-deposit
studies can help in generating public education and awareness--an important
aspect of mitigation efforts. The 26 December 2004 and the 11 March 2011
tsunamis tragically demonstrate the global need for tsunami hazard assessment,
education, and community preparation. This workshop will bring together
scientific researchers and engineers in order to develop means for improving the
communication of tsunami research results to potentially affected communities.