* 1137267
* EFRI-M3C: A Hybrid Control Systems Approach to Brain-Machine Interfaces for Exoskeleton Control
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2011,02/29/2016
* Masayoshi Tomizuka, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/2016
* USD 2,000,000.00

This interdisciplinary research proposal brings together leaders in
neurophysiology and brain-machine interfaces (BMI), control systems, and
exoskeleton design to significantly advance our understanding of fundamental
principles in the neural control of movement in scenarios that involve physical
interactions with the world. Furthermore, this work will transform
neuroprosthetic systems to improve the quality of life for a large number of
neurological patients. The central question that motivates this proposal is:
Does the brain use motor programs to help it control a highly redundant multi-
degree of freedom (DOF) biomechanical plant such as the arm? To answer this
question, this project will conduct a series of experiments that require a
combination of three major innovations at the experimental (BMI), theoretical
(hybrid control), and technical (exoskeleton design) level. This proposal aims
to synthesize all three innovations into a new experimental paradigm unifying
brain, biomechanics, and behavior. Specifically, visually-cued motor plans in
the motor cortices of macaque monkeys will be: 1) read by a BMI, 2) interpreted
by a hybrid controller and a musculoskeletal model, and 3) translated into
appropriate movements and stiffness in a multi-DOF upper-limb exoskeleton.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a societal
level, this proposal seeks to create a significant advancement in
neuroprosthetic systems to improve the quality of life of patients suffering
from paralysis due to lesions of the central nervous system or other
neurological disorders. BMIs will make a great impact in the quality of life for
neurological patients by providing reliable performance when interacting with
real objects and in real-world scenarios. This proposal also informs motor
systems neuroscience by proposing a novel framework to study how neural
ensembles can learn to control a multi-DOF exoskeleton by volitional modulation
of neural activity in real-world tasks. It provides a critical link between
neural events and real-world dynamics through a novel hierarchical distributed
control scheme for hybrid systems identification and control that captures the
continuous time evolution of the arm/exoskeleton, as well as the dynamically
changing sequence of tasks. No motor task of this complexity has ever been
demonstrated in a BMI system. The potential impact of the proposed work is
immense. If successful, this work will transform our understanding about how the
brain controls movement, and will introduce a paradigm shift in the development
of the next generation of neural prosthetics that will restore motor function in
millions of neurologically impaired patients ? a development which may very well
impact other domains such as human-machine interaction and innovative user
interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The dissemination of
data and research findings from this project will be done through a project
website. Our codes will be open source, and the methods, algorithms and results
will be available through publications in the fields of neuroscience, control
and robotics. Through the Center for Information Technology Research in the
Interest of Society (CITRIS) at Berkeley, research results from this program
will be immediately accessible and distributed to a large engineering community,
in particular other interdisciplinary research groups. Also, the findings in the
proposed research will be outreached to K-12 students and their parents through
various activities at UC Berkeley and Lawrence Hall of Science (LHS), such as
CAL-day. In addition, research findings will be disseminated through workshops
at the main annual conferences in neuroscience, robotics, control, and
biomedical engineering. The educational component of this proposal relies on BMI
as a platform for interdisciplinary education in science and engineering. New
graduate-level courses will be introduced and existing courses will be enhanced
based on results of this project. The proposed efforts will open doors to
student rotations between neuroscientists, control theorists and roboticists. In
addition to postdocs and graduate students, undergraduate students will
participate in all aspects of the project: modeling, analysis, simulation,
prototype development and experimentation. Special effort will be placed on the
recruitment of individuals from underrepresented groups including women, thereby
building on the strong record the PIs have in this area.