* 1137593
* EAGER:  Design for Bundling Decisions with Marketing and Public Policy Considerations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Shapour Azarm, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 99,985.00

The objective of this EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
is to explore the engineering design decision aspects of Design For Bundling
(DFB) and address the challenge of bringing together the three related areas of
engineering design, marketing and public policy into a unified DFB decision
framework. DFB is defined as the process of integrating the design elements of
multiple complementary product categories into a single product and selling it
to the customers for one price. The product categories can be physical, service,
software or a combination. The approach will explore two main research
questions. The first research question explores the issues of representation,
generation and evaluation of a bundled design purely from an engineering design
perspective. The second research question investigates the implications of
marketing and public policy in a design decision making context in DFB. The
answer to these questions will produce the research ingredients necessary for a
systematic decision making in DFB that can be used for physical, service, and
software product categories under market competition, public policy regulations
and uncertainty considerations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
exploratory research will have important implications for United States
manufacturers in creating successful product bundling innovations for national
and international markets that take competition and regulatory aspects into
account. It will also enable manufacturers to understand the impact of
uncertainties in developing bundled products and functionalities that compete
with foreign brands. The design method will contribute to the area of interface
of engineering design, consumer markets, and public policy by taking into
account structural complexities. The DFB approach here will also promote a new
product innovation model which can reshape the market structures because DFB
essentially blurs the established boundaries of existing product markets. Wide
adoption of the methodology will open up new markets and redefine the
competitions among the manufacturers. The research award involves active
participation of one Ph.D. student. The PIs plan to transfer research results
and engage students in their respective undergraduate and graduate courses in
engineering design decision making, marketing research and public policy.
Additionally, it is expected that the successful completion of this EAGER
research will provide the necessary foundations for launching a full-scale
research effort that will lead the way for other researchers in the community.