* 1137412
* RAPID: Establishing Radionuclide Levels in the Central Pacific Ocean in Response to Releases from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Henrietta Dulai, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/2013
* USD 94,637.00

The March 11, 2011 earthquake and resulting tsunami made substantial damage to
the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, and as a consequence there were
significant releases of iodine, cesium, cobalt and other radioisotopes to the
environment. Radionuclides were released to the atmosphere as well as the ocean.
For atmospheric releases it was only a matter of days before they dispersed in
the northern hemisphere. Isotopes detected on EPA air filters at many US sites
included 137Cs, 134Cs, 132Te, 132I and 131I. While the currently observed
radiation levels do not pose a health risk for the US population the released
activities are easily identified over the long-term background levels in the
atmosphere. Releases so far have been episodic and highly variable, making
predictions of spreading and deposition patterns difficult.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from this Grant for Rapid Response Research
(RAPID), researchers at the University of Hawaii at Manoa will monitor seawater
near Hawaii in the central Pacific Ocean in order to establish a dataset of
selected key isotopes. Its proximity to Japan makes Hawaii an obvious, important
monitoring point. They will collect coastal and offshore water samples as well
as particulates from ocean traps. Additionally, they will analyze samples
provided to us by investigators from Midway and Guam. This dataset would become
a part of a global effort initiated by colleagues at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution to establish an east to west network of sampling
stations in the Pacific an Atlantic Oceans. Since releases from Japan have been
registered in Hawaii as early as March 22, it is essential that sampling and
analysis begin immediately in a coordinated and quality controlled manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The findings of this study will be
incorporated into the database of results collected in the Pacific as well as
the Atlantic Oceans to build the understanding of the inventories and behavior
of fission-produced radionuclides in the marine environment on a global scale.
The study will include international collaboration with investigators from
Japan, the IAEA, Czech Republic and scientists from WHOI, USGS, Guam and others.