* 1137001
* Population Genomics of Cold Adaptation in Poplar
* BIO,IOS
* 03/23/2011,08/31/2013
* Matthew Olson, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2013
* USD 441,650.00

PI: Matthew S. Olson, Texas Tech University&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Peter Tiffin,
University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Populus species are economically,
ecologically, and environmentally important; they are harvested for paper pulp
and particle board production, and hold potential for playing important roles in
CO2 biosequestration and biofuel production. Populus also is the model organism
for hardwood tree genomics and physiology. Population genetic tools are
increasingly useful for identifying genes that underlie variation in
ecologically and economically important traits, but are not presently available
in Populus. This project will develop these tools for Populus balsamifera, use
them to identify the genetic basis for phenotypic variation in bud set (an
important determinant of cold adaptation and growth rate). This research also
will test whether the same genes responsible for variation and adaptive
evolution of bud set in North American P. balsamifera and European P. tremula.
These objectives will be accomplished through collaboration with Canadian
researchers who are establishing long-term common gardens of P. balsamifera.
These common gardens will be maintained as a long term resource and are
available to the wider scientific community; therefore, the data we generate
will greatly facilitate future genotype-phenotype association analyses on
additional economically and ecologically important traits (wood density, drought
tolerance, etc.). The comparative population genomic analyses of adaptation to
northern latitudes will be accomplished through collaboration with colleagues at
the University of Umea, Sweden, who are conducting complementary research in
European aspen (P. tremula).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts and
intellectual merit: This project will provide numerous training opportunities in
plant genomics and bioinformatics for undergraduate students, graduate students,
and post-doctoral researchers. Training for undergraduate students will focus on
developing and conducting scientific research and written and verbal
communication of results. Research opportunities will be made available to
Native Alaskan students through University of Alaska Fairbanks ANSEP Program.
Graduate students and post-doctoral researchers will receive more in-depth
training in scientific inquiry, communication of results, and mentoring. The
research will form the basis for the development of laboratory exercises in DNA
sequence analysis, population genomics, and association mapping for
undergraduate courses. These exercises will be developed in courses taught at
the University of Alaska and the University of Minnesota and made freely
available to the larger educational community through our project web site and
the plant genome outreach portal (http://www.plantgdb.org/PGROP/pgrop.php).
Finally, this research will illuminate the population genomics of a keystone
species of Arctic boreal communities and the tree with the northernmost
distribution in North America, complementing the themes of International Polar
Year (2007-2008).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All genomic tools, data, and biological
materials generated by this project will be made publicly available through the
project website at http://biotech.inbre.alaska.edu/PPG/ and through the Poplar
Genome Portal http://www.populusgenome.org/. These materials will greatly
facilitate, in time and money, future association analyses of functionally-
important genes in poplar.