* 1137289
* ICML 2011 Workshop on Learning from Clinical Free Text
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Zeeshan Syed, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2012
* USD 6,774.00

The increasing availability of large quantities of clinical data in digitized
form in the course of routine patient care, presents unprecedented opportunities
as well as challenges in improving the quality and reducing the cost of clinical
care through the use of Electronic Medical Record (EMR) systems. Because it is
impossible to anticipate and precisely identify/define all of the relevant
information that would be useful in every clinical setting, and the need for the
definitions of key information elements to change in response to changes in
medical knowledge (e.g., evidence-based treatment guidelines), despite the
increasing emphasis on collecting information in structured fields of EMRs, a
substantial fraction of key information continues to be available as
unstructured (i.e., free) text. Hence, there is a growing interest in
identifying novel learning approaches that can be used to adapt strategies for
information extraction from free text in such settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zeeshan Syed and collaborators plan to organize a multi-
disciplinary Workshop on Learning from Clinical Free Text to bring together
researchers from machine learning, computational linguistics, and medical
informatics, who share an interest in problems and applications of learning from
unstructured clinical text. The workshop to be held on July 2, 2011 at Bellevue,
Washington, USA, in conjunction with the International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), which is the premier international forum for researchers and
practitioners from academia, industry, and government for sharing the latest
advances in machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merits: The
workshop seeks to bridge the gap between the theory of machine learning, natural
language processing, and the applications and needs of the healthcare community
and to promote fruitful interdisciplinary collaborations. The workshop seeks to
cover a range of topics of interest to academic as well as industrial
participants through a program consisting of presentations by invited speakers
from machine learning, computational linguistics. and medical informatics, and
by authors of extended abstracts solicited from the broader research community.
A panel discussion will help identify important problems, applications, and
synergies across the research in and practice of machine learning, computational
linguistics, and medical informatics. The workshop will connect established
researchers with graduate students and early career researchers and academics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These activities will collectively
facilitate the the infusion of the latest results and tools from the machine
learning and computational linguistics, and text mining communities into Health
Informatics, catalyze the establishment of an interdisciplinary community of
researchers focused on advancing machine learning to meet the needs of
information extraction from free text medical records, and help integrate a
diverse group of graduate students and early career researchers into the Health
Informatics community.