* 1137904
* Environmental and social implications of hydraulic fracturing and gas drilling in the United States: An integrative science and policy workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Robert Jackson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2013
* USD 45,538.00

The goal of this proposal is to bring together representatives of the different
sectors (industry, science, regulators, and environmentalists) in a workshop
that will address the environmental and social effects of hydraulic fracturing
and gas drilling. An interdisciplinary workshop at Duke University is proposed
to capture different environmental and social aspects and the scientific, legal,
and socio-economic components related to gas extraction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will address key environmental and social
issues related to hydraulic fracturing, including 1) the water-energy nexus (how
much water is needed and where water availability could limit hydraulic
fracturing), 2) disposal (what are the scientific factors that limit the
disposal of toxic and radioactive produced water to the environment), 3) direct
environmental impacts (how the different environmental effects could be avoided,
mitigated, and regulated), and 4) socio-economic effects (how will the expansion
of natural gas exploration via hydraulic fracturing influence U.S. energy
security and affect other potential options for energy diversification,
including renewable forms of energy, and what will be the socio-economic impacts
on the communities in the surrounding areas of gas
production?)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the magnitude of hydraulic fracturing
and gas drilling in the U.S., significant public interest is expected from this
proposed workshop. Outcomes from this workshop will include publications of the
presentations in the workshop in both professional journals and the public. The
dissemination of this interdisciplinary dialogue will be also published on a web
site designed specifically for the proposed workshop. Finally, the results of
the workshop should help engage stakeholders and policymakers in discussions
about the results and context for the conclusions reached at the meeting,
including holding at least one information session or briefing in Washington,
D.C.