* 1137229
* EFRI-M3C: Partnered Rehabilitative Movement: Cooperative Human-robot Interactions for Motor Assistance, Learning, and Communication
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* C. Karen Liu, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,000,000.00

Our vision is to develop caregiver robots that interact fluidly and flexibly
with humans during functional&lt;br/&gt;motor activities, while providing motor
assistance, enhancement, and communication to facilitate
motor&lt;br/&gt;learning. However, we currently lack theories to understand how
rehabilitation and movement therapists&lt;br/&gt;provide timely and appropriate
physical feedback and assistance to improve mobility in individuals
with&lt;br/&gt;motor impairments. To develop devices that could accompany an
individual as both assistant and&lt;br/&gt;movement therapist, our goal is to
study human motor coordination during cooperative
physical&lt;br/&gt;interactions with a humanoid assistive robot. We will use
rehabilitative partner dance as a paradigm to&lt;br/&gt;examine a sensory-motor
theory of cooperative physical interactions relevant to walking and
other&lt;br/&gt;functional motor activities. We will use a "partnered box step",
a constrained and defined pattern of&lt;br/&gt;weight shifts and directional
changes, as a paradigm for a cooperative physical interaction with
welldefined&lt;br/&gt;motor goals.&lt;br/&gt;Objectives: To 1) experimentally
verify a hierarchical theory of human sensory-motor control
and&lt;br/&gt;learning and 2) develop predictive models of whole-body human
movement for cooperative physical&lt;br/&gt;interactions with machines. Over
four years, we will test our models by demonstrating the
successful&lt;br/&gt;participation of the robot in a box step as leader or
follower and adapt its movements to the motor skill&lt;br/&gt;level of a human
partner.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Our work will provide transformative
experimental, theoretical, and practical&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary frameworks
that will forge new paths toward autonomous cooperative robots
with&lt;br/&gt;physical intelligence to enhance, assist, and improve motor
skills in humans with varying motor&lt;br/&gt;capabilities. These advances will
aid prosthetic and robotic design and may advance our understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;the brain.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The expected project outcomes
would have long-term impact on the quality of life of&lt;br/&gt;millions of
Americans by improving fitness, motor skills, and social engagement.
Applications include&lt;br/&gt;healthcare devices or sports robots that
entertain and improve fitness. We will provide seminars on&lt;br/&gt;mobility-
related issues and rehabilitative dance instruction to older adult living
communities and&lt;br/&gt;populations with motor impairments. The broad appeal
and social nature of this work will likely garner&lt;br/&gt;media publicity that
will increase public interest in science and technology.