* 1137293
* Collaborative Research: Grassland Sensitivity to Climate Change at Local to Regional Scales: Assessing the Role of Ecosystem Attributes vs. Environmental Context
* BIO,EF
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Yiqi Luo, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2017
* USD 499,326.00

Although scientists have learned much in the past 20 years about how individual
ecosystems are likely to respond to climate change, extending this knowledge to
regional and continental scales has been a far greater challenge. At these
larger spatial scales, both the environment and the attributes of ecosystems
vary dramatically. For example, in the central US, there are strong temperature
and rainfall gradients from Texas to North Dakota and the dry plains of Colorado
to eastern Kansas, and the types of grasslands differ as well (from short
grasslands in the west to tall grasslands in the east). In order to better
forecast how entire regions will respond to expected climatic changes, there is
a pressing need to understand why ecosystems differ in their sensitivity to
changes in climate. This project includes research designed to answer a question
of fundamental importance for advancing knowledge of biological processes at
large scales: How important are the attributes of ecosystems per se vs. the
environmental context in which climate is changing in determining ecological
responses to climate change at regional scales? To answer this question, a
geographically distributed field experiment will be conducted at six sites in
NM, CO, WY and KS and the results from this experiment will be used to
strengthen an existing process-based terrestrial ecosystem model. With this
model, the relative importance of ecosystem attributes versus the environment
for determining responses to climate change will be evaluated and then scaling
rules for extending site-based knowledge to regional scales will be developed.
The experiment imposed will be a severe multi-year drought in grasslands arrayed
along a rainfall gradient (from desert grassland to mesic tallgrass prairie).
Key responses measured will include many related to carbon cycling and budgets
and plant biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a number of
broader impacts including enhancing existing terrestrial ecosystem modeling
approaches, and conducting a field experiment that will provide a platform for
others in the scientific community to conduct additional research activities. A
project website will make products (datasets, key results, papers, models)
available to the scientific community and general public. Research will occur on
federal lands and at a number of other research stations where outreach programs
are in place, allowing results to be shared with a wide range of stakeholders.
The project is also designed to provide training opportunities for numerous
graduate and undergraduate students. Because this study is unique in its spatial
extent and combination of field and modeling approaches, the collaborative
training opportunities available to students differs substantially from
traditional degree programs.