* 1137097
* Beacon: A Strategic Path to Scientific Discovery Enabled by the Intel MIC Architecture
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Homayoun Karimabadi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 03/31/2015
* USD 1,058,230.00

With the stagnation of computer processor frequency due to the constraints of
power and density, processor manufacturers are introducing additional
parallelism within their designs to attain increased performance for highly
parallel applications. The Intel Many Integrated Core (Intel MIC) architecture
offers potential advantages over the current generation of heterogeneous
architectures. To explore the effectiveness of the Intel MIC architecture on a
broad range of computational science research, this award to the University of
Tennessee Knoxville will (1) operate an experimental cluster equipped with Intel
MIC co-processors for a period of two years and (2) coordinate an associated
research program in collaboration with other institutions aimed at exploring the
potential impact of the Intel MIC architecture and related programming models on
key scientific codes. Through a partnership with Intel, the experimental cluster
will initially be equipped with pre-release hardware to allow leading scientists
and engineers in a variety of disciplines to begin working with the Intel MIC
architecture prior to its commercial debut. The pre-release hardware will be
upgraded to commercially available Intel MIC co-processors upon their release.
The associated research program will be comprised initially of software projects
(from the fields of plasma physics, nanoelectronics, astrophysics, chemistry,
biology, quantum chromodynamics, and computer science) directly supported by
this project and subsequently expanded to a more diverse set of scientific
applications (selected by a panel of experts) proposed by research teams across
the country in response to an open call for participation. These software
projects will optimize important scientific and engineering applications using
techniques that are expected to benefit performance on both conventional and
accelerator-based architectures. Results will be made available
publicly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project strategically promotes the use of
emerging developments in accelerator hardware and parallel programming models
within the nation's research community. The associated software projects are
expected to advance the state of the art, positioning the nation's research
community for future scientific and engineering advances. It also deepens the
collaboration of the University of Tennessee Knoxville with industry. Finally,
associated engagement activities that leverage existing University educational
outreach programs ensure that the benefits of this research are broadly
disseminated throughout the open science community and offer opportunities for
traditionally underrepresented groups to participate in world-class
computational research.