* 1137751
* CREST:Center for Functional Nanoscale Materials
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Michael Williams, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2018
* USD 4,950,000.00

The Center for Functional Nanoscale Materials was established in 2006 as a NSF
Phase I CREST. The Phase II award will enable the Center further to increase the
capacity of Clark Atlanta University to train talented minority scientists in
the area of the physical sciences and will advance human understanding of
nanoscale materials science. The Center will continue to play a major role in
mitigating the Nation's technical workforce needs, will make significant
contributions to the technical knowledge base that has kept the U.S. competitive
on the world stage, and will continue to enable talented and well-prepared
Center alumni and alumnae to assume leadership roles in industry, government and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;In Phase II the
Center will implement its five year plan (2011 to 2016) to build on the
expertise, experience, resources, connections and partnerships that have been
firmly established by the Center?s work during Phase One. Three research
subprojects form the foundation of the Center?s research and educational
activities. The subprojects are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* The Development of
Carbon Nanotube-Based Multicomponent Nanohybrids, &lt;br/&gt;* The Design of
Nanophase Inorganic Oxides Derivatives as Oxidation Catalysts and for the
Synthesis of Organic Molecules and Structures, and &lt;br/&gt;* Functional
Nanomaterials for Biosensors and Drugs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
these studies can potentially be translated into new energy storage technologies
to fully utilize the intermittent forms of energy such as solar and wind.
Studies will also result in the development of novel nanoscale functional
materials to serve as detectors in sensors for single molecule detection and
thus contribute advances in nanomedicine The Center's educational programs
thoroughly integrates into these research programs with the goal of stimulating
the development of a cadre of talented and well-prepared minority
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;This NSF CREST
funded Center will continue to function as an effective agent for change within
the University by providing support for students, administrative and technical
support for faculty and upgrades to and acquisition of new equipment. The Center
will provide summer research opportunities for students attending other
universities through its summer programs. The Center will continue to work with
area middle and high schools by providing training in new instructional
methodologies, creation of new instructional materials and sponsoring graduate
student-teacher teams that work in local classrooms. Through its diverse
activities, the Center will continue to provide top quality graduate and
undergraduate training that is holistic and will produce individuals who will be
well prepared to assume leadership roles in their fields.