* 1137084
* EAGER: Estimating Phylogenetic Trees when Character Evolution is neither Independent nor Identically Distributed
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sampath Kannan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The evolutionary tree or phylogeny of a set of species is a tree that explains
the history of their evolution from a common ancestor. To estimate this history,
scientists make observations about species that are alive today and seek to find
a tree that best fits this data. The most common types of observations these
days are in the form of biomolecular sequences such as DNA or protein sequences
for genes or proteins. These sequences are aligned so that corresponding
positions in the given sequences exhibit as much similarity as possible. Each
column of the alignment is called a site or a character. In the standard model
of evolution each node in the tree has a certain state for the character and
transmits this state to its children. However, the state is probabilistically
mutated along each edge of the tree. The standard model also assumes that all
characters evolve according to identical, independent stochastic processes.
Tight bounds are known for the number of characters needed to infer the tree
(and mutation probabilities on the edges) under these assumptions. The problem
is that these assumptions are not biologically realistic. It is well known that
selection pressure operates differently on different sites and that the
evolution of one character can be dependent on other characters. Much more
sophisticated mathematical analysis is needed to infer the tree and dependence
structure under these conditions, and this is precisely the major goal of this
project.

The problem of reconstructing evolutionary trees is of central importance in
biology since evolution is the theory in biology. Computer scientists have made
contributions to this field, but the solutions provided by computer scientists
so far simplify the problem too much to produce reliable solutions on realistic
data. This project aims to take an important step towards making tree inference
algorithms more realistic.