* 1137306
* Type 2: The Future of Ecosystems and Extremes: Using Diverse Environmental Data Sets in Support of Regional to Global Earth-System Models and Predictions
* BIO,EF
* 02/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Kyaw Tha Paw U, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,540,955.00

Our nation's natural and managed ecosystems are essential to public livelihood
and its sustainable future. Extreme climate and weather events impose a
substantial risk to ecosystem productivity, as such events are the most damaging
and costly. Further increases in the frequency, strength, and/or duration of
extreme events under altered environmental conditions may also result in
irrecoverable damages to ecosystems. Therefore, it is of critical importance to
comprehensively observe, understand, document, and predict ecosystems' response
and resiliency to extreme environmental conditions and the extent to which
irreversible thresholds may be crossed as a result of changes in the Earth's
natural and human systems. Improved performance in predictive models is achieved
only through observational evidence of ecosystem behavior under the full range
of environmental conditions. The current suite of ecologic, meteorological, and
hydrologic observations combined with the nation's next-generation National
Ecologic Observation Network (NEON) allow an exciting opportunity to enable new
analyses that comprehensively span the diverse types of ecosystems across our
nation. This study undertakes coordinated calibration, evaluation, enhancement,
and experimentation with a hierarchy of predictive tools that includes: models
representing the field-scale mechanisms of ecosystems; a high-resolution
regional ecosystem-climate model; as well as a global integrated assessment
model of the linked earth-human systems. Through these, region-specific
thresholds in the productivity, response, and resiliency of ecosystems governed
by human-altered shifts in weather and climate extremes as well as land use,
which pose severe implications for ecosystem services, will be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testing and evaluation of ecosystem models
against the NEON observations will identify the critical model capabilities
required to faithfully predict ecosystem response to extreme conditions. Under
the auspice of potential climate and environmental change through the end of
this century, projections with regional and global human-earth systems models
will also allow for a risk-based assessment of ecologic change and resiliency.
This is possible through the ability to run these models across the range of
plausible human emissions and the climate/ecologic response. The atmospheric
outputs of these regional ecosystem-climate projections could then also be used
as boundary conditions for other detailed studies of regional climate impacts -
such as air quality and water resources (quantity and quality). Overall, the
scientific assessments and predictions from this study will enable local
stakeholders as well as national and international policymakers to make more
informed decisions regarding mitigation and adaptation strategies - particularly
those that are relevant to the protection of natural and managed ecosystems
threatened by extreme environments.