* 1137211
* EFRI-M3C: Development of New Algorithmic Models and Tools to Enhance Neural Adaptation in Brain Computer Interface Systems.
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Daniel Moran, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,992,456.00

Human interaction with machines has always relied on some form of muscle
movement to translate the brain's desired action to the machine (e.g. turning a
knob). The objective of our project is to eliminate the need for muscle
transformations in the man-machine interface. Using a new brain-computer
interface (BCI) technology (electrocorticography or ECoG) pioneered by the
research team, we will develop novel decoding algorithms to control the
force/torque inputs to an external device directly. Likewise, by designing
machine learning algorithms to identify and incorporate neural plasticity in the
decoding schemes will allow the BCI to evolve over time. Finally, by combining
brain signals from multiple areas to identify various brain states, we can
identify and change the effectors to be controlled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual Merit: All previous BCI studies decoded only kinematic signals to
control computer cursors as well as robotic limbs. While kinematic control is a
natural extension for disabled individuals trying to regain function lost by
paralysis or amputation, a direct interface between the brain and the machine
allows for much more elegant interaction. Thus, rather than controlling a
robotic arm through the use of imagined self limb movements (a proxy of
intention), one rather controls the device as if it was a part of their own
body. For instance, mapping brain activity to kinetic parameters such as a
robot?s torque motor allows the individual to directly control the forceful
interactions within the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact: One
advantage of ECoG is that while it is an invasive recording technology, the
electrodes can be placed epidurally which significantly reduces the risk profile
for implantation. In the long term, this should allow ECoG-based BCIs to be
accepted as a viable implant in able-bodied humans. Developing a safe and
effective BCI modality for the general public will fundamentally change how
humans interact with machines. No longer will humans require muscle activity as
an intermediary to interact with machines. A whole new field of man-machine
interfacing will be initiated where the brain builds complex internal models of
the machine's dynamics (instead of musculoskeletal dynamics) for accurate and
direct control of the machine's effectors.