* 1137249
* EFRI-MIKS:  Innovations for Next Generation Biomanufacturing and Microengineering
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Joerg Graf, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,000,000.00

The interplay that occurs among microbes in their habitat allows the microbial
community, or "microbiome", to carry out chemical processes exceeding that of
any individual organism in the community. The successful execution of such
complex processes requires a coordination of the metabolisms of the component
species. Such coordination is accomplished by directly sending and receiving
signals among members of the community. Some signals are indirect, such as those
resulting from changes in the local environment caused by their metabolisms. By
understanding these signaling processes, it may be possible to manipulate these
communities and harness their capabilities on an industrial scale.&lt;br/&gt;The
microbial community inside the gut of the lower termite represents one such
community. Consisting of bacteria, archaea, and protists, the organisms in this
community exist symbiotically, breaking down complex carbon sources, such as
lignocellulose, to the benefit of all. The physical and chemical habitat of the
termite gut varies at a spatial scale of microns and affects the structure and
function of its microbial community. We hypothesize that the lignocellulosic
processing capabilities of the termite gut community are dependent on its
composition, the spatial distribution of its members, and their interactions. We
further hypothesize that maintenance of the community is regulated through a
complex signaling network composed of cell-cell contact dependent signaling and
intercellular chemical signaling. By understanding how these processes function,
it will be possible to harness the termite microbiome as a platform for chemical
production. To test our hypotheses, we will reproduce the micro-scale physical
and chemical features of a lower termite gut in manufactured microhabitats, i.e.
artificial termite guts. We will pursue the following specific aims to
accomplish our goal:&lt;br/&gt;1. Metagenomics: Evaluate the gut community of
the lower termite Reticulitermes flavipes by sequencing DNA extracted from the
entire community and analyzing those sequences.&lt;br/&gt;2. Signaling: Identify
key signaling molecules and the organisms they interface with and examine the
functions that they control.&lt;br/&gt;3. Modeling: Carry out mathematical
analysis to determine the signaling network?s structure and control
processes.&lt;br/&gt;4. Engineering: Develop a microfluidic culture array
mimicking the microhabitat of the R. flavipes gut allowing physicochemical
control and real time monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;5. Integration: Establish, maintain,
and control a functional termite microbiome in vitro.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The transformative nature of this work lies in developing an
understanding of the termite gut signaling network and using it to engineer a
chemical production platform. A significant leap in engineering knowledge will
be realized through the development of the artificial termite gut and our
ability to rationally manipulate its microbial population. The microhabitat?s
population will be manipulated by the introduction of appropriate signal
molecules into its feed stream or through disruption of natural intercellular
signals.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed research will address a
national need by laying the groundwork for a new biofuels development platform.
Our long-term strategy is to develop the microhabitat array for use in
processing lignocellulose to a biofuel or to an intermediate compound for
biofuel production, such as feedstock for other microorganisms capable of
ethanol or butanol production. Additionally, we will carry out a number of
outreach activities, including high school teacher training initiatives and
local radio broadcasts about the research. To reach a wider audience, and to
provide educational supplements, podcasts will be developed along with workshops
&amp; presentations at local museums. An iPod/iPad application and PC
educational video game/educational tool about building an in silico functional
termite microbiome will be created and made freely available in both English and
Spanish. All computer code will be open sourced and made freely available.