* 1137711
* AGS-PRF: The Large Scale Impact of Wind Shear on Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Aaron Kennedy, Kennedy                 Aaron          D
* Fellowship Award
* Edward L. Bensman
* 07/31/2013
* USD 93,167.00

Intellectual merit: At the local scale, it is well known that wind shear
influences convection by modulating convective mode and strength. However, how
wind shear affects convection at the scales required for climate simulations is
unknown. As a result, Global Climate Model (GCM) convective parameterizations do
not consider wind shear. This simplification results in errors of unknown size
and increased uncertainties for the GCM's estimate of the Earth's hydrologic and
radiation budgets, harming future predictions of climate. To help answer this
problem, this research will test the following hypothesis: In an equivalent
thermodynamic environment, convection will be enhanced in the presence of wind
shear at the resolution of a GCM.

This hypothesis will be investigated by using a large number of convection
resolving model runs. These Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) simulations
will be provided by collaborators at three institutions: National Center for
Atmospheric Research, National Severe Storms Laboratory, and National Centers
for Environmental Prediction. Convective statistics will be derived from these
simulations at the resolution of GCMs to understand how convective properties
vary with wind shear in similar thermodynamic environments.

Broader impacts: This research will help fill the knowledge gaps that exist
between the severe convection and climate modeling communities, and will improve
the understanding of the Earth climate system and knowledge of current
uncertainties within GCMs. The research results will aid future parameterization
development for GCMs by determining whether wind shear and its effects on
convection need to be included into future convective parameterizations or may
be safely neglected. If this work supports the proposed hypothesis, the
statistics derived from this study will serve as a starting place for
parameterization developers. Regardless of whether the hypothesis is supported
or rejected, policymakers and society will benefit from the increased
understanding of the Earth's climate system.

Results from this work will be disseminated to both the climate and severe storm
communities. This will be accomplished by making results available on a public
webpage, presenting results at relevant professional conferences, and publishing
the results in refereed journals. There will be additional opportunities to
present results at the collaborating institutions, which have provided model
simulations for this work.