* 1137497
* Research Initiation Award: SIGNAL INTERACTIONS BETWEEN LIGHT AND OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSES IN PLANTS
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* ByungHoon Kim, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 185,906.00

Albany State University's Research Initiation Award entitled - Signal
Interactions Between Light and Other Environmental Responses in Plants - will
address the question of how the integration of different signals takes place in
an organism using Arabidopsis as a model system. Most biological studies focus
on responses to a single stimulus. However, growing evidence suggests that
responses to different stimuli can crosstalk and affect each other.

The project will conduct various morphological and physiological
characterizations under two factor variable conditions to identify response
interaction at the phenotypic level. Then similar phenotypic and molecular
analyses will be carried out using existing mutants with defects in light or
stress signaling to identify the interaction point in the signaling pathways.
Microarray analysis and real-time RT-PCR will be carried out to investigate the
interaction at the gene expression level using plant samples grown under two
factor variable conditions.

The long-term goal and the potential application of the project is to facilitate
the breeding of crop plants for improved drought, heat, cold, and salt tolerance
by uncovering how enhancements in environmental stress tolerance constrain plant
light response that affects productivity, and vice versa. The information
obtained from the research has the potential to strengthen our knowledge of
plant survival and productivity. Undergraduate students will be exposed to a
variety of experimental approaches from phenotypic characterization to molecular
study and to genetic/genomic level analysis. They will learn how to analyze and
validate scientific data statistically, and publish and present their results at
scientific meetings.