* 1137166
* NSF/FDA SIR:  Assessment of derating procedure using remote temperature measurements during HIFU sonication
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Rupak Banerjee, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 124,409.00

1137166&lt;br/&gt;Banerjee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High Intensity Focused
Ultrasound (HIFU) is a minimally invasive surgical technique that has potential
in interventional medicine, with applications that include tumor and fibroid
ablation, vessel cauterization, and clot lyses. In the pre-clinical regulatory
review of HIFU devices, characterization of devices involves multiple
assessments, including prescription of the intensity field in a liquid me-dium,
determination of temperature rise and lesion volume in a tissue-mimicking
material or excised animal organ, and obtaining beam focus relative to the
desired target. Characterization of HIFU beams is difficult at clinically
relevant power levels due to the destructive potential of beams to expe-rimental
sensors, as well as the possibility of interference of the sensors with the beam
and the intro-duction of potential cavitation sites by these sensors. For higher
intensities and powers, which are characteristics of HIFU devices, the acoustic
pressure, measured in the liquid medium, can't be re-duced or ?derated? to
estimate the pressure in a tissue medium. The gap in this research is that only
a few HIFU devices are currently marketed in the US despite many technical
advantages of HIFU. One obstacle impeding a faster path to market for HIFU
devices is the lack of standardized and inex-pensive test methods for
establishing the safety and efficacy of the devices. This, in turn, compli-cates
the path to HIFU device commercialization, thereby limiting wider use of the
devices clinically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is
to improve characterization of HIFU transducers. The ob-jective is to test a
nonlinear derating method that can evaluate the thermal effects of HIFU beams.
The central hypothesis is that the derated pressure, obtained from measurements
in water, can deter-mine temperatures and thermal doses for assessing bioeffects
in tissues.