* 1137706
* Emphasis Year in Algebraic and Smooth Microlocal Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Boris Tsygan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 60,000.00

The Department of Mathematics at Northwestern University plans to hold an
emphasis year in Algebraic and Smooth Microlocal Analysis in the 2011-12
academic year. This entails having a program of visitors in the field at all
levels and for varying durations and holding four conferences in the field
during the course of the year. Microlocal analysis is analysis in phase space.
It is the mathematics underpinning the semi-classical limit in quantum
mechanics, as well as having applications in other areas of physics and
geometry. The proposed project would bring together researchers using microlocal
methods in widely disparate contexts, ranging from quantum mechanics to
representation theory, complex geometry, and mirror symmetry. The central
feature of the emphasis year is to be a program of four workshops, as well as
mini-courses from visiting mathematicians. The topics of the workshops will be:
(i) Algebraic Microlocal Analysis (D-modules and deformation quantization); (ii)
Analytic Microlocal Analysis (microlocal analysis in the complex domain); (iii)
Spectral and Scattering theory in the C-infinity setting; (iv) Nonlinear
Evolution Equations. These four workshops represent quite distinct areas of
microlocal analysis, reflecting the major areas of concentration in the field at
Northwestern. The workshop on Analytic Microlocal Analysis is intended to unify
and bridge the different areas. Many of the technical triumphs in microlocal
analysis lack approachable expositions, and the emphasis year should help make
microlocal tools more accessible to researchers in many
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microlocal Analysis is a part of analysis and
geometry that studies functions, differential equations, and other objects on a
space in terms of its phase space. A point of the phase space describes a
position of a particle on the original space together with its momentum. In
particular, its dimension is double that of the original space. The phase space
plays a fundamental role in classical and quantum mechanics, as well as in
optics (as the space of light rays) and other parts of physics. There are more
general types of phase spaces, called symplectic manifolds. In particular, large
classes of complex manifolds, or geometric spaces based not on real but on
complex numbers, are in this class. There are other, less well-understood,
connections between symplectic manifolds and complex manifolds; they are
expressed by the mirror symmetry, an area of both string theory and geometry.
All this suggests that microlocal methods play crucial role in many areas of
mathematics and physics. In fact these areas spread all the way from quantum
field theory to differential geometry to complex analysis to number theory. The
goal of the Emphasis Year at Northwestern is to bring together leading
researchers working in these different areas.&lt;br/&gt;More information can be
found on the
website:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.northwestern.edu/~dbaskin/spscconf/