* 1137568
* EAGER: Collaborative : A Multi-Party Distributed Wall through Dispersed Sensing and Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Thanasis Korakis, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2013
* USD 127,224.00

The goal of this project is to build a distributed experimentation
infrastructure spanning multiple sites in the US and Europe that is uniquely
positioned to facilitate experimental research on global scale mobile services.
The infrastructure would consist of cameras and touch-screen displays at
different locations in New York and Madison as well as in CERTH and IBBT In
Europe, allowing wireless based connectivity for its users through a layer 2
tunnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable research in distributed
mobile services at a global scale. The research questions revolve around
tradeoffs in placing computation across diverse locations around the globe and
how they should be best replicated to optimize between performance latencies,
bandwidth consumed and operational costs of such a service. The PIs are
considering an application that they call a distributed wall where each site has
a number or sensors and actuators, i.e. motion-detecting cameras and displays. A
core local computational task is to quickly detect individuals and focus the
cameras on them. As the number of sites grows, a key challenge for the
application developers is to determine how and when to provision servers in
different parts of the globe to optimize on the key experimental metrics. The
proposed outcomes include better understanding of distributed deployment of
global scale mobile services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has
significant educational impact. The PIs will incorporate learnings from the
project into the classroom through various networking and wireless communication
courses at the respective universities. In addition, this project will bring
students together from several countries to work together on a single project.
The students will travel to the remote locations to give them exposure to
research in different institutions across different countries with different
research cultures and approaches to addressing networking research.