* 1137583
* Chromosome Compaction and Cyanobacterial Gene Regulation via a Circadian Clock
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Stanly Williams, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2012
* USD 56,979.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective of this research is to
better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying circadian rhythm
generation and maintenance in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus. This
understanding will include the metabolic signals used as time markers by the
circadian clock, the in vivo clock mechanism itself and the rhythmic patterns of
gene expression and metabolism controlled by the circadian clock. Recently,
clock-regulated chromosome compaction was identified as a component of clock-
generated gene expression rhythms. The circadian clock appears to use this
compaction rhythm to establish the rhythmic patterns and phase relationships
among clock regulated gene expression patterns. However, this supposition
requires more rigorous experimental testing for confirmation. In addition, it
was previously found that strains devoid of a critical protein function, SasA
protein, lose normal patterns of gene expression despite continued circadian
clock function. Recent evidence demonstrates that chromosome compaction rhythms
and SasA protein function are each necessary but neither one is sufficient for
the generation and maintenance of circadian rhythms in gene expression. The
research objectives address the nature of the chromosome compaction rhythm, how
specific changes that occur in components of the circadian oscillator affect its
interactions with the SasA protein, and how these two circadian clock controlled
processes, chromosome compaction and SasA function, work together to generate
and maintain rhythmic patterns of gene expression throughout the entire S.
elongatus chromosome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate, graduate, and post graduate students will
participate in all aspects of the research. A typical student project includes
gene cloning, cyanobacterial strain construction, protein purification and
assay, and deconvolution fluorescence microscopy of live cells. As part of their
training students will also communicate and disseminate their research results
to broad audiences. They will meet with other professional scientists during
weekly lab meetings to discuss the details of their research progress. They will
also discuss their research results during a weekly scientific journal club
attended by microbiologists from the University of Utah's Biology Department and
School of Medicine. Graduate and post-graduate students will present their work
at meetings of the Society for Research on Biological Rhythms and of the
Bacterial Locomotion and Signal Transduction group. These are very different
types of scientific meetings. The former is attended by medical clinicians and
exposes the students to the human impact of their research efforts in circadian
biology. The latter is attended by leading signal transduction groups and
exposes students to the best of scientific research. The Biology Department at
Utah continues to recruit local high school students into research laboratories
and funding from the NSF will support efforts to also bring their teachers into
the research laboratory environment.