* 1137578
* Research Initiation Award Grant: Advancing the Complex Product Design Using Virtual Reality Techniques
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Xiaobo Peng, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,999.00

Prairie View A&M University's Research Initiation Award entitled - Advancing the
Complex Product Design Using Virtual Reality Techniques - has the goal to
advance the ability of complex product design especially freeform shape modeling
with Virtual Reality techniques. The objective is to investigate a virtual
sculpting modeling and simulation technique for freeform geometry design with
heterogeneous material. By introducing material heterogeneities, the freeform
can obtain anisotropic properties, achieve advantages of various materials, and
avoid the problem of material incompatibility. The approach is to apply a
virtual sculpting method by interactively carving a workpiece using a virtual
tool. Boolean operations between the model and the tool are executed to change
the geometry and materials of the design model simultaneously. Haptic interface
is incorporated to reflect the interaction between the tool and the model during
the sculpting process. The virtual sculpting process is then integrated into the
large scale PowerWall virtual environment.

The project presents a new method of creating a freeform model with
heterogeneous materials in an intuitive and interactive manner using virtual
sculpting. By integrating the process with haptic interface and PowerWall
virtual environment, the product design quality will be improved and the product
design cycle will be shortened. The research has potential applications in
composite materials, nano-technology, bio-engineering, and medical simulations.

The education goal is to enhance the quality of engineering students and
increase the number of African-American students pursuing engineering careers at
Prairie View A&M University. This will be accomplished through curriculum
development, student mentoring, and outreach activities.