* 1137486
* Research Initiation Award: Computational Study of Molecular Interactions and Catalysis
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Daqing Gao, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 199,425.00

Central State University's Research Initiation Award entitled - Computational
Study of Molecular Interactions and Catalysis - proposes to investigate the
hydration thermodynamics of protonated 1,2- and 1,3-propanediols and 1,3- and
1,4-butanediols, as well as protonated amino acids with sequential addition of
water molecules by computational methodologies based on both wave function and
density functional theory calculations. In particular, the binding enthalpies,
entropies, and free energies, as well as the structures of protonated diols and
amino acids with one, two, and three water molecules in the gas phase will be
determined. Additionally, the project will investigate the potential energy
surfaces of dispersion bound systems of He-CH4 and Ne- CH4 with CCSD(T)
calculations using medium-sized basis sets and bond functions. Combined quantum
mechanics and molecular mechanics Monte Carlo statistical mechanics computer
simulations will be performed to investigate the origin of acetone catalysis of
the decarboxylation reaction of aminomalonate in
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to provide an in-depth
understanding of experimental observations and solvent effects on chemical
activities, validate theoretical methods, establish an undergraduate
computational chemistry research program at Central State University, attract
underrepresented minority students to STEM fields, enhance students' research
experiences, improve and integrate research and teaching at CSU, establish
collaborations, and generate high quality publications. The research activities
will help attract and retain students in STEM areas and prepare them for
admittance into graduate or professional schools, as well as for future
scientific careers.