* 1138526
* Type II: CT4TC - Computational Thinking for Teaching Computing: Validating a Theory of Broadening Participation
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Kris Gutierrez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,500,000.00

The University of Colorado proposes Computational Thinking for Teaching
Computing (CT4TC) to develop a Computational Thinking (CT) empowered 21st
century workforce by extending and validating the the research base of an
iDREAMS strategy project. The iDREAMS project developed the Scalable Game Design
curriculum that has been embedded in existing courses and used to introduce
students to computational thinking through game and STEM simulation design.
CT4TC will explore the influence of mediation as a pedagogical and scaffolding
approach employed by teachers to implement Scalable Game Design curriculum, and
assess subsequent impact on student motivation, performance and
ownership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will have two expected outcomes.
First, CT4TC will verify a theory of broadening participation in computing. The
project staff will explore the influence of mediation as pedagogical and
scaffolding approaches employed by teachers as they implement Scalable Game
Design curricula, and assess subsequent impact on student motivation,
performance and ownership. Gender and ethnicity-specific effects of scaffolding
approaches employed by teachers will be systematically researched and validated.
Second, CT4TC will deliver CT education with measurable learning outcomes.
Measurable learning outcomes are essential to an iterative design approach based
on providing feedback to professional development models. The Computational
Thinking Pattern Analysis, developed by the iDREAMS project, employs a unique
Latent Semantic Analysis inspired mechanism of computationally analyzing games
and STEM simulations submitted by students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will bring CT education to K-12 students in tech hub, urban, remote rural, and
Native American communities. The focus of this investigation will be at the
middle school level in computer education and STEM (mostly Science and Math)
courses.