* 1138870
* 2012 Global Change Open Science Conference: Planet Under Pressure: New Knowledge Towards Solutions
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Sybil Seitzinger, International Geosphere
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2012
* USD 448,351.00

This award will provide support for The ?Planet Under Pressure: new knowledge
towards solutions? conference (26-29 March 2012, London) being developed by the
International Geosphere Biosphere Program (IGBP) in conjunction with the
International Council for Sciences international global environmental change
research partners. Building on a comprehensive update of our current knowledge
of the Earth system and the pressure it is under, the conference will present
and debate new insights into potential opportunities and constraints for
innovative development pathways based on novel partnerships. The conference will
focus on three broad themes which are critical to the scientific and societal
challenges surrounding global sustainability. These themes are:

1. Meeting global needs: food, energy, water and other ecosystem services; 2.
Transforming our way of living: development pathways under global environmental
change; and 3. Governing across scales: innovative stewardship of the Earth
system.

This conference will provide a critical step toward reaching solutions to these
challenges and will provide a venue to highlight the current state of our planet
prior to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) in
June of 2012. The conference will bring together 2,500 global change experts
from around the world in a discussion of the current status of, future
predictions for and potential solutions to the issue of global change as it
relates to human and environmental sustainability. The synthesis of ideas
generated at the conference will advance our collective understanding of the
pressures on our planet and what steps need to be taken to alleviate these
pressures while maintaining and promoting quality of life. The conference will
provide a venue for early career and developing country scientists and students
to forge new international networks and partnerships to better understand and
overcome the issues involved in providing pathways for a sustainable planet. A
major component of the conference will be stakeholder engagement through plenary
talks, technical sessions, workshops and seminars. In addition, the conference
will include strong policy and science interactions through these mechanisms and
strong public engagement through webcasts and interactive media.