* 1138515
* Collaborative Research: Type I: Taste of Computing: Adding a CS Entree to the Education Choices in a Large Urban School District
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Dale Reed, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2016
* USD 907,306.00

DePaul University and Loyola University of Chicago propose a project to improve
and expand computer science (CS) education in Chicago Public Schools (CPS) high
schools. The project will create a high-quality CS course that will serve as the
introductory course for all tracks of the three-year CPS Career and Technology
Education InfoTech (CTE InfoTech) program that is offered at 32 high schools.
The course will adapt and extend the successful pilot "Exploring Computer
Science" (ECS) curriculum originally developed for the Los Angeles Unified
School District. With a focus on computational thinking, the ECS curriculum
includes units on Human Computer Interaction, Problem Solving, Web Design,
Programming, Computing Applications, and Robotics. This project will create new
units on Game Programming and Project Management as alternatives to the Robotics
unit. These new units won?t require expensive technology, facilitating the
adoption of ECS in a wider range of schools; in addition, they will also better
serve some of the tracks being introduced in the newly revamped CTE InfoTech
curriculum. To increase adoption beyond the CTE program, the new course is
likely to be offered also as a Mathematics elective and it will be a great
preparatory course for the new AP Computer Science Principles course that is
being developed. Finally, the CPS high school population is 51% African American
and 37% Hispanic, making Chicago an ideal location to reach students from
underrepresented groups, and leveraging the expertise of the PIs, specific
efforts will also be made to achieve a more equitable representation of the
female half of the population.