* 1138469
* Type I: Engaging African Americans in Computing through the Collaborative Creation of Musical Remixes
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Brian Magerko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,057,881.00

The Georgia Institute of Technology proposes a project to engage and retain
African-Americans in computing using music composition for the contextualization
of computing practices. African-American participation in computing is
relatively low compared to other ethnic groups. Recent research has shown that
the relationship between computer games, once thought a "silver bullet" for CS
education, and an eventual interest in computer science is not as strong as many
have assumed, especially for African Americans; therefore, there is a need for
more culturally-motivated approaches. Currently existing approaches for directly
motivating African Americans in CS address pre-computational topics or are used
for recruiting students into high school programs; however, there are no current
approaches in addressing culturally motivated core CS topics for high school
students. This project represents one such approach: the development of an audio
composition environment, called EarSketch, which enables students to create
computational remixes (i.e. musical compositions that are comprised of code
snippets that manipulate small musical samples and beats). This approach with
its focus on hip hop remixes may (a) sidestep the cultural issues that computer
games have had in the engagement of minorities and therefore be more successful
in engaging these constituencies; (b) make computational music more accessible
to those without classical training by operating on the more accessible
hierarchical level of "loops" and "beats" as opposed to the finer-grained note
and event level of classical Western composition; and (c) allow students to
create culturally relevant artifacts that have a deep meaning to them. The
EarSketch curriculum will be initially deployed in summer workshops for high
school students with a final piloting in a high school CS course at Lanier High
School. Students will learn how to remix music in digital audio workstation
(DAW) software and how to write code to algorithmically generate remixes within
this environment, approaching remixing from the perspective of computing
concepts aligned with the CS: Principles national curriculum (e.g. creating
computational artifacts, using abstractions and models, and working effectively
in teams). EarSketch is designed to motivate students to learn and apply
computational concepts in order to achieve musical goals such as the creation of
additive, repetitive, and varying textural constructs. The curriculum also
borrows from ideas of pair programming and leverages social media as a means of
sharing and collaborating while adding the unique feature of students creatively
reusing and remixing each other?s works, as is done with musical remixes. An
EarSketch social media sharing site will enable students to share their creative
works and remix other?s work, by reusing, altering, and augmenting code,
samples, and beats.