* 1138182
* NUE: Interdisciplinary Research-Based Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Tsu-Wei Chou, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE: Interdisciplinary Research-Based Education", at the University
of Delaware, under the direction of Dr. Erik T. Thostenson, will encompass 1)
curriculum development, 2) undergraduate research and 3) involvement in extra-
curricular programs. In all of these areas there will be an emphasis on the need
for interdisciplinary collaboration for the development of nanoscale materials
and their devices. Research experiences for undergraduates in the laboratory are
invaluable at teaching future engineers the manufacturing approaches for
developing functional nanostructures as well as giving students hands-on
experience in new characterization and modeling techniques required for
nanoscale engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the program
include enhancing the infrastructure for research and education through the
collaboration of diverse research groups and co-advisement of students, and
shared facilities and instrumentation. A particular effort will be aimed at
recruiting exceptionally talented students from under-represented groups through
the College of Engineering's Resources to Insure Successful Engineers (RISE) and
Women in Engineering (WIE) programs. The involvement of engineering student
groups advised by the PIs in project-based activities will emphasize working in
interdisciplinary teams and building scientific leadership skills. Research
results will be disseminated broadly to the physics, materials science, and
mechanical engineering research communities because of the interdisciplinary
nature of the projects. The project team will incorporate the results of this
NUE in their ongoing outreach programs as well as the College of Engineering
Outreach programs. Finally, a focal point for active exchange and interaction is
the Center for Composite Materials (CCM). Numerous research activities at CCM
involve the development of nanostructured materials and devices. There is
participation of faculty and students from nine academic departments throughout
the university as well as almost 70 companies in the Center's Industry
Consortium Program. This close university/industry interaction facilitates rapid
technology transfer between basic science and technological applications.