* 1138103
* Workshop: Energy and Power Summer Program to be held at Georgia Tech Global Learning Center in Atlanta, GA on July 8-12, 2011.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Tuviah Schlesinger, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2012
* USD 99,748.00

A safe, secure, reliable and affordable supply of electric power is a basic
requirement for economic health. The utilities that operate this grid face
increasing challenges in meeting the growing demand for electricity in the
context of sustainable energy. The grid must evolve to accommodate new energy
sources such as renewable energy and support new uses such as plug-in electric
vehicles. Utilities need to integrate information and communication technologies
into the next-generation grid to deliver electricity more efficiently and
effectively. As a result, the next generation of electric power engineers will
require knowledge of topics outside the traditional curriculum including
communications, sensor integration, policy, software development and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department Heads Association (ECEDHA) and their member departments in the United
States and Canada have recognized the need to update and upgrade programs in
power engineering. The summer program described in this proposal is an outgrowth
of November 2010 ECEDHA workshop which addressed a range of issues including
curriculum changes and faculty development. The summer program will prepare
university educators to teach an expanded curriculum in electric power
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the summer program centers on the urgency for ECE
educators to update and upgrade university-level power engineering programs to
advance fundamental knowledge and prepare the next generation of engineering
professionals in this critical field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the summer program is
reflected in the international nature of the electric power grid, and by the
impact the summer program will have on recruiting, retaining, and mentoring
undergraduate students, graduate students and young faculty, while drawing as
much as possible from underrepresented groups in engineering (e.g., minorities
and women in engineering).