* 1138634
* RAPID: Forensic Analysis of Eccentrically Braced Frame Fracture during the February 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Amit Kanvinde, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2012
* USD 26,000.00

The principal research objective of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award
is to identify and understand the conditions that could cause an earthquake-
induced fracture in eccentrically braced frame (EBF) steel buildings. For this
purpose, multi-scale forensic analysis of the first earthquake failure worldwide
of an EBF structure will be conducted. Such a failure occurred in the
Christchurch Hospital during the February 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand
earthquake. The perishable data to be collected under this RAPID are material
specimens from the failed frame before repairs begin. The forensic analysis
involves simulations encompassing several scales (from building scale to
micromechanical fracture), and will feature mechanical and chemical material
tests from the failed frame. The research, if successful, will result in the
discovery of new failure modes of EBFs with direct implications for design
safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad significance of this research will
include the discovery of new failure modes and the consequent enhancement of
design considerations, resulting in safer buildings. Outside the immediate
discipline of structural engineering, a significant impact is the modeling of a
comprehensive end-to-end simulation (encompassing several scales) of an observed
field failure. In addition to revealing deficiencies in such end-to-end
simulation methodologies, and thus spawning new research, this will have high
educational and training value across various levels of academic accomplishment,
including technology transfer to industry.