* 1138147
* Conference: "Phytochemical Society of North America 50th Anniversary Conference"; to be held December 10-15, 2011 in The Fairmont Orchid, Hawaii
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Cecilia McIntosh, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

The Phytochemical Society of North America will hold its 50th anniversary
meeting on December 10-15, 2011, at Kohala Coast in Hawaii. The focus of this
meeting is on advancing phytochemistry research by bringing together the
established and upcoming scientists in the field. This meeting is anticipated to
attract a broad range of researchers from both the United States and worldwide.
The Society has a long tradition in the study of plant biochemistry, chemistry,
and natural products (e.g. food and fiber sources, commodity chemicals,
renewable energy, nutraceuticals), and this meeting will address major topics in
the field, including: Biofuels and Bioengineering; Metabolism and Metabolomics;
Biosynthesis; Transcriptome Profiling.

Broader Impacts The Phytochemical Society of North America has a tradition of
supporting young scientists (including undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows) to attend their meetings and make presentations. This
meeting will continue that tradition by providing opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, women and members of
underrepresented groups in phytochemistry to present their research findings and
exchange ideas with scientific colleagues, including leaders in the field. The
PSNA Young Members Committee has a program whose topics are focused on enhancing
the skills and career advancement of junior researchers.