* 1138710
* Collaborative Research: RAPID - Post-Disaster Structural Data Collection Following the 11 March 2011 Tohoku, Japan Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Kwok Fai Cheung, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2012
* USD 28,835.00

The tsunami triggered by the 11 March 2011 magnitude 9.0 earthquake off Tohoku,
Japan, created widespread structural damage in cities along the Japanese
coastline. Careful documentation of flow depth and structural response resulting
from this tsunami will provide data that can be used to validate tsunami
inundation models and corresponding methodologies for calculating structural
response due to the inundation. The primary objective of this Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) award is to collect time sensitive impact data in Japan from
this March 2011 tsunami that will soon be lost, as buildings and infrastructure
in the affected areas are repaired or demolished. The investigation team
includes researchers and students from the University of Hawaii and Oregon State
University. This study will focus on collecting detailed, localized data in
several of the most severely damaged areas of the coastline in the Miyagi and
Iwate Prefectures, rather than a general survey of all of the inundation areas,
which has been undertaken by other local and international reconnaissance teams.
Through this award, the reconnaissance team will collect high resolution, ground
based LIDAR data. The LIDAR data will be used to generate virtual models that
can be queried for measurements such as flow depths, observed maximum run-up,
and scour depths at key sites. These will be complemented with manual
measurements and analysis of videos and photographs. The LIDAR data will also
provide detailed dimensional data for the structures to be studied. The focus in
specific areas of study will provide the data needed for validation of the
tsunami inundation model. Furthermore, the structural properties of both damaged
structures and undamaged structures will be used to determine hydrostatic,
hydrodynamic, and impact forces applied during the tsunami inundation. This
field reconnaissance will help resolve several key questions in the tsunami
design provisions regarding flow velocities and momentum of tsunami bores and/or
wave surges over land and scouring, as well as gain information on overarching
questions on risk-based design criteria and the ultimate capabilities of
structures to resist a maximum credible tsunami. This team will coordinate
reconnaissance activities with the UNESCO-led International Tsunami Survey Team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such data are important for understanding how to design
buildings to resist earthquakes and tsunamis for public safety. Many parts of
the United States and other places in the world that face similar hazards will
benefit from such discoveries, which will help shape building design codes,
which are important for public safety. These new standards, validated by
information collected on this project, could also provide data in the near
future to assist Japan in the recovery phase of their disaster stricken coastal
areas. This project will also enable graduate students to observe sites impacted
by tsunamis and learn from this event so that they will be better prepared to
lead future generations of engineers in reducing seismic and tsunami risk.