* 1138168
* RAPID: Cone Penetration Testing (CPT) and Spectral Analysis of Surface Waves (SASW) Testing at Seismograph Stations with Liquefiable Soils Affected by the Tohoku Earthquake, Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Brady Cox, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2012
* USD 120,253.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award is for a detailed study
that focuses specifically on characterizing the soil conditions at a select set
of strong ground motion recording stations that are underlain by liquefiable
soils in regards to the March 11, 2011 magnitude 9.0 Tohoku, Japan Earthquake,
which ranks as one of the largest in recorded history. In the aftermath of the
earthquake, an advance team from the Geotechnical Extreme Events Reconnaissance
(GEER) Association traveled to Japan to coordinate perishable data collection
and research efforts with our Japanese colleagues from the Japanese Geotechnical
Society, the Center for Urban Earthquake Engineering, and the Port and Airport
Research Institute. On this visit, Cone Penetration Testing (CPT) and Spectral
Analysis of Surface Waves (SASW) testing at key strong ground motion recording
stations where liquefaction occurred were identified as priority research tasks
that the US could contribute to joint US-Japan reconnaissance efforts. The GEER
Advance Team visited 14 strong ground motion recording stations underlain by
liquefiable soils in the Kanto Plain region, including several with both
downhole and surface recordings. Peak ground accelerations at these stations
ranged from 0.14 to 0.22 g, and surface evidence of liquefaction was observed at
7 of them. In addition, the Port and Airport Research Institute has indicated
they have several strong ground motion recording stations further to the north,
where shaking was stronger, that are underlain by liquefiable soils, including
some with ground improvements. These key ground motion recordings represent a
unique set of data that captures the dynamic response and liquefaction of soft
soils during long-duration shaking produced by this M9.0 earthquake. As such,
these data can be used to anchor liquefaction triggering curves and refine
magnitude scaling factors, assess procedures for estimating ground surface
deformations, and evaluate dynamic site response analysis models for liquefiable
soils. However, proper characterization of these sites is an imperative step
before subsequent analyses can be performed accurately. Subsurface information
at these sites is currently limited to a single Standard Penetration Test (SPT)
and downhole shear wave velocity (Vs) profile at each site. CPT soundings and
many additional Vs profiles from SASW testing at six or more of the most
significant strong ground motion recording stations will be obtained. CPT is
often preferred over SPT in the US and much of the world for evaluating
liquefaction triggering, but CPT is relatively uncommon in Japan for various
reasons, and it is unlikely that this work will be performed by our Japanese
colleagues. This work is an important and valuable contribution that will
enhance the value of these case histories and tie them to US practice. The
urgency of this project is due to: (1) the possibility of post-earthquake repair
work that could modify ground conditions at key sites, and (2) the need for
rapid distribution of CPT and SASW results, which will have maximum impact if
obtained before the ground motion records are used for other research
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study are expected to
contribute to a significant advancement in the procedures used to predict and
model liquefaction effects across the US and elsewhere in the world. Significant
research collaborations have existed between the US and Japan since the 1964
Niigata Earthquake. Both counties have benefitted from this partnership, and
have used these experiences as a spring board to lead the rest of the world in
seismic design and building standards. The CPT and SASW testing will be
performed in close coordination with our Japanese colleagues in an effort to
continue this tradition by facilitating cross-training of researchers and
students on testing practices in our respective countries, providing an avenue
for new and important international collaborations.