* 1138614
* RAPID: Data Collection on the Performance of Adhesive Anchor Retrofits in Unreinforced Masonry Buildings during the February 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Arturo Schultz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 49,679.00

The objective of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award is to collect
perishable data from the February 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand earthquake on
the performance of unreinforced masonry (URM) structures that had been
retrofitted with adhesive anchors. Such anchors are used to connect floor or
roof diaphragms to masonry walls or parapets. Wall-to-diaphragm connection
retrofit using these anchors is the most common seismic rehabilitation technique
used in both the U.S. and New Zealand. The URM building stocks in the United
States and New Zealand, including both unretrofitted and retrofitted buildings,
share many similarities. Perishable data will be collected from as many of the
59 retrofitted URM buildings in the Christchurch area, as well as from
comparable unretrofitted buildings, as is possible during the 28-day duration of
the field work. This data will be used for follow-on research of this retrofit
strategy for the URM building inventory in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity will expand current understanding of URM
building vulnerabilities to earthquake effects. By focusing on the observed
performance of URM buildings with adhesive anchor retrofits, the data collected
and its analysis will provide enhanced assessment methods for evaluating seismic
rehabilitation techniques for URM buildings. The goal is to advance the seismic
safety of URM buildings, which are widely constructed in the U.S. and one of the
most seismically vulnerable building types. The results of this research will be
widely distributed to the earthquake engineering community, including
organizations responsible for updating and improving national seismic design
provisions.