* 1138907
* International Workshop on Information Centric Engineering (ICE) in Nano Engineering and other Emerging Process Domains; Hersonissos, Crete, Greece; October 19-20, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 24,698.00

This grant provides funding to organize an international workshop on Information
Centric Engineering (ICE) and Cybertechnologies to be held on October 19-20,
2011, in Hersonissos, Crete, Greece. Dr. J. Cecil (Oklahoma State University,
PI) and Dr. Herve Panetto (University of Nancy) will plan and conduct this
workshop with the help of an organizing committee composed of faculty and
researchers from universities and industrial organizations worldwide. The impact
of cyber technologies and collaborative techniques on innovative engineering
approaches and practices have been significant worldwide. Rapid advances in
Internet technologies and Virtual Reality based engineering approaches have
catalyzed the evolution of this new interdisciplinary field called "Information
Centric Engineering" (ICE). This workshop's objectives are to bring together
leading researchers to discuss the challenges and opportunities in ICE in the
context of emerging and traditional engineering process domains. The objectives
of this ICE workshop include: (i) Assess and discuss the state of the art and
impact of information centric cyber engineering on nano/micro manufacturing,
biomedical engineering and other emerging process domains; (ii) Identify
specific "bottleneck" areas which need to be addressed by further research as
well as explore ideas for future collaborative research in ICE in the context of
identified process domains and subsequently develop white papers related to
these findings for submission to NSF; and (iii) Discuss the creation of advanced
ICE oriented Test Beds and "collaboratories" which will foster closer
collaborative ties among workshop participants. This workshop seeks to stimulate
discussion in the related areas that are relevant to ICE. The information
related topics will include: (a) IT frameworks and distributed computing
architecture and methods: relevant research related to future Internet designs
with a specific emphasis on the GENI initiative, Cloud Computing, Semantic
Technologies and other topics; (b) Virtual Prototyping approaches and
technologies: this will encompass discussions on design of innovative Virtual
Prototyping approaches; emergence of new technologies related to Virtual Reality
systems (visual, haptic, etc); frameworks for collaborative immersive
engineering, among others. These two ICE themes will be explored in the context
of various process domains including Nano-/Micro-manufacturing, Bio Medical
Engineering and other emerging process domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ICE
workshop organizing committee comprising of researchers from universities and
industry will be responsible for the overall organization including selection of
participants, speakers and providing support to successfully conduct this
workshop. The workshop participants (including faculty, researchers and doctoral
students) will be selected to ensure diversity and broaden participation.
Participation of Women, African American, Hispanic and other underrepresented
groups will be encouraged. Paper presentations and panel discussions involving
international researchers and participants will be held. The post workshop
activities planned include submission of white paper reports and proposals to
NSF and developing plans to create an international "collaboratory" to support
research and educational activities in Information Centric Engineering. The
session papers and other findings will be disseminated through conference and
journal papers.