* 1138205
* NUE: Development of the Nanoscale Engineering Concentration (NEC) at the University of Texas at Brownsville
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Karen Martirosyan, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2016
* USD 210,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE: Development of the Nanoscale Engineering Concentration (NEC) at
the University of Texas at Brownsville", under the direction of Dr. Karen
Martirosyan, has as its objectives:1) To establish new nanotechnology courses
for a structured NEC for undergraduate students in the College of Science,
Mathematics, and Technology (CSMT) at UTB which is a minority serving
institution with more than 92% of its students being Hispanic-American; 2) To
upgrade existing coursework which includes nanoengineering laboratory training
and establish online laboratory exercises by using the Clean Room Facility at
the University of Houston; 3) To enable nanotechnology opportunities for NEC
scholars within a framework of Senior Capstone Projects and Undergraduate
Research; 4) To leverage NEC to enable professional development opportunities
for graduate students at UTB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NEC program is distinct
from the standard nanotechnology minor programs now offered by several
universities across the U.S. in that the proposed curriculum is designed as a
fully integrated nanoengineering program across the Science, Mathematics, and
Technology programs rather than a set of electives on nanotechnology related
topics. The impact and associated outcomes of this program is in training
students who will be prepared for the challenges of the emerging nanotechnology
job sector.