* 1138020
* RAPID: Robotic Systems for Disaster Assessment and Disaster Relief
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Maria Gini, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 12/31/2012
* USD 54,996.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-38020&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Papanikolopoulos,
Nikolaos&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;Title: RAPID:
Robotic Systems for Disaster Assessment and Disaster Relief&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project proposal, consisting of a development
effort and dispatching of improved robotic inspection tools to colleagues in
Japan, will expand on existing, successful robotic development efforts to create
a new robot with specific capabilities needed to assist response to the Sendai
earthquake and tsunami. The novelty of the proposed robot may be found in its
locomotion capabilities and its resistance to dirt and water. Its ease of use
make it stand out among research artifacts. The researchers will be engaged in
some of the following activities: &lt;br/&gt;- Engineer a treaded version of the
Aquapod submersible robot&lt;br/&gt;- Develop a sensor suite for the
Aquapod&lt;br/&gt;- Develop a simulator tool for first responders&lt;br/&gt;-
Deploy the robots in Japan through Japanese colleagues&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators collaborate with Dr. Kazuhiro Kosuge from Tohuku University and
Satoshi Takoro from Tohohu University. Their letters and other appropriate
invitations have been secured from the Japanese researchers and responders,
including the International Rescue Systems Institute, to ship a small team of
robots to Sendai, Japan to assist in the inspection of critical infrastructure
and other recovery operations as well as perform research on the efficacy of
emergency response methods and practices. (The search and rescue phase has been
terminated.) These new, improved robots combine treads and limbs for novel
locomotion capabilities for their sensor payloads. New sensor payloads enable
expanded sensing of location, environmental data, and radiation. With these
enhanced capabilities, a team of robots will be deployed for victim and economic
recovery decision-making while simultaneously collecting ephemeral data not
possible with existing devices. The Sendai disaster is unique in its large
geographical and economic scale and types of damage. These robots deployed in
Sendai will provide an additional modality of unmanned systems to be tested
along with conventional robotic types. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal promises an immediate benefit to society by supporting
economic recovery efforts in Japan through a participatory research paradigm.
Moreover, long term benefits for future disasters are in evidence since
emergency response and unmanned systems are both formative domains and the data
collected will advance the discovery and understanding of intelligent, human-
centered systems in unpredictable situations. The PI has a history of outreach
to museum, K-12, and general public education events. In addition, the simulator
tool promises to enhance the safety of emergency responders, which has
multiplicative benefits.