* 1138181
* Collaborative Research CDI-Type II: Hierarchical Stochastic Algorithms for Materials Engineering.
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Petr Plechac, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 191,675.00

Non- Lead Proposal ID: CMMI - 0835548 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Vlachos, Dionisios G.
(University of Delaware)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non- Lead Proposal ID: CMMI -
0835673 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Katsoulakis, Markos A. (University of Massachusetts
Amherst)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of the proposed
research is development of a mathematical and computational framework that
enables rational control and design of materials forming by self-assembly
processes. The spontaneous character of self-assembly gives great promise for
easy and cheap scale-up of devices for commercial use. However, it has eluded
researchers how to reproducibly control and design such systems, a difficulty
stemming from their inherent stochasticity and emergent behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed framework is based on novel mathematical and
computational tools that enable, for the first time, modeling of stochastic
processes with sufficient accuracy over realistic length and time scales and
systematic derivation of coarse-grained approximations used in simulations and
control of self-assembly. The research tasks will bring together expertise of
mathematicians and chemical engineers in an interdisciplinary and multi-
institutional virtual environment using information technology for efficient
data sharing, communication between participating groups and coordination of
research tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work has the potential to provide a
systematic approach to the development of rational protocols for
experimentalists, enabling for the first time computational thinking-based
fabrication of nanomaterials formed via hierarchical self-assembly in a cost-
effective manner. The proposed framework crosses among multiple sciences and
engineering fields of high economical interest, ranging from materials synthesis
to biological systems to energy production. Emerging problems in areas of
critical technological and societal impact demand a paradigm shift in education
philosophy. The proposed research offers such an opportunity through the
exchange of knowledge between applied mathematicians and chemical engineers. The
PIs will actively pursue the recruitment of students from under-represented
groups, both at the undergraduate and graduate levels.