* 1138609
* RAPID: Collection of Data on the Performance of Wood Diaphragms in Buildings during the February 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Roberto Leon, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2012
* USD 40,597.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award will collect data to document the
performance of unreinforced masonry (URM) construction during the February 2011
Christchurch, New Zealand earthquake. Specifically, this award will document the
ability of originally constructed and retrofitted floor and roof diaphragms to
efficiently distribute loads to all walls and other lateral-load resisting
elements. NZ URM construction from 1880 to about 1970 typically used timber
joists, rafters, and trusses, very similar to U.S. construction from the same
era. The project will catalog seismic performance at both the qualitative and
quantitative levels. At the qualitative level, the project will identify weak or
poor detailing typical in URMs and effective mitigating technologies. At the
quantitative level, the project will develop guidelines for the type and
detailing of retrofit measures to be used in strengthening projects in the
United States. These guidelines will be developed in close collaboration with
the U.S. masonry industry and practitioners to ensure that results from this
research will be transferred quickly to American practice.

Building stock in large parts of the United States, including most of the east
coast and the Midwest, consists of URM construction. This type of building is
known to be very susceptible to collapse under earthquake loading; therefore,
effective and economical retrofit techniques are needed to mitigate damage and
ensure human safety. The Christchurch event provides unique and exceptional data
to calibrate current U.S. practices for seismic evaluation and retrofit of these
systems, including retrofits that did not bring the structures to 100% of the
strength required by current codes. This latter data is important for the case
where seismic retrofits will not be carried as a single project, but rather as a
series of smaller projects spread over a number of years as other improvements
are made to existing URM buildings. This staged approach has been proposed to
spread the cost over a longer period and make the retrofits more feasible. The
NZ experience will clarify which vulnerabilities need to be addressed first and
which techniques should be used.