* 1138881
* Small Grants for Collaborative Research in the Americas (SGP-CRA)
* GEO,GEO
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Holm Tiessen, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 12/31/2015
* USD 2,757,237.00

To be able to build on the best of its Collaborative Research Networks, the IAI
has asked investigators of its current CRN2 (GEO-0452325) and Small Grants
Program-Human Dimensions (GEO-0642841) to submit proposals to advance the best
science, most promising research initiatives, and to support the most innovative
cross-disciplinary teams. The current proposal seeks funding for research to be
conducted as sub-awards under that call. Outstanding proposals have been
selected through review and panel evaluation by the IAI?s Scientific Advisory
Committee. Of the current 21 CRN &amp; SGP-HD projects, 13 submitted proposals,
of which 9 were selected for possible funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
program has a broader impact beyond its research though integration with
decision makers from IAI member countries, through facilitating stakeholder
participation in the science, and through the consolidation of international
science collaboration networks and institutional links. Multidisciplinary
participation in each project, particularly between the natural and human
sciences not only enriches the research program but also guides IAI science
governance towards its mandate of providing the best science for informed
decision making on issues of global change on the
continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Inter-American Institute for Global Change
Research (IAI) was created by an international agreement concluded among
representatives of American States, namely the Agreement Establishing the Inter-
American Institute for Global Change Research, done at Montevideo on May 13,
1992 ('the IAI Agreement'). The IAI Agreement created an intergovernmental
organization for the purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research
related to global change. The Institute has an evolving 'Scientific Agenda'
identifying particular areas for research. Full membership in the IAI is limited
to States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute is governed by an annual
Conference of the Parties, and by a subsidiary Executive Council (EC). The US
Government currently chairs the EC. The IAI possesses the fundamental
institutional characteristics of an international organization: it was created
by international agreement, is composed of States and is governed by governing
bodies composed of representatives of States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US
Government participates actively in the IAI. The United States played a leading
role in the creation of the IAI and has been an active participant in the IAI
since its creation. Senior US Government officials have served on the Executive
Council and held other responsible positions related to IAI activities.
Furthermore, the IAI has been listed by the State Department and by the Office
of Personnel Management as an international organization within the meaning of
the Federal Employees International Organization Service Act, covered by 5
U.S.C. 3343 and 5 U.S.C. 3581, and as such has been recognized by State and OPM
as a legitimate International Treaty Organization.