* 1138497
* Type I: ENGAGE: Immersive Game-Based Learning for Middle Grade Computational Fluency
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Kristy Boyer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 10/31/2015
* USD 1,047,996.00

North Carolina State University proposes the ENGAGE project to develop,
implement, and evaluate a middle grade version of the CS Principles course that
is fully situated within an immersive game-based learning environment. ENGAGE
has three thrusts: (1) developing and implementing a highly engaging game-based
learning environment that delivers a CS Principles course for middle grade
students and their teachers; (2) making a significant educational research
contribution by evaluating the effectiveness of game-based learning for computer
science education; and (3) making a significant contribution to broadening the
participation in computing by evaluating the effectiveness of the game-based
learning framework for student learning, computing interest, and self-efficacy,
particularly for underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ENGAGE leverages
the strengths of game-based learning, particularly narrative-centered learning,
in which the game is driven by an engaging and highly motivating story. Within
ENGAGE, students explore and solve global computing problems they encounter on a
remote volcanic island, Crystal Island. Students work collaboratively, think
creatively, deal with "big data," and analyze how their computing artifacts or
those created by others are likely to impact their world. The project also
includes a major focus on in-service professional development through the
EngageToTeach summer institute designed not only to build teachers'
computational fluency, but to instill a sense of advocacy toward computing
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ENGAGE will see the development of a game-based
learning environment for middle grade computational fluency that is expected to
be highly effective for all students. With a specific focus on serving
underrepresented groups, the project will draw on a partnership with North
Carolina State University and diverse middle schools, including a public middle
school of Johnston County, North Carolina, and a private middle school of
Durham, North Carolina.