* 1138716
* EAGER -- Field tests of low-impact treatment for acid mine drainage
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Richard Yuretich, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 01/31/2014
* USD 29,997.00

This exploratory project will investigate field techniques by which natural
microbial processes can be stimulated to reverse the conditions of acid-mine
drainage. Acid-mine drainage is produced when sulfide minerals excavated during
mining operations are exposed to oxidation and hydrolysis at the Earth's
surface. However, within the soils and stream deposits of these mine sites there
is a community of microorganisms, largely sulfate-reducing and iron-reducing
bacteria, that have the capability of reversing the conditions of low pH and
elevated heavy metal content typical of affected waters. A field study site will
be established at the outflow of Davis Mine, a long-abandoned pyrite mine in
western Massachusetts, to monitor the changes in geochemistry that result from
the introduction of a reactive fill into the outflow. This reactive fill will
consist of a mix of limestone and organic compost that will provide an initial
neutralization of the acidic water and a carbon source to stimulate the
microbial population. Water samples will be collected at regular intervals
upstream and downstream of the experiment site to monitor changes in chemistry
resulting from the introduction of the mixture. If persistent positive changes
are noted, the microbial communities within the stream sediments both before and
after introduction of the reactive fill will be assayed. The results of the
investigation will provide important data on the conditions required for
successful growth and development of the in situ iron- and sulfate-reducing
bacteria that can help in a long-term reversal of acid generation and metal
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Acid-mine drainage (AMD) is a global problem
that is often associated with extensive coal mining, but it occurs frequently
around abandoned base-metal mines in remote areas. Cleaning up these sites often
involves elaborate engineering efforts that are both costly and environmentally
disruptive. However, if the conditions within the surface waters of an affected
mine site can be modified so that the natural community of sulfate- and iron-
reducing bacteria can grow and prosper, these microorganisms could establish a
self-sustaining method for neutralizing the excess acidity and removing the
metals. This project will examine the processes that can optimize the conditions
for such a beneficial outcome.