* 1138697
* FIRE: Exploring Visual Cueing to Facilitate Problem Solving in Physics
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2015
* USD 399,985.00

Vision is a critically important medium of communication. Students are
continuously bombarded with images on television, cell phones and during
instruction. Although well-designed images can facilitate learning, poorly
designed images can hinder learning. This project tests the hypothesis that
appropriately designed visual cues provided on physics problems, can improve
students physics problem solving skills. This project strengthens an existing
partnership between a cognitive psychologist mentor and physics education
researcher mentee to test the above hypothesis through a sequence of two studies
with a total of 150 participants enrolled in introductory algebra-based physics
courses. An expert panel of two cognitive psychologists and a physics education
researcher serve as the Advisory Board and external
evaluators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies extend ongoing work over the past
two years. The first study identifies differences in the eye movements of 20
experts and 50 novices enrolled in introductory algebra-based physics while
solving physics problems with diagrams. Each participant solves 20 conceptual
problems in introductory physics, each of which includes a diagram whose spatial
structure is intimately connected to the problem's solution. The study will
measure the total duration of eye-fixations in the areas of the diagram that are
relevant to the solution as well as those that are irrelevant to the solution,
but salient for other reasons. This tests the hypothesis that the experts will
focus on the relevant areas and the novices will tend to focus on the irrelevant
areas of the problem. The second study tests the hypothesis that appropriate
visual cueing to change the eye movements of novices can improve their problem
solving performance. One hundred participants with an appropriate level of
physics knowledge are selected from students enrolled in algebra-based physics.
Each participant is shown 10 physics problems on which largest expert novice
differences are observed in the first study. First, each participant solves the
problem, and if unable to do so correctly, she is given a practice problem which
is similar to the initial problem. If she solves the practice problem correctly,
she is shown a different problem. One half of the participants receive visual
cues overlaid on the practice problem, while the other half do not. The study
compares the problem solving performance of each group to test the hypothesis.
Two graduate students whose dissertation research focuses on visual cueing will
work on this project under the guidance of the principal
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is one of the first of its kind
to explore and exploit the link between cognition and eye movements in the
context of physics problem solving. Although this project focuses on problem
solving in physics, the results of the research have implications for learning
in other STEM disciplines where the use of images is important. Beyond its
immediate scope, the project will benefit the field of physics education
research by infusing ideas from cognitive psychology regarding visual cueing
into physics education research, It will also potentially change the ways visual
media are used in physics and other STEM instruction to more effectively
facilitate students' learning.