* 1138396
* EAGER: Methodologies for Tight Integration of Physical and Cyber Models in Power Aware Wearable Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Roozbeh Jafari, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2013
* USD 52,551.00

Wearable computers are gaining significant attention due to their capability to
enable a wide variety of new applications in domains such as wellness and health
care. Despite their tremendous potential to impact our lives, wearable health
monitoring systems face a number of hurdles before becoming a reality. The
enabling processors and architectures demand a large amount of energy, requiring
sizable batteries. This creates challenges for further miniaturization of the
wearable units. This EAGER award is pursuing preliminary research in tiered,
model based signal processing that can exploit pre-determined signal templates
to enable extreme power optimization. In this approach, signal processing can be
performed at several levels, where in each level, only the hardware for a
specific template is active. If the template of interest is present, the next
level of signal processing will be activated, otherwise hardware components
corresponding to the next and the remaining levels will remain inactive. This
approach, however, highly depends on the effectiveness of templates. In
monitoring human movements, if templates do not accurately represent the
physical activity of interest, the system will not exhibit acceptable accuracy.
The goal is to develop effective techniques and methodologies to ensure
templates adapt to remain valid throughout the operation of the system,
accurately representing the corresponding physical
movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on speed-insensitive
template matching architectures that can reduce the effects of movement
variations on signal processing. Timing models for movements and user activity
profiles are exploited to monitor the correctness of the signal processing, and
tunable parameters decrease or increase the sensitivity of the signal
processing. For example, if the user is expected to perform sit to stand at
least once every two hours in the day time, and the tiered signal processing has
not detected the movement in the past few hours, the sensitivity will be
increased, or user interaction and template retraining can be initiated. When
performing a movement that has been determined to be of interest, the user can
initiate (re)training if the system does not recognize the movement. Effective
template generation and on-line retraining are expected to open opportunities to
individualize systems and signal processing and to reduce the complexity of
storage and processing architectures. This research is expected to provide the
groundwork for ongoing design and development of practical ultra low power
signal processing architectures, reduce costs of computing platforms for medical
sensing, and to enable future progress in areas such as gait and balance
monitoring for fall prevention, and in-home movement monitoring for Parkinson?s
disease.