* 1138358
* RAPID: Mapping of Damage in Precast Concrete Buildings from the February 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Jose Restrepo, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2012
* USD 59,223.00

The objective of this Rapid Research Response (RAPID) award is to gather
perishable data on the damage to two precast concrete buildings during the
February 2011 magnitude 6.3 Christchurch, New Zealand, earthquake. This project
is a collaboration among researchers from the University of California-San
Diego, University of Arizona, and University of Canterbury. Project team members
will travel to Christchurch and catalog earthquake damage (foundation,
structural and non-structural) through visual observation. The post-earthquake
structural state will be determined by means of collecting ambient vibration and
potential aftershock dynamic response. An array of accelerometers loaned from
the NEES facility at the University of California, Los Angeles will be
temporarily deployed to monitor and record these vibrations. Sensors will be
strategically distributed to capture the predominant modes of vibration and
concentrated at the foundation to capture soil-structure interaction. This data
will be post-processed for a first-level system identification and
characterization of the damaged buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cataloging
post-earthquake damage is an established practice for the benefit of seismic
design. Forensic engineering is an essential catalyst of modern building codes.
The technique advances the field of earthquake engineering leading to better
designs, seismic details, and construction methods. These two buildings are
important to the earthquake engineering research community and the precast
concrete industry in the United States because of relevant construction and
designs. With state-of-the-art seismic design guidelines in place, the two
buildings performed as intended, well beyond the life-safety minimum of seismic
design philosophy in New Zealand and the United States. Structural damage was
sustained as expected, with the buildings' structural integrity remaining
intact. To replicate this desirable performance in future buildings, the damage
needs documenting to advance the earthquake engineering practice before repairs
eliminate the opportunity. Participation by researchers at three universities in
two countries will strengthen the infrastructure for research on an
international level. Educational outreach is leveraged by introducing an
undergraduate student to international collaborative research, forensic
engineering, sensors, data acquisition, and seismic resilience with an NSF-
supported Research Experiences for Undergraduates site through the Pacific
Earthquake Engineering Research Center at the University of California,
Berkeley.