* 1138733
* RAPID: Population Protection and Monitoring in Response to Radiological Incidents
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Eva Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 05/31/2015
* USD 54,533.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-38733 PI(s): Lee, Eva K Institution: Georgia Tech Research
Corporation Title: Population Protection and Monitoring in Response to
Radiological Incidents Project Proposed: This RAPID project, collecting rare and
real-life data pertaining to radiological emergency response in Japan, builds on
previous work that collects and processes a large amount of time-motion study
data in the public health emergency response system planning and usage at
Georgia Tech. The team will work with Japanese collaborators in their efforts in
performing assessment of the recent series of disasters in Japan, as well as in
assisting in the recovery. This team is experienced in using a real-time
information-decision support system for emergency preparedness. The collection
and the analysis of scarce data in the so-called Knowledge Data Bank for
Radiological Responses, speaks to the importance and uniqueness of the proposed
system. The Japanese-USA academic research team will be engaged in some of the
following activities: - Establish a knowledge data bank for radiological
response: emergency data collection and resource assessment. - Process mapping
and time motion study. - Interview individuals (emergency workers, affected
individuals, etc.) - Incorporate the radiological knowledge data bank into a
real-time simulator and decision support system. - Analyze and assess the
effects of the disaster in collaboration with NanZan University. The final
system will facilitate assessment of current operations performance versus pre-
disaster preparedness. It will allow for the study, training, and enhancement of
emergency response, as well as future planning for radiological incidents. The
work provides a unique opportunity to collect on-the-ground emergency response
data. The researchers collaborate with the Japanese investigators from NanZam
University, Dr. Suzuki and Dr. Sasaki, whose work is funded by the Japan Society
of Promotion of Science. The Japanese team will arrange trips for the US team to
visit the various shelters, distribution, medical, and/or health-registering
sites where they will conduct the time-motion studies, interviews, and
operations/performance observations, and evaluations. A letter of support and
biographical sketches of the Japanese collaborators are included in the
supplementary document. Broader Impacts: This project promises an immediate
benefit to society by supporting economic recovery efforts in Japan through a
participatory research paradigm. The data bank is critical to our national
medical preparedness, emergency response, and homeland security. Moreover, the
work is urgent for population protection from nuclear plant accidents. Long-term
benefits for future disasters are in evidence. Obviously, the emergency response
and disaster mitigation research will be enabled with the developed simulation
and decision support system along with the knowledge data base. In general, the
project also contributes to train graduate students exposing them to high-impact
application areas.