* 1138673
* RAPID: Investigation on the Performance of Buildings with Structural Walls in the Tohoku, Japan, Earthquake of 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Mete Sozen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 49,000.00

The objective of this Rapid Research Response (RAPID) award is to investigate
the performance of buildings with structural walls in the Tohoku, Japan,
earthquake of 2011. The goals of this investigation are (1) to collect
quantitative data on the seismic performance of buildings with dominant
structural walls in the Tohoku region, (2) to compare it with similar
information obtained in Chile, (3) to identify the causes of successes and
failures observed in the two locations, (4) to test the ability of state-of-the-
art simulation tools to reproduce what occurred in the field, and (5) to
summarize the findings in brief statements and/or algorithms that can be used to
design safer structures. Building standards in Chile, Japan, and the US are
comparable. Nevertheless, the Maule, Chile, Earthquake of 2010 caused severe
structural failures that demonstrated that there are critical missing links in
our technology related to earthquake resistance of mid- to high-rise buildings
with structural reinforced concrete walls. In Concepción, Chile, where the peak
ground acceleration did not exceed 0.4g, nearly 7 percent of the buildings with
more than 10 stories were evacuated and scheduled for demolition. In contrast,
the intensity of the ground motion caused by the earthquake of 2011 in the
Japanese region of Tohoku was as large or larger than in Concepción (with peak
ground accelerations exceeding 2g), but the frequency of building damage was
lower.

The knowledge to be generated by this investigation will contribute to the
safety of urban populations in seismic regions. The investigation will lead to
elimination of massive economic and human losses in future earthquakes. In
addition, the necessary fieldwork will involve the participation of students in
a rich educational and cultural activity. The findings of the investigation will
be made available to the public through NEEShub.org, an easily and universally
accessible NSF-funded web site dedicated to improving engineering knowhow.