* 1138737
* Collaborative Research: The Dark Energy Survey Data Management Operations
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Richard Kron, Fermi Research Alliance, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

AST-
1138766/1138729/1138737&lt;br/&gt;Petravick/Jarvis/Frieman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The Dark Energy Survey (DES) project is a major step forward in probing the
physical origin of cosmic acceleration and the nature of dark energy. It
consists of two pieces: a deep, multi-band map covering 5000 square degrees, and
a "cosmic movie" of a thirty square-degree region obtained by revisiting that
area at least once every six nights. The wide-area survey will measure
positions, shapes, fluxes, and approximate (photometric) redshifts for around
300 million galaxies, and the time-domain survey will discover and measure light
curves for several thousand supernovae and other transients. Data will be
collected during five annual, six-month observing seasons, beginning in
September 2012, with the Dark Energy Camera (DECam), a new wide-field, facility
instrument built by the DES collaboration that will be installed in late 2011 at
the prime focus of the Blanco 4-meter telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American
Observatory in Chile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The raw survey data must be processed
efficiently into scientifically useful products that are served to the DES
collaboration to enable the science goals. With previous NSF support, the
project has constructed the Dark Energy Survey Data Management (DESDM) system so
as to meet the DES Science Requirements. This system will be finished and
operated as part of carrying out the DES. The work will be done mainly at the
National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, with important contributions from the University of
Pennsylvania and from the Institut d'Astrophysique in Paris. This award supports
the major operational expense, that of the personnel, with small hardware costs
for storage and database needs. The core processing will be mainly carried out
using Grid resources supported separately by NSF. A small amount of funding is
also provided to help with project coordination at the Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DES data will be made public,
providing a rich legacy that will enable numerous archival research projects in
astronomy that can confidently be predicted to go far beyond the scientific
goals of the DES. Such confidence is merited by noting the high impact and broad
community use of an earlier survey, the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), and
realizing that the DES data will be substantially deeper, have higher angular
resolution, and extend to longer wavelengths than the SDSS imaging. The DESDM
data products will be "science-ready," with high-precision photometric and
astrometric calibrations, and will include single-epoch and co-added images and
derived object catalogs, all served from an easily accessible database compliant
with international virtual observatory
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information about the many thousands of
transients expected to be found by the time-domain survey will be made public
immediately, to enable follow-up by other researchers. The availability and
quality of the DES data will also impact the public understanding of research,
and the DESDM team itself will be working with a local program for middle-school
girls and with the Adler Planetarium, among others, to pursue these education
and outreach possibilities.