* 1138371
* RUI: Collaborative research - Genetic and Cell Behavioral Characterization of Nonrandom Mating in Arabidopsis Thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Anna Edlund, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 108,818.00

RUI Collaborative research: Genetic and cell behavioral characterization of
nonrandom mating in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Because of their lack of mobility, flowering plants are sometimes thought to be
passive mates, accepting all sperm indiscriminately. The pollen dusted across
the female flower, however, is a mixture, whose proportions do not often match
proportions within progeny. In other words, some pollen have greater mating
success, a phenomenon called nonrandom mating. The principle scientists for this
proposal will exploit tools available in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana to
study the genetic architecture and cell behaviors responsible for nonrandom
mating among compatible mates. Using genetically-distinct accessions of A.
thaliana, these scientists are constructing preliminary maps of the female and
male genetic loci involved in nonrandom mating. These scientists are also
characterizing pollen cell behaviors responsible for competitive performances in
these two accessions, using microsurgery and races between pollen cells
expressing fluorescent proteins of different colors. Compatible mate choice
mechanisms have striking evolutionary significance in organisms across kingdoms.
The two approaches outlined in this proposal, genetic and cell biological,
compliment each other to yield a uniquely comprehensive understanding of these
mechanisms in flowering plants; such studies address fundamental questions in
plant reproductive choice and flower function and could be especially valuable
in agriculture. Finally, this project demands cross-specialty collaboration
between two undergraduate institutions, one of them a historically black college
for women; this collaboration will expose and recruit students to research
professions, while enhancing the research and teaching infrastructures of both
institutions.

