* 1138749
* EAGER:  Amorphous Photonic NanoMembranes for Broadband Chemical Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Ralph Whaley, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2013
* USD 74,946.00

Project Motivation While there has been extensive development on integrated
sensors in the near-IR region due to the maturation of Si, SOI, and III-V
materials, these technologies are not easily translated into the visible and
near-UV regions which are critical for the detection of many chemicals of
environmental and security interest. This project focuses on the use of wide
bandgap, amorphous materials, specifically, amorphous zinc oxide (a-ZnO),
amorphous hafnium oxide (a-HfO2) and amorphous beryllium zinc oxide (a-BeZnO),
in the development of broadband chemical sensors operating at critical
absorption lines spanning the near-UV (200 nm) to the near-IR (1.5 µm). These
amorphous materials are deposited at low temperature (0 to 100ºC), are
substrate-independent, and have chemical etch selectivities compatible with most
dielectric, III-V, and Group-IV materials.

The architecture employed for this research is a nanoscale membrane (typically
40-100 nm thick) that supports a guided low optical overlap mode (LOOM) - an
optical mode in which approximately 1% of the electric field is confined to the
lossy core region. The resulting extended mode has a greatly enhanced overlap
with the analyte, resulting in a device sensitivity (~70%) that is over an order
of magnitude higher than current high-performance, dielectric evanescent wave
sensors (~2%) as modeled by analytical and finite element methods.

Intellectual Merits The proposed project has two core objectives within the one-
year time frame to demonstrate the advantages of this sensing approach, (1) the
demonstration of broadband LOOM propagation in amorphous nanostructured membrane
waveguides at the critical absorption lines 1513 nm and 598 nm (NH3), 357 nm
(TiCl4), and 220 nm (PCl3); and (2) the demonstration of the enhanced LOOM
sensing of NH3 by the use of an integrated Mach-Zehnder interferometer. Highly
sensitive, integrated sensors that utilize a single-material, single-design
platform that span the spectral range of 200 nm to 1600 nm are a potentially
disruptive technology that would displace the current need to heterogeneously
integrate several different materials and architectures. In addition, the
ability to achieve compact multi-point sensing, utilizing a CMOS-compatible
process, can greatly enhance the detection of specific gaseous and aqueous
agents, thereby reducing false positives. Furthermore, the extended modal
profile and dispersive insensitivity of these designs may also lead to the
development of highly efficient SERS probes. Our modeling has also shown that
the extension of this technology into the THz region, where integrated
technologies are difficult to develop, can also be attained.

Broader Impacts Within the Appalachian Ohio region, there is a strong need for
the monitoring of gaseous and aqueous contaminants due to coal-fired plant
emissions and agricultural runoff. Compounds such as reactive gaseous mercury
(RGM), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and zinc are just a few examples of difficult-to-
detect materials with absorption signatures in the visible and near-UV. This
research sets a baseline approach to develop effective technologies for their
detection. The PI for this project works with several undergraduate and graduate
students from the SE Ohio area that have a strong concern for these issues. This
project will support two graduate students, one of whom is from an
underrepresented, minority group.