* 1138658
* RAPID:  Minimizing the spread of false rumors in social media during a disaster
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Yasuaki Sakamoto, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 49,979.00

This project focuses on understanding the spread of false information during
responses to natural disasters and on the development of new techniques to
prevent the spread of false information in social media. For example, after the
March 11, 2011 major earthquake in Japan, social media such as Twitter played an
important role in sharing information and coordinating disaster response.
However, social media were also used by some people to spread false information
about radiation and supplies, potentially creating widespread panic. The goals
of this project are to better understand how false information is spread via
Twitter after an emergency and to develop and evaluate new techniques to prevent
the spread of false information. To achieve these goals, the investigators will
build a visualization tool to measure the effectiveness of counteracting tweets
that question the accuracy of false tweets and conduct experiments with
university students in Japan and USA in which subjects' familiarity with and
likelihood of spreading different types of false and counteracting tweets are
measured. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project will provide new
insights into the factors that determine the spread of false information, as
well a set of recommendations for reducing this spread. The project will also
contribute new methods for analyzing the spread of information in social media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The insights and tools provided by the
project will benefit future disaster response efforts by allowing emergency
personnel to detect when false information is being spread and intervene to
counteract the effects of false information before negative societal effects
such as panic occur.