* 1138275
* EAGER:   Development of a Model System for Study of Dinoflagellate-Cnidarian Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* John Pringle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

In the U.S. and around the world, coral reefs are of enormous ecological and
economic importance for biodiversity preservation, shoreline protection, food
production, drug discovery, and recreation. Unfortunately, coral reefs have
shown extensive and increasing degradation in recent years, apparently due
largely to the inability of the corals to survive the stresses imposed by
increasing ocean temperature, acidity, and pollution. Coral death is typically
preceded by "bleaching", in which the coral animals lose the symbiotic algae
that normally live inside their cells and provide them with most (often &gt;90%)
of their energy through photosynthesis. There has been much recent attention to
this problem from marine and conservation biologists, but their efforts have
been severely handicapped by the lack of basic information about the molecular
and cellular mechanisms that underlie coral growth and the interactions between
the animal hosts and their algal symbionts. This gap is due largely to the fact
that corals themselves present multiple significant difficulties for laboratory
study. In other areas of biological and biomedical research, progress has come
primarily from intensive studies of a small number of "model organisms" that
were chosen not for their intrinsic interest, but instead for their
susceptibility to intensive experimental investigation, including the
application of powerful genetic methods for investigation of cell function. This
project focuses on developing the small sea anemone Aiptasia as a model system
for the study of coral molecular and cell biology. Aiptasia is closely related
to corals and is symbiotic with similar or identical types of algae, but it has
many great experimental advantages. The specific studies proposed here build on
recent progress in the PI's laboratory (notably the induction of spawning and
production of larvae in the laboratory) and focus on three different aspects of
developing genetic methods for this system, namely (1) methods for following
natural and induced variation in genetic crosses, (2) methods for obtaining RNA-
mediated knockdown of gene expression, and (3) methods for transforming animals
with DNA constructs that will allow disruption or tagging of individual genes.
&lt;br/&gt;Progress with these methods should have a major impact on
investigations of basic coral biology and will be communicated to the research
community through presentations at conferences, publications, and both
laboratory-specific and community-maintained websites. In the process, both
postdoctoral and predoctoral students will receive a diverse and sophisticated
training to prepare them for independent careers in research and/or policy. In
addition, the intrinsic fascination of the complex and beautiful coral-reef
ecosystem will provide numerous opportunities for effective outreach to both
younger students and the general public on both coral-specific and more general
issues of basic science and its relationship to conservation.