* 1138621
* RAPID: Field Investigation on Post-Disaster Humanitarian Logistic Practices under Cascading Disasters and a Persistent Threat: The Tohoku Earthquake Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Jose Holguin-Veras, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 42,000.00

Objectives: The Tohoku disaster(s) is an event almost without parallels in
disaster history. Four specific features make it a very unique disaster:
severity and pervasiveness of the trigger and cascading disasters, geographic
coverage, and persistence over time of the nuclear threat. As a result of these
factors the disaster and its response offer important lessons of benefit to
future relief operations. In this context, the main objectives of the project
are: (1) to study the impacts on the humanitarian logistic response produced by
the cascading disasters that impacted Tohoku; (2) to study how the post-disaster
humanitarian logistic (PD-HL) system responded to the disasters; (3) to study
how the persistent nuclear threat impacted the overall PD-HL effort; (4) to
identify a preliminary topology and features of the various PD-HL structures
that emerged in the response; (5) to gather insight into their level of
effectiveness, positive and negative characteristics, manpower provided,
coverage and extent of their operations; (5) to gather data about the flows of
critical / non-critical supplies, and their dynamic patterns over time; (6) to
gather data about the impact of preexisting conditions on post-disaster relief
capacity; and, (7) to document lessons learned, both positive and negative.

Intellectual merit and broader impacts: The research to be conducted is
important to the nascent field of PD-HL and disaster research because it will
provide much needed evidence-based insight into actual/emerging PD-HL practices,
and lessons both positive and negative that could benefit future relief
operations. In this context, it is important to highlight that the realities of
PD-HL response are not well understood by the disaster research community at
large. This is because of: (1) the relatively low occurrence of disasters; (2)
the extremely small size of the professional and research PD-HL communities; and
(3) the ephemeral nature of the data. The project will provide the first
systemic characterization of the PD-HL process that emerged after cascading
disasters with a persistent nuclear threat. The findings produced by such
characterization would: (1) enhance theoretical understandings of organizations
and organizing in disaster environments; and (2) set the stage for advanced
modeling of these approaches. The research will: (1) promote multidisciplinary
collaboration on humanitarian logistics research; (2) integrate students to a
multidisciplinary and international research process, with a particular emphasis
on underrepresented students; (3) generate findings that will be integrated into
disaster and logistics courses; (4) generate findings with applied benefits that
will be broadly disseminated to organizations engaged in humanitarian logistics,
including stakeholders in Japan.