* 1138714
* RAPID: Performance of the Base-Isolated Christchurch Women's Hospital during the Sequence of Strong Earthquakes and Aftershocks in New Zealand from September 2010 through 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Henri Gavin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2012
* USD 44,470.00

The objective of this Rapid Research Response (RAPID) award is to collect
perishable data on the seismic response of the base-isolated Christchurch
Women's Hospital during the sequence of strong earthquakes and aftershocks in
Canterbury, New Zealand from September 2010 through 2011. The relatively high
probability of additional strong aftershocks in 2011 presents a unique
opportunity to capture high-fidelity data on the performance of a modern
seismically-isolated structure. This project involves collaboration among
researchers at Duke University and the University of Canterbury. The project
team will travel to Christchurch to temporarily instrument the isolation galley
and the top level of the Christchurch Women's Hospital with accelerometers,
displacement transducers, and data recorders loaned from the George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) facility at the
University of California, Los Angeles. This instrumentation is capable of
enabling near real-time observation of the building response measurements.
Aftershock responses will be recorded automatically over a period of months and
ambient vibrations will be recorded periodically. These records will be used to
assess the behavior and to develop mathematical models of this seismically-
isolated structure, including soil-foundation-structure interaction effects and
the effects of inter-structural coupling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
soil-foundation-structure interactions and coupled-structure interactions in
base-isolated buildings is needed for advancing knowledge and future
implementation of this method of seismic hazard mitigation. Visual inspection of
the seismic isolators following the New Zealand earthquakes of 4 September 2010
and 22 February 2011, and the first-person accounts of motions felt within the
hospital during these events, indicate that the isolation system deformed less
than may have been expected given local ground motion records. High-fidelity
response measurements of this structure to strong aftershocks will provide the
basic quantitative information required to assess the mechanisms at play in this
and many similar base-isolated structures. Future implementation of base
isolation as a seismic mitigation strategy will therefore benefit from the
knowledge gained from examining the performance of a modern base-isolated
facility responding to strong ground motions. Collaboration among researchers in
the United States and New Zealand in this project will advance the development
of seismic isolation internationally. Knowledge generated from this project will
be used to illustrate soil-foundation-structure interaction effects in an
interactive web-based educational tool, and will provide opportunities for
undergraduate research.