* 1138018
* Device for Tooth Cleaning in the Disabled
* ENG,CBET
* 11/16/2010,11/30/2012
* Shiva Kotha, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 11/30/2012
* USD 119,187.00

0933337 Kotha

Good oral hygiene practices, such as brushing teeth regularly, are critical to
maintaining tooth and periodontal health. Lack of regular brushing eventually
leads to calculus formation, which can lead to caries, and periodontitis. In
disabled individuals with reduced manual dexterity, brushing is not rigorous
enough to maintain oral hygiene. This leads to a higher incidence of caries and
periodontitis in these cohorts. Poor oral health not only affects nutritional
status adversely, it also has serious implications on quality of life with a
substantial increase in the susceptibility of these individuals to chronic
cardiovascular and pulmonary ailments. This provides the impetus to develop a
novel, hands-free device for tooth cleaning, with the objective of improving
oral health in the disabled. In this proposal, our goals are to evaluate two
techniques that in combination will reduce the power required to induce
cavitations produced by piezoelectric strips, with relevance towards cleaning
teeth. To achieve these goals, we propose to: (1) Manufacture customized
piezoelectric strips that can generate different ultrasound frequencies and be
operated with different phase offsets and determine the reduction in power
required to generate cavitations, (2) Develop gels that contain pre-formed
bubbles and particulate to further reduce the power required to generate
cavitations and determine the reduction in power required to generate
cavitations, and (3) Determine the efficacy of the device in tooth cleaning of
porcine teeth in vitro.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The scientific and technological impact of this proposal
lies in advancing our knowledge of factors that can be used to lower ultrasonic
powers required to generate cavitations, with a special focus on particulate
components that can be used to clean and regenerate tooth surfaces.

BROADER IMPACT: The underlying principles generated from this study have
important implications in improving the efficiency of cleaning devices
(especially the proposed tooth cleaning device), as well as in lowering the
energy threshold for use of ultrasound in biomedical therapeutic applications.
In addition, it has direct influence on the long-term health and quality of life
in disabled individuals with impaired hand mobility.

A broad educational program on Ultrasound Transducer Design and Applications
will be developed concurrently and will focus on the education of not only
undergraduate and graduate students but also high school students, teachers and
the general public. A web site will be created with tutorials on Ultrasound
(showing finite element movies of pressure propagation and its role in
cavitations), and the possible influences that advances in this arena has to the
development of potential therapies. The web-site will include real-time
information at the forefront of ongoing research. The education efforts aimed at
high school students will include workshops for high school teachers, seminars
and workshops for high-school students. These individuals will not only
participate in training sessions and seminars but will also perform hands-on
laboratory demonstrations. Undergraduate education will be complemented by
research opportunities for undergraduates in the proposed research and the
formation of a senior level technical elective, Ultrasound for Imaging and
Treatment. The proposed research will be performed by PhD and MS students, at
least one of whom will be a minority female student. Graduate students will also
be actively involved in outreach efforts to the general public as well as
efforts that target high school students and teachers.