* 1138685
* Bridging the Gap: The Effects of A School-To-Career Approach To Promoting Wildlife Science Careers Among Minority Students
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Don Lisowy, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,044,917.00

The Wildlife Conservation Society and Good Shepherd Services (a youth
development and education agency) are implementing and evaluating a school-to-
career model program that consists of afterschool and weekend programming for
high school students at four New York City area zoos and an aquarium, followed
by post-participation tracking, support, and mentoring. The goal is to promote
affective, cognitive and behavioral outcomes among 150 low-income minority youth
necessary to pursue careers in the wildlife sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Bridging the Gap project is (1) developing a science career program that
includes hands-on, technology-enriched, science learning experiences at
zoos/aquaria; career building services, mentoring, and long-term tracking and
support, (2) forming a community of minority students who have the knowledge and
skills to pursue wildlife careers, (3) generating research findings on the
short-term and long-term effectiveness of the program, and (4) disseminating
information about the project's resources and findings to other informal science
education institutions around the nation for replication. The evaluation plan
measures a variety of outputs, outcomes and impacts that include short-term and
long-term cognitive and affective variables. Data collection methods include
student activity monitoring and pre-post testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses a compelling personnel issue documented by the American Zoo
and Aquarium Association - the small number of minority science professionals
working in zoos and aquariums. Because few programs currently exist to help
minority students enter the wildlife science professions, this project fills an
important programmatic need and serves as a model workforce program that can be
replicated by other informal science education organizations around the country.
The project's key strategic impact is its capacity to broaden participation in
the wildlife sciences by expanding the science professional pipeline beginning
in high school.