* 1138256
* Collaborative Research: A Next-Generation Model of the Corona and Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Jon Linker, Predictive Science Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 31,277.00

The proposers will develop a strategic capability for solar physics modeling by
combining SAIC's MAS code with Colorado's ENLIL code, which are among the most
sophisticated models available today. Coupling MAS and ENLIL will deliver
cutting-edge techniques for deriving time-dependent photospheric magnetic field
data, as well as result in a GUI-driven product that will appeal broadly to the
solar and heliospheric scientific community. The proposing team includes experts
in solar magnetometry, surface flux evolution modeling, coronal and solar wind
modeling, and computational physics. Their new model will encapsulate the
capabilities of both MAS and ENLIL, as well as important improvements that will
be developed and incorporated during the course of this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observed photospheric magnetic fields are the primary
boundary conditions to the MAS and ENLIL simulations, and their solar wind
solutions are strongly dependent on these boundary conditions. Thus the proposed
work includes detailed studies to improve the quality of this observational
input. The proposers intend to drive their new model with time-dependent output
from flux transport codes, allowing production of a real-time model of the solar
wind which would be delivered to the Community Coordinated Modeling Center
(CCMC). Ultimately, this model might replace the current Wang-Sheeley-Arge model
at the National Weather Service's Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado.
While global magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models are, by necessity, complex, the
proposers plan to minimize unnecessary complications for users by providing a
uniform GUI interface with which to initiate model runs. The collaborators here
will also provide a set of GUI tools for post-processing, analysis, and
visualization of model output, since much of this work has already been done as
part of previous and ongoing programs.