* 1138200
* EAGER: SmartGreen: An Adaptive Architecture for Management of Large Energy Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2014
* USD 209,823.00

We are faced with unprecedented challenges stemming from global climate change,
rising energy cost, and their impact on national competitiveness and security.
To reduce greenhouse gas emissions and dependency on imported fossil fuels, it
is imperative to harvest as much renewable energy as possible, which, in turn,
can benefit from efficient large-scale energy storage systems that can buffer
variable energy supply. Recent progress in battery technology has made it
possible to use batteries to store energy, and then power platforms that incur a
significant energy load, such as transportation vehicles, homes, and industrial
buildings. However, the slow pace of improvement is insufficient to make the
performance of rechargeable batteries competitive with, and an attractive
alternative to (for example) conventional powertrains, including gasoline
combustion engines. In particular, when a large number of battery cells (e.g., a
6800-cell pack for Tesla S model and a 300-cell pack for GM Volt) are put
together as a pack, their electrochemical interaction and reaction can shorten
the pack?s life significantly despite the high quality of individual cells. This
research project explores how efficient battery management (BM) can extend the
pack?s life for as long as the constituent cells can last (e.g., 10?15 years).
This project is developing a holistic architecture, SMARTGREEN, based on active
monitoring and control mechanisms. SMARTGREEN maximizes the synergy between
battery management algorithms, software (cyber), and reconfigurable battery
hardware (physical), that are tightly-coupled. SMARTGREEN focuses on:
intelligent monitoring, active computation, proactive prognostics, and dynamic
reconfiguration, operating in tandem to dramatically extend battery life and
operation-time.