* 1138674
* RAPID: CRAWLER Robot with Dual-Use Limbed Locomotion and Manipulation for Void Inspection
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Anneliese Andrews, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 06/30/2014
* USD 64,351.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-38674 PI(s): Andrews, Anneliese Mahoor, Mohammad Institution:
University of Denver Title: RAPID: CRAWLER Robot with Dual-Use Limbed Locomotion
and Manipulation for Void Inspection Project Proposed: This RAPID project,
developing and fabricating a custom robotic tool based on the ongoing work in
the CRAWLER robot with reconfigurable attachments, aims to deploy the tool in
the areas affected by the 2011 tsunami and nuclear disaster in Fukushima, Japan.
The robot, to be donated to International Rescue System Institute at Tohoku
University in Sendai, will be based on the recent improvements that would make
CRAWLER more resistant to water and more cleanable and maintainable. The system
expands on the present robotic systems developed by the team to enable the use
of multi-camera, orthogonal vision system for emergency responders that would be
attached to the robot for enhanced situational awareness. This new vision
subsystem constitutes part of its novelty. The Japanese-USA academic researcher
team will be engaged in some of the following activities: - Develop methods to
analyze the efficacy of the improved robot?s vision system. - Engineer and
deploy the robot to collect data about the degree of contamination. - Deploy the
robots in Japan through Japanese colleagues at the International Rescue System
Institute at Tohoku University in Sendai. The investigators collaborate with Dr.
Satoshi Tadokoro (Tohoku University), a search and rescue researcher. A support
letter has been submitted by Dr. Tadokoro for the proposed joint research. The
project is expected to fabricate an improved version of the robots (developed
under a separate NSF grant) in extreme environment tests, and donate this robot
to the Japanese lab for joint experimentation and in-situ testing. Additional
funding is also requested to travel to Japan for collaborative research and
experimentation. Proposed are also interactions and coordinating efforts with
Robin Murphy (TAMU) who is organizing a workshop following up on the disaster in
Japan (the related travel funds are not part of this proposal). Broader Impacts:
This proposal promises an immediate benefit to society by supporting economic
recovery efforts in Japan through a participatory research paradigm. Moreover,
long term benefits for future disasters are in evidence since emergency response
and unmanned systems are both formative domains and the data collected will
advance the discovery and understanding of intelligent, human-centered systems
in unpredictable situations. In addition, the use of the proposed tool should
establish an important milestone in robotics allowing the nuclear power industry
to be better positioned to rapidly respond to disasters in the future. Finally,
the project aims to train undergraduate and graduate students and expose them to
high-impact application areas. The PIs have strong track record in advising
underrepresented students.