* 1138492
* Collaborative Research: Type 1: CE 21: Computing Principles for All Students' Success (ComPASS)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Leland Beck, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2016
* USD 294,430.00

The University of California, San Diego and San Diego State University propose
the Computing Principles for All Students' Success (ComPASS) Project that will
build local capacity for teaching the proposed new Advanced Placement CS
Principles (CSP) course. ComPASS will create novel curricula and methodology
content for teacher profession development. The project will develop and
evaluate pedagogical content knowledge curriculum to support the adoption of
best methods and practices in teaching CSP content. It will continue the
engagement of the San Diego-area computing education community, and tailor its
offered training and support to engage university faculty, as well as in-service
and pre-service teachers both with and without computing backgrounds. It will
build comprehensive, multi-pronged, flexible, and scalable infrastructure to
train and support teachers and faculty and it will pilot that infrastructure at
2 universities, 5 community colleges, and 15 high schools. The project's
research component will evaluate the use of blended-learning approaches in
transferring effective pedagogical techniques to diverse instructor groups. In
addition, the pilot sites have been chosen to reflect a commitment to serving
underrepresented populations and the research plan includes a qualitative study
of the attitudes of those students with respect to course content and their
beliefs about computing. ComPASS will foster the implementation of broadbased,
inclusive, and motivational education in computing foundations and computational
thinking for all students, regardless of their eventual career path. The ComPASS
project will directly impact 105 pre-service teachers, 19 in-service teachers,
and about 5000 students. If successful, its model could be adopted at other
universities, colleges, and school districts.