* 1138279
* Community Workshop: Charting the Future of Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) in the Earth Sciences and Related Fields
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* David Phillips, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 49,488.00

1138279&lt;br/&gt;Phillips&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a community
workshop to define strategic directions for applications of Terrestrial Laser
Scanning (TLS) for rapid high resolution surface mapping of natural and manmade
features and how the geosciences community can best realize support for the
technology. TLS is based on Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) technology and
offers the capability to map surfaces with centimeter to sub-cm resolution with
applications to the mapping of fault scarps, geologic outcrops, volcanic
features, glacial features, barrier beach morphology; watershed drainage
features; forest canopy and vegetative cover; and civil structures. The
combination of repeat TLS surveys tied to GPS referenced locations allows for
subtle change detection for the study of surface deformation in response to
active tectonics, climate change and extreme events, and active volcanism. Long
range TLS capabilities exist to map surfaces out to 1-2 km and thus offer
advantages for rapid mapping of features that can pose human hazards using more
traditional mapping techniques. High resolution TLS mapping complements
spaceborne and terrestrial radar and LIDAR mapping modalities for studies
requiring cm to sub-cm surface analysis A three day workshop is planned for late
October, 2011 in Boulder, Colorado and will bring together approximately 50
geoscientists and students with experience and interests in exploiting TLS for
the advancement of Earth system process understanding. The organizing committee
will produce a final workshop report that will make recommendations for the
advancement of TLS data acquisition, processing, analysis, and distribution to
all levels of the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***