* 1138757
* Gordon Research Conference on Supramolecular Chemistry, June 19-24, 2011; II Ciocco Italy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 16,665.00

Kotov, Nicholas A.&lt;br/&gt;CBET - 1138757&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
supports the organization of a one-of-a-kind conference on "Supramolecular
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering", co-sponsored by Gordon Research Conference
fund, Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Nico Technologies Corporation,
American Chemical Society, and Firmenich, SA to be held on June 19-24, 2011 in
Il Ciocco Italy. The funds requested in this project will be used to partially
cover the registration fee and travel expenses of scientists and engineers at
all levels of careers from graduate students and post-doctoral researchers to
assistant, associate professors. Special emphasis is given to the young
generation of scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
aims at finding new methods of nanoscale engineering of materials, devices, and
processes. The conference will assemble top-notch scientists and engineers with
many different areas of expertise to look into the problem of how to utilize the
phenomena of self-organization for energy efficient manufacturing processes. The
participants will attempt to apply classical approaches of thermodynamics and
other classical disciplines to the following self-structuring solids: carbon,
polymer, metal, semiconductor, and hybrid nanostructures. A large portion of the
meeting will be devoted to the use of self-assembly for catalysis and solar
energy conversion as well as interfacial and transport phenomena governing
catalytic and energy conversion processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal is the vision
of self-organization as the foundation of new types of chemical processes in
industry. The conference will utilize collective properties and
nano/micro/polymer interfaces and particles. Besides the fact that such a
transition leads to inherently more energy efficient manufacturing, it will also
create a fundamentally new relation between biological and non-biological
processes that can potentially open the door to a new branch of chemical
engineering. This conference for the first time will attempt to formulate the
unified approach to different self-organization processes at different
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the meeting will encompass new collaborative activities between the
top-notch scientists of the USA and other countries. It will also allow the
young researchers to become more integrated in the larger scientific and
engineering community and to find their pathway to success. From the educational
perspective, the meeting will provide an energetic and stimulating environment
for students. They will be introduced to the toughest problems of modern
materials science, which require out-of-the-box solutions. The educational
impact of the proposal will be enhanced by the possibility for students to
interact with both academic and industrial researchers. Integration of
underrepresented groups to the fabric of the conference was given special
attention.