* 1138248
* NUE: Integrating Nanotechnology into Undergraduate Engineering Education at the University of Arkansas
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Min Zou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The objectives of this Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in
Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Integrating Nanotechnology into
Undergraduate Engineering Education at the University of Arkansas", under the
direction of Dr. Min Zou, are to 1) develop nanotechnology modules for freshman
and sophomore classes; 2) develop a new laboratory to develop student skills
with nanotechnology tools; 3) create a multidisciplinary nanotechnology
certificate program; and 4) increase the number of undergraduate students
participating in undergraduate research. The proposed plan creatively and
effectively integrates interdisciplinary nanotechnology education into
undergraduate engineering curriculum in the College of Engineering (COE) at the
University of Arkansas (UA). Members of the project team are from different
departments in the COE and the College of Arts and Sciences, forming an
interdisciplinary team that gives the students the broadest exposure to
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this program is in the
development and implementation of an increased learning environment in
nanotechnology for the next generation of scientists and engineers who will lead
discovery at the nanoscale. Almost all UA COE undergraduate students will be
exposed to nanotechnology education starting at the freshman level and a
significant portion of them will participate in research in nanotechnology. The
proposed plan has the potential to serve as a model for other mid-size graduate
institutions that wish to impact the education of undergraduate engineering
students in areas of emerging technology.