* 1138098
* Portable and Persistent Autonomous Real-Time Marine Mammal Acoustic Monitoring
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Christopher Clark, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,049,818.00

This Proposal was submitted to the National Ocean Partnership Program (NOPP)
Broad Agency Announcement 10-024 titled "Marine Mammal Detection and Monitoring"
and selected for funding by NSF.

The PI's request funding to integrate existing technologies, namely the
Bioacoustics Research Program (BRP) marine autonomous recording unit ("Pop-Up")
hardware, and detection, classification, and localization (DCL) software into a
wave-powered glider towing a small array. An autonomous marine mammal monitoring
system will be developed that includes a broadband satellite communications
system that would be capable of transmitting detection, classification, and
localization data in near real-time to an on-ship or onshore Data Management and
Communications (DMAC) receiver.

Broader Impacts:

Successful development of the proposed system has the potential to provide a
lower cost method for monitoring marine mammals in areas that would otherwise
not be surveyed. Monitoring and understanding the impacts of anthropogenic noise
on marine mammals is becoming more important as human induced sound in the
marine environment increases. The system could potentially lower the cost of
monitoring because it will not require a local ship for its deployment or
retrieval and it reduces the steps needed for data analyses by broadcasting data
over the Satcom link and providing initial DCL measures prior to human data
processing. The potential for transferring data via the broadband satellite link
will be a huge boon for the community as currently limited bandwidth inhibits
progress in DCL.