* 1138207
* Workshop on "AMO Theory: Recent Developments and a Vision for the Future," to be held August 18-19, 2011
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Carlton Caves, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2014
* USD 85,621.00

An intensive 1.5 day workshop will be held at the National Science Foundation in
Arlington (Virginia) August 18-19, 2011. The objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I. To bring together leading researchers in atomic,
molecular and optical physics to assess the state of theoretical research in the
field and to formulate a vision for theoretical atomic, molecular, and optical
physics (TAMOP) for the next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. To survey the
current organizational and funding landscape in TAMOP, including the balance
between individual investigators, groups of investigators, centers and
institutes, and types of institutions, and to suggest general guidelines for the
next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the workshop lies in
the discussion of the state-of-the-art in frontier research areas of atomic,
molecular, and optical (AMO) physics and quantum information science, including:
atomic and molecular structure and collisions; strong-field and ultrafast
processes; cold atoms and degenerate gases, including cold collisions; quantum
optics and quantum information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
workshop will be its anticipated impact on the future of AMO physics. An
important educational impact will be to inform researchers in the various
subareas about the overall state of the field and hence support cross
fertilization.