* 1138668
* RAPID: Impact of Debris Generated from the 11 March 2011 Tohoku, Japan Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Clay Naito, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2013
* USD 40,971.00

The objective of this grant for rapid response research (RAPID) is to assess the
type of debris generated by tsunami events and quantify the resulting impact
damage to structures. To achieve this objective, a field investigation of the
northeast coast of Honshu, Japan, inundated by the 11 March 2011 Tohoku tsunami,
will be conducted by a team of researchers from Lehigh University, Oregon State
University, University of Hawaii, and Japan's Nagoya University. The research
team will acquire field data on tsunami generated debris, document cases of
impact on structures in Japan, and use this field data to validate results of an
ongoing experimental and analytical NSF-supported research project on tsunami
generated debris impact. The research will assess the type and size of debris
demands typical for coastal communities, assess structural damage patterns
generated as a result of impact events, and validate models developed as part of
the ongoing NSF-supported study. This research team will also coordinate with
the UNESCO-led International Tsunami Survey Team.

The knowledge gained from the proposed research will be used for enhancement of
U.S. infrastructure code recommendations and design practice for coastal
communities where the threat of a tsunami event exists. Identification of debris
type is critical for determination of potential design loads. Video footage and
post-event images indicate that the Tohoku event generated a spectrum of debris
ranging from wood, vehicles, and shipping containers, to entire houses and
ships. Assessment of what size and type of debris is likely in a given region is
critical for the development of design recommendations. In addition, the
occurrence of impact events may not be associated with all types of debris, and
some structural systems may be more sensitive to a type of impact demand. These
issues will be quantified with the field studies conducted in Japan.