* 1138046
* Expansion of Metadata Management, Visualization and Data Processing Functionality of OBIS-SEAMAP
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Patrick Halpin, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2014
* USD 314,269.00

This Proposal was submitted to the National Ocean Partnership Program (NOPP)
Broad Agency Announcement 10-024 titled "Marine Mammal Detection and Monitoring"
and selected for funding by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's request funding
to create a three-tiered hierarchical framework to process and disseminate
passive acoustic monitoring (PAM) data. The PI's will expand the capabilities of
OBIS-SEAMAP to allow better metadata management, easier access to available
data, and improved visualization and processing tools. Currently the
availability of raw and processed acoustic data is not easily accessible from a
centralized location. The expansion of OBIS-SEAMAP proposed by the PI's would
provide the tools for researchers and managers to obtain data, and process it to
obtain usable results (e.g. maps of animal locations relative to oceanographic
features, animations of animal locations over
time).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developments from this study would benefit users of OBIS-USA, iOBIS and GBIF
networks. A technical workshop will be organized by the PI's to discuss
developing improvements in OBIS SEAMAP functions with input from passive
acoustic experts. The resulting improvements to OBIS SEAMAP will become publicly
available and the improvements in data visualizations can be used for both
research and educational purposes.