* 1138929
* Collaborative Research:  Reactivity Associated with Ambient Particles: Hydrogen Peroxide, Quinones, Transition Metals and Hydroxyl Radical
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2017
* Suzanne Paulson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2017
* USD 630,167.00

This study will take a comprehensive approach to understanding particulate
radical formation and its related reactive oxygen species (ROS), by monitoring
and modeling hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radical generation as well as
transition metals, the oxidation state of dissolved iron and organics, including
quinones, organic hydroperoxides and potential organic electron donors, in
ambient aerosol samples and laboratory generated test aerosols. Field
measurements at sites in the San Joaquin Valley and the Los Angeles Basin,
California will provide samples for ongoing measurements of hydrogen peroxide
and hydroxyl radical production and their relationships to variables of
interest, and samples collected at the field sites will enable different
particle types to be examined. A series of environmental chamber experiments
will generate secondary organic aerosol (SOA) from oxidation of biogenic and
anthropogenic hydrocarbons with pure ozone and high and low nitrogen oxide
photochemistry, with and without seed aerosols composed of metal salts or diesel
soot, and possibly other materials such as crustal dusts. Bulk mixture chemistry
will also be explored to probe the interplay between metals, quinones and other
organics, and effects of light on ROS chemistry will be examined in simplified
systems. A chemical kinetics model will be developed and refined to guide the
efforts to accurately assess ROS chemistry.

The project will enhance teaching and training of undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars, and will establish a new partnership between
the University of California, Los Angeles, and California State University,
Fresno. The partnership will benefit the students involved, and will lead to
synergistic benefits that will translate into enhanced classroom materials and
outreach activities. The project will enhance participation in science by
underrepresented groups, and the results will potentially contribute to key
scientific questions related to human health and climate.