* 1138585
* RAPID: Investigation of Cascading Effects of the 2011 Japan Earthquake to Structural Damages of Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* George Lee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 01/31/2013
* USD 50,261.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award provides funding to carry out an
exploratory study focused on modeling of structural damages of selected bridges
subjected to long duration, high intensity earthquakes (including both mainshock
alone and mainshock plus aftershocks), and strong earthquake followed by tsunami
wave force by using actual input data of the March 11, 2011 Japan earthquake off
the Pacific coast of Tohoku. The PIs will work with their Japanese research
partners who are collecting ground motion and tsunami wave force records as well
as other useful perishable information; and will identify instrumented and
damaged bridges that are suitable for preliminary investigations on the
correlations between structural damages and long duration earthquake load
effects as well those due to cascading hazard effects. Based on information
available, special emphasis for field data collection in this exploratory study
will include some or all of: (1) the structures designed according to comparably
strict seismic design codes of Japan, but damaged in the mainshock earthquake
most likely due to the characteristic of long duration; (2) the bridges survived
in mainshock earthquake with minor damages, but damaged more severely or even
collapsed in sequential aftershock earthquakes (including earthquake and/or
tsunami introduced soil liquefaction effects); (3) damaged or collapsed bridges
near coast in hazard region due to combined actions of the mainshock earthquake,
tsunami water wave forces associated with the impact forces from floating debris
objects, cars and ships to impact the structures; (4) the bridge failure as a
result of degradation or loss of function of structural protection systems
implemented on the bridge.

The results of this exploratory research will be presented to an NSF workshop
for considering future research opportunities related to multiple extreme hazard
(including cascading events) mitigation of civil infrastructure systems. The
study will also contribute to continued US-Japan cooperative earthquake
engineering research and expanding the scope to multiple extreme event
engineering. Additionally, this study will provide an opportunity to train post-
doctoral and graduate students to understand the complex nature and challenges
to develop multi-hazard resilient structures.