* 1138073
* IPG - Developing and Testing an Integrated Paleoscape Model for the early Middle and Late Pleistocene of the South Coast of South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Richard Cowling, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,049,994.00

This research examines the coupled response of people and the environment in the
Cape Floral Region on the south coast of Africa to major fluctuations in global
climate during the time of the origins of the modern human lineage. It does so
through an integrated widely interdisciplinary study that synergizes knowledge
and scientists from paleoanthropology, behavioral ecology, botany, cultural
anthropology, geology, geography, marine geophysics, oceanography, paleo-
oceanography, computer modeling, and climate science. This research is
scientifically important as the south coast of Africa is one of the hypothesized
origin locations for the modern human lineage and at the same time is the
location for the floristically hyper-diverse and unique Cape Floral Region, the
world's smallest floral kingdom, and a super-rich marine ecosystem. It has been
argued that this confluence of diversity softened the blow of harsh climate
phases and thus created a refuge for the first behaviorally modern humans during
climate crises. The research team will explore the co-evolution of people and
ecosystem by creating the first paleoscape models of the Cape Floral Region for
four climate states: strong glacial, moderate glacial, moderate interglacial,
and strong interglacial. The researchers will then use state-of-the-art computer
models to simulate how people with hunting and gathering economies would utilize
these changing environments. These models will produce archaeological
expectations that will be tested with archaeological
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has numerous broader impacts. The Cape
Floral Region is a world-renowned biodiversity hotspot, and the ancient climate
and environment record for this region bears directly on how this biodiversity
evolved. The project will significantly improve understanding of the evolution
of the Cape Floral Region and thus help provide insight into how climate change
interacts with diversity on a broad scale. The Cape Floral Region is a
Mediterranean-type ecosystem, as is coastal California, so the work will further
understanding of how these systems respond to climate change. Empirical broad
impacts include understanding how to use isotopic variation across the landscape
to understand past ecological communities, building a systematized knowledge of
plants, animals, and shellfish as food resources for hunter-gatherers and
sources of raw materials in the Cape Floral Region, and the producing new and
geographically wider sequences of ancient climate and environment that will
increase understandings of climates and environments in a region crucial to
world climate systems. Undergraduate and graduate students from both the US and
South Africa will travel overseas for field and laboratory experiences. The
project will build collaborations between a variety of international scientists
and universities, and create links between scientists of the United States and
South Africa during a time when the latter increasingly expands into an
important continental and international leadership role.