* 1138394
* Constraining Tropical Low Cloud Feedbacks Using Observations of the Fast Cloud Response
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Frank Evans, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2015
* USD 397,045.00

Changes in the properties of low clouds in the tropics and subtropics in
response to global warming have been identified as a key cause of the large
uncertainty in global warming projections from climate models. In some models
warming produces more prevalent or more reflective low clouds, thus reflecting
more sunlight back to space and partially mitigating the warming effects of
greenhouse gases (a negative cloud feedback to the imposed warming), while in
other models the clouds become less reflective or less prevalent and enhanced
sunlight at the surface exacerbates global warming (a positive cloud feedback).
This research attempts to produce observationally-constrained estimates of the
true low cloud feedback using a combination of satellite observations,
reanalysis products, and climate model outputs. The method first uses a neural
network to establish empirical relationships between low cloud reflectivity and
other cloud properties (determined from satellite observations) and large-scale
variables including sea surface temperature and atmospheric temperature and
water vapor. These relationships are established using the fast (timescales of
hours to a day) response of clouds to their environment. Once these
relationships are established, cloud feedback will estimated by applying the
empirical relationships represented by the neural network in combination with
changes in the large-scale variables in the climate models which occur as a
result of simulated global warming. In addition to estimates of the low cloud
feedback to global warming, the method will provide uncertainty bounds for those
estimates, and can be used to diagnose errors in model parameterizations of low
cloud properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the
key role of tropical low cloud feedback in generating the large uncertainty in
model projections of climate change. A reliable, observationally-based estimate
of the low cloud feedback could help to reduce this uncertainty and provide
better information to decision makers regarding the likely extent and physical
consequences of greenhouse-gas induced global warming.