* 1138619
* Collaborative Research: FIRE: Making Meaning from Geoscience Data: A Challenge at the Intersection of Geosciences and Cognitive Sciences
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Thomas Shipley, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 57,104.00

This Fostering Interdisciplinary Research in Education (FIRE) project is a
partnership between Columbia University and Temple University that seeks to
understand the perceptual and cognitive processes by which undergraduate
students and scientists transform earth science data into explanations and
prediction.

The principal investigator of this FIRE award, a geoscientist, will be working
with a mentor in spatial cognitive science to continue to develop her expertise
in this area and eye tracking in particular. The researcher proposes two studies
using eye-tracking and think aloud protocols. The first study will investigate
students? perceptions and reasoning as they interpret a data set (from
topography/bathymetry) that is known to be subject to misinterpretation. Study
two is an intervention study, testing whether providing hypothesis templates
will help students interpret a three-dimensional data volume in the area of
ocean salinity. The research will be evaluated by experts in spatial cognition,
epistemology of data, visualization, and earth science. In the geosciences, many
students have a difficult time learning the skills that are necessary to
interpret maps and large amounts of spatial data. Such skills are central to
what geoscientists do and how knowledge is rendered in this discipline. This
study could lead to improvements in how students learn the skills necessary to
visualize geoscience data and make claims based on data interpretation. The
project clearly advances discovery and promote teaching and learning in the
geosciences. The research may also have implications in the learning in other
fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics that place high
demands on a student's visualization abilities.