* 1138776
* Student Travel Support Program for the 2011 V.M. Goldschmidt Conference in Prague, Czech Republic August 14-19, 2011
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Carla Koretsky, The Geochemical Society
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

The 2011 V. M. Goldschmidt Conference in Prague, Czech Republic will provide an
excellent opportunity for young geochemists from US institutions to share their
research with the scientific community, learn about cutting edge research taking
place around the world, and interact with senior scientists specializing in
their specific realm of interest. Thematic issues to be addressed at the
conference span a broad range of sub-disciplines in low- and high- temperature
geochemistry. In addition to oral and poster presentation sessions, students
will have an opportunity to participate in field trips as well as short courses.
This proposal puts forth a method for fairly selecting and distributing travel
support funds to the a diverse and highly qualified group of student applicants,
to ensure that 40 or more have an opportunity to benefit from all the resources
to be assembled at the conference. In addition to the funding requested from
NSF, the Geochemical Society will contribute $10,000, bringing the total number
of student opportunities to 50.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International scientific
meetings are the primary networking outlet for researchers of all experience
levels. For graduate students, these meetings are often the first opportunity to
interact with members of the international scientific community. As the premier
international geochemical conference, the Goldschmidt Conference plays a
critical role in introducing young researchers to the world of geochemistry
beyond their home institutions. The lingering effects of such an international
learning and networking experience can be life changing for a graduate student
struggling to gain a foothold in the scientific community. The proposed student
travel support program will enable the best and brightest students from the US
and US Territories, students who might otherwise be unable to attend due to
financial constraints at their home institutions, to benefit from all the
advantages this meeting has to offer at this turning point in their respective
careers. Every effort will be made to encourage women, underrepresented
minorities, and people with disabilities to apply for funding, and to ensure, as
much as possible, that the full range of demographic diversity sampled by
today's geosciences graduate student community is represented among the
awardees. Moreover, ncouraging participation by underrepresented groups in
international events such as the Goldschmidt Conference may increase the
diversity of the core group of senior geoscientists in the years to come.