* 1138612
* RAPID: Immediate Behavioral Response to Earthquakes in New Zealand and Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Michael Lindell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 44,989.00

A substantial portion of the US population at risk from earthquakes lives and
works in structures that are likely to experience partial or complete collapse
in the event of a major earthquake. There is no technology available that
provides forewarning of local earthquakes, so people?s immediate response to
earthquake shaking is very likely to determine whether they survive the event.
Unfortunately, the research literature on people?s immediate response to
earthquake shaking is quite small in comparison to the literature on responses
to tornadoes or hurricanes or even the literature on pre-impact seismic hazard
adjustments. In part, this is because major earthquakes are rare events in the
US so there are few opportunities to study them. This makes it especially
important to collaborate with researchers in New Zealand and Japan to examine
their residents? immediate responses to the recent earthquakes in Christchurch
and Tohoku. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will send questionnaires
to 1200 residents in areas stricken by the Christchurch and Tohoku earthquakes.
Using our standard mail survey procedures, we expect to get a response rate in
the range of 30-50%. This project will extend the American investigators? recent
research on the earthquake and tsunami in American Samoa by documenting people?s
behavioral response during the earthquake shaking and all of the actions they
took during the next half hour after the shaking stopped. In addition, we will
collect data and conduct analyses of the effects of physical context (e.g.,
location in open spaces, vehicles, and buildings of various types) and social
context (e.g., alone, with children, with known adults, or with adult
strangers), previous earthquake experience (e.g., damage or casualties), hazard
education (e.g., meetings or brochures), and household emergency preparedness
(e.g., emergency plan, emergency kit, battery radio) on people?s behavioral
responses. A major contribution of this study will be to assess the effects of
people?s immediate emotional reactions on their behavioral responses. Although
people?s emotional reactions are likely to have a significant effect on their
behavior, this class of variables has been almost completely ignored in previous
research on earthquake response and has been studied inadequately even in the
few cases when it has been addressed.