* 1138387
* ABI WORKSHOP: Biocomputing to be held 12-13th of Sept at the National Institute of Technology in Calicut, Kerala,India
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Mathew Palakal, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2012
* USD 23,600.00

The US-India Workshop on Biocomputing brings together leading researchers
working in the areas of Biotechnology, Bioinformatics, and Computer Science from
both the US and India---providing a forum for discussion of current research
trends in the areas of biotechnology and bioinformatics. A staggering volume of
data continues to grow in the fields of genomics, proteomics, and systems
biology, as new data collection technologies continue to evolve. Thus,
bioinformatics and biotechnology have emerged as complementary tools to
biologists---assisting them in their efforts to understand biological processes,
improve agricultural products, discover new drugs, and so
on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research presentations focusing on regulatory networks,
structural informatics, protein interaction networks, microarrays, text mining
of biological literature, and synthetic biology by the invited speakers from
both the US and India will spark discussions on open problems and research
challenges, advancing the field of Biocomputing. This workshop will provide
ample time for researchers to interact closely and exchange ideas for future
collaborations. Collaborations that may evolve from this workshop will lead to
joint research projects and short-term visits by faculty and students?ultimately
leading to economic, scientific, and cultural engagements for both countries.