* 1138814
* Completion and Attrition in AGEP and non-AGEP Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2017
* Suzanne Ortega, Council of Graduate Schools
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,991,719.00

The underrepresentation of minority students in STEM fields is a national
concern. Underrepresentation in doctoral enrollment is exacerbated by the fact
that attrition rates from doctoral programs are high (40-50%), and minorities
tend to complete at even lower rates than their counterparts. Such high rates of
attrition impose significant economic, psychological, and social costs on
individuals and society. Quite apart from these costs, we are faced with an
aging STEM faculty and non-academic workforce that will need to be replaced.
NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program aims
to address this problem of underrepresentation in doctoral education and the
academic workforce. Evaluations of the AGEP program have indicated that the
numbers of underrepresented minority students enrolling in STEM doctoral
programs have increased over time at institutions that received funding through
the AGEP program, but the research conducted to date has not tied the activities
and initiatives of AGEP institutions to student success, particularly completion
rates. Since the activities and initiatives of the AGEP grantees vary
considerably across institutions, it is not clear which of these interventions
have the most potential to positively impact doctoral completion rates for
underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;The project outlined in this
proposal aims to examine patterns of completion and attrition among
underrepresented minorities in STEM doctoral programs across a diverse set of
AGEP and non-AGEP institutions with a view to understanding the factors that
promote successful completion and the policies and practices that hold promise
in this regard. The project builds on work already underway at the Council of
Graduate Schools (CGS) on Ph.D. completion and attrition and master's completion
and attrition and extends it to include a much more fine-grained investigation
of underrepresented minorities? experiences in STEM doctoral programs. Twenty
institutions will be selected through a competitive process to provide de-
identified student-level completion and attrition data for all underrepresented
minority students entering all STEM doctoral programs at the participating
institutions from 1992-93 through 2011-12 utilizing the methodology developed
for the Ph.D. Completion Project and refined in the project's successor,
Completion and Attrition in STEM Master's Programs. Participating institutions
will also be required to administer surveys to underrepresented minority
students to gather information on factors related to completion and attrition;
to provide detailed data on activities and initiatives funded through the AGEP
program, the Ph.D. Completion Project, and other sources, that may have impacted
completion and attrition; and to facilitate access to faculty, administrators,
and students during site visits designed to collect in-depth information on
program policies, practices, and climate, and the perceived impact of these
factors on completion and attrition.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;:
The research findings from this project will provide a rich and compelling
portrait of the experiences, academic progress, stumbling blocks, and
perceptions of underrepresented minorities enrolled in STEM doctoral programs in
a variety of AGEP and non-AGEP institutions across the nation. Findings will
inform NSF and the larger higher education community on how best to support
these graduate students in diverse contexts so they successfully complete their
doctoral programs and are fully acculturated in the norms and cultures of their
disciplines, capable of mentoring and teaching the next generation of
researchers and scholars, as well as driving future discovery in their
fields.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: CGS is uniquely positioned to undertake this
effort in terms of its research capacity, current data collection efforts, and
experience studying completion and attrition, as well as its ability to
influence the larger world of graduate education. Collectively, CGS institutions
annually award nearly 95% of all U.S. doctorates and more than three-quarters of
all U.S. master's degrees. CGS disseminates its findings in a variety of ways,
including published reports, newsletter articles, press releases, seminars,
workshops, and annual conferences. As such, this project has the potential to
have an extensive impact on improving participation, retention, and completion
of underrepresented minorities in STEM doctoral programs in AGEP and non-AGEP
institutions across the nation.