* 1138506
* Type I: Project Engage!
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Calvin Lin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2016
* USD 999,920.00

The University of Texas Austin proposes Project Engage! to address the shortage
of high school computer science (CS) students and teachers. The main components
of this initiative are&lt;br/&gt;(1) a novel dual enrollment (DE) CS Principles
course for which high school students receive college credit, (2) a revamped
college course that aligns with this DE course, and (3) a summer institute that
trains in-service teachers to teach this DE course. The DE CS Principles course
is innovative in three ways: First, it uses blended instruction in which classes
are led by a high school teacher who is supported by online resources; second,
it uses a problem-based curriculum that makes students active participants in
the learning process; and third, it builds online learning communities for both
students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;The online learning environment is central to
this project because it provides teachers with instant access to pedagogical and
curricular support, it provides teachers with an online community, allowing them
to communicate with other teachers and discuss common concerns and successes,
and it enables students to collaborate across traditional geographic and
institutional boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promises significant
impact in three dimensions. First, it will expand the CS community's supply of
both students and teachers. The DE course can reach the 65% of Texas high
schools that currently offer no AP CS courses. The summer institutes will train
current math, CS, and science teachers to teach the DE course, and these
teachers will receive on-going support from the online learning environment in
the areas of course content and pedagogy. Second, it will significantly broaden
participation among girls and under-represented minorities. DE courses
disproportionately benefit students of lower socio-economic levels; anecdotal
evidence suggests that the CS Principles course will attract a broader segment
of the population, including girls; and the student-centered approach will
engage students across all demographics, making computing relevant to their
lives, their personal interests, and their future. Third, it will set a new
standard for online CS education, answering many scientific questions about the
impact and effectiveness of using blended instruction, problem-based learning,
and online communities in a DE course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
implement pilot DE courses at 6 Texas high schools, with the goals of eventually
scaling this effort to several hundreds of Texas high schools and replicating
the effort in other states through&lt;br/&gt;the UTeach Institute.