* 1138938
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR--Development and Application of a Multi-site Observing Network to Study Mid-latitude Thermospheric Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Aaron Ridley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2016
* USD 173,666.00

This is a 3-year experimental project to be undertaken as part of the Coupling,
Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) program. The main
objective is to install and operate a small network of Fabry-Perot
interferometers (FPI) in the central eastern United States. The network will
consist of four stations with a site-to-site separation between 350 and 700 km
allowing common volume measurements of winds and temperatures in the
thermosphere that together provide a regional view of the thermospheric wind
structure and dynamics. This includes quantifying the latitudinal and
longitudinal extents, propagation direction, and speed of wave events, source
regions, and other dynamical quantities that are not possible with current
available instrument deployments. Supporting data from available ground-based
magnetometers and radars as well as space-based measurements of magnetic fields,
ion drifts and auroral precipitation will be used together with a global
thermosphere/ionosphere general circulation model to provide a global context
for the measurements. In this way, the observations will facilitate breakthrough
insights about the dynamics of the thermosphere including the propagation of
large-scale disturbances away from the auroral zone and the response of the mid-
latitude thermosphere to geomagnetic disturbances. Strategies and algorithms
will be developed as part of this project to change the observing strategy in
real-time based, for example, upon the local cloud conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The operational experience gained from this network will
serve as a proof of concept for a much larger-scale network required for a more
complete investigation of thermospheric dynamics. The pilot network will make
technological advances in regard to issues such as understanding how to operate
the chain as a unit, how to consistently process data in real time, and how to
visualize and interpret results from multiple stations. The project is a
collaboration between a team of professors at Clemson University, the University
of Michigan, and University of Illinois. Deployment and operation of the
instruments and the network will provide hands on training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students at each of the universities.