* 1138640
* RAPID: The Role of Urban Development Patterns in Mitigating the Effects of Tsunami Run-up
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Albert Lin, ImageCat, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 42,017.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project seeks to understand the
relationship between urban development patterns and the extent of physical
damage caused by widespread tsunami run up. The 11 March 2011 Tohoku, Japan
earthquake caused significant damage all along the northeastern coast of Japan.
In order to understand how the built environment can affect the performance of
communities in a tsunami, the project will study at least nine communities in
the Miyagi/Chiba/Ibaraki Prefectures Â¨C areas ranging from minor to moderate
damage to complete devastation. The central research question is: Can the urban
topology of a community mitigate the effects of a tsunami by isolating the more
damaging surge effects to a few well designed and well placed buildings, thus
limiting damage to protected buildings to just rising water effects. The main
objectives of this study are: 1) to perform field studies to collect perishable
data on coastal community performance following the Tohoku earthquake, 2) to
develop an understanding of the data landscape in post earthquake Japan, and 3)
to develop a preliminary understanding of the role that urban development
patterns played in either mitigating or exacerbating tsunami induced
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will gather new information to
systematically and comprehensively assess the effect that urban development
patterns have in mitigating or exacerbating the effects of tsunamis. Such
information would complement current studies that focus only on the performance
of individual structures, i.e., not on the performance of communities. This
information can also provide an important reference point for any future studies
on long term recovery in Japan by documenting the initial damage states of
representative communities along the coast of Japan. In addition to data
collection, this project will explore new methods of performing rapid damage
assessment using distributed visual analytics and crowd sourcing, and high
resolution aerial and satellite imagery; these methods can be vital in
situations where immediate field access is not possible or damage is widespread
(as was the case in the Tohoku earthquake). Furthermore, the knowledge gained in
this study will help to inform future tsunami loss modeling activities by
introducing community based parameters that can either enhance or exacerbate the
direct effects of an earthquake. The results of this study will also enforce the
notion that resilience should be viewed at a community level in order to
minimize the socioeconomic impacts of large disasters. The knowledge gained from
this study will help to improve regional preparedness plans for many coastal
areas, including the west coast of the United States, which also experienced
significant damage in the Tohoku earthquake.