* 1138299
* HCC:  Coordinating Communication: Visual, Social &amp; Biological Factors in Grounding for Humans and Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 10/25/2010,08/31/2012
* Justine Cassell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 272,611.00

With the advent of increasing numbers of increasingly smart machines, there is a
growing need to develop technologies that are not only smart, but sensitive to
the people and the other machines around them, and sensitive to the context in
which they are used. Such an understanding will permit the development of
technologies that can coordinate their interactions with humans in a more
natural, seamless and fluid fashion. To meet these goals, this research program
focuses on three critical yet under-studied contexts of interaction, each of
which represents a different constraint upon interpersonal communication: (1)
the physical context of shared visual access, (2) the social context of rapport,
and (3) the biological context of aging. While some research has been conducted
on each of these contextual factors, none has addressed their interaction, nor
gathered them into one broader conception of the role of context in
interpersonal coordination. This research applies a theory-driven design
approach that includes experimental studies, theory development, computational
modeling, system implementation and evaluation. In particular, the research
program proposes: a) A rigorous study of human-to-human communication using
elicitation experiments to develop a more detailed understanding of
interpersonal communication across a range of contexts; b) A formalization of
the findings into computationally explicit forms that provide predictions of
behavior and capture the observed behavioral patterns; c) Integration of the
models into a dialogue manager that is implemented within a larger computational
architecture; and, d) Evaluation of the implemented system by having untrained
humans interact with the system in such a way as to evaluate its effectiveness
and reveal gaps in the underlying models as well as in our theoretical
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will advance
our theoretical understanding of the role various contextual factors play during
interpersonal communication. The results will be useful to a variety of
scientific communities including those that study basic human communication
(e.g., psychologists, linguists and communication researchers) and those that
study interactive computational systems (e.g., computer scientists,
computational linguists, and interaction designers). The research will also
provide practical design guidelines and a general computational model that
describes how machines can make intelligent choices on the basis of these
contextual factors during everyday interactions. At a practical level, the
general computational model can be applied by technologists developing many
different technologies, such as embodied agents, large-scale displays,
ubiquitous computing, in-car navigation, and assistive technologies for the
elderly and those with cognitive impairments.