* 1138436
* Conference: Diffusion Fundamentals IV - A Multidisciplinary Conference on the Fundamentals of Diffusion and its Applications; Troy, NY, August 21 - 24, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Marc-Olivier Coppens, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 30,000.00

Abstract PI: Coppens Proposal ID: 1138436

This Project is concerned with The Diffusion Fundamentals IV conference which
will assemble internationally renowned authorities and beginning researchers
across a broad range of disciplines, to discuss recent progress on diffusion.
While chemical engineering related scientific research, including nanoporous
materials for molecular separations and catalysis, is a major area of interest,
the conference will be uniquely multidisciplinary, with presentations varying
from the physics of diffusion and biomedical applications to the geosciences.
The presentations will cover astounding progress in nano- and Multiscale theory,
combined with sophisticated experimental characterization and new capabilities
to control diffusion thanks to new synthesis techniques. New fundamental
insights and applications of nano-confinement and surface barrier effects on
thermodynamics and molecular transport drive the recent excitement in diffusion
fundamentals. Interdisciplinary discussions on diffusion are expected to
translate to transformational research in individual and crosscutting
disciplines, in chemical engineering, geosciences, medicine, and beyond. An
international conference that unites experts and students is timely. It will be
the first time that the conference is held outside Europe, at Rensselaer in
Troy, NY, after successful meetings in Leipzig, L'Aquila and Athens, starting
with the 2005 celebration of Einstein's famous article on Brownian motion.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research is related to properly
accounting for, or even controlling diffusion from micro- to macroscopic length
scales, is essential to a range of applications, from chemical engineering to
groundwater monitoring, climate studies, controlled delivery of pharmaceutics
and the propagation of diseases. A century after Perrin, Einstein, Knudsen and
Langevin, there is a revival of fundamental interest in diffusion. This is
partly due to the ability to synthesize materials with well-controlled and novel
nanostructures (leading to interesting confinement effects, anomalous diffusion,
etc?), partly to advanced characterization methods that provide qualitatively
new insights and unprecedented quantitative precision (PFG NMR, various
spectroscopic and scattering methods), and partly to multiscale theoretical and
computational methods that allow us to bridge length and time scales for proper
experimental interpretation and practical applications, from zeolite membranes
to physiology and geology. The Diffusion Fundamentals IV conference will cover
this progress in a unique manner, bringing together people for whom thematic
professional forums would not suffice. The intellectual merit, with
uncompromising focus on science, will foster collaborations, multidisciplinary
research, as well as progress in individual thematic areas.

The broader impacts of the proposed research include the phenomenon of diffusion
is one of the most important fundamental physical phenomena, with boundless
applications, not only in chemical engineering and the aforementioned broad
scientific areas, but also in sociology, business and finance. It is also an
area of great educational interest, and allows demonstrating physical concepts
linked to materials science, chemical engineering and biology. Participants will
benefit from presentations and discussions during the conference, within their
own disciplines and across traditional borders. The conference will stimulate
junior researcher participation, interactions, and new domestic and
international collaborations by keeping the student registration fee low ($200)
and allowing ample time for poster presentations, associated to invited talks by
US and world experts.