* 1138967
* Collaborative Research: An Expedition in Computing for Compiling Printable Programmable Machines
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Wojciech Matusik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 6,600,000.00

An Expedition in Computing for Compiling Printable Programmable
Machines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daniela Rus, Vijay Kumar, Andre DeHon, Martin
Demaine, Sanjeev Khanna, Sangbae Kim, Insup Lee, Wojciech Matusik, Martin
Rinard, Rob Wood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions a future
desktop technology that prints actual programmable hybrid electro-mechanical
devices from only their sketches on-demand, anywhere with the skill of a team of
professional engineers using advanced materials. It would transform
manufacturing as dramatically as the personal computer democratized information
technology and transformed how we communicate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
capability to customize cyber-physical systems on-demand would change how
contingencies are planned. Rescuers engaged in humanitarian aid and disaster
reliefs in remote locations could minimize their logistic needs on-site.
Warehouses of spare and replacement parts that may never be used could be
replaced by storing only their designs digitally, not the physical parts
themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental problems in computer science about
what is computable by digital machines will change. The problems will be
reframed in a larger context as what functional hybrid machines are
constructible from cyber-physical primitives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical approach builds on analogies with compiler technology and supporting
algorithmic theories. Experienced engineers may know from experience what is
constructible but their experience must be expressed in a language that blends
the continuous with the discrete, the cyber with the physics of materials
processing. The project addresses broad classes of constructible cyber-physical
systems: (1) the development of tools for functional specification and automated
co-design of the mechanical, electrical, computing, and software aspects of the
device; (2) the design of planning and control algorithms for the assembly of
the device and for delivering the desired function of behavior, and tools for
the analysis of these algorithms that take into account all the necessary
resources, including actuators, sensors, and data streams from the world; (3)
the methodology to generate device-specific and task-specific programming
environments that provide safeguards for programs written by non-expert users to
enable them to operate the machines safely; and (4) the development of novel
approaches to the automated production of new devices which may be based on the
synthesis of programmable materials with customizable electrical or mechanical
properties. This research is highly multidisciplinary, primarily leveraging the
disciplines of computer science, electrical and mechanical engineering,
materials, and manufacturing science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create a community of interest in this new research area, reach out to young
people in grades K-12, engage the national and international community through
professional society meetings, and establish new interdisciplinary programs
among the participating academic institutions. Like the very successful MOSIS
program (www.mosis.com/), this project will disseminate the research results and
provide a community resource and service for experimentation with our
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;Â¬&lt;br/&gt;For more information, please visit:
http://ppm.csail.mit.edu