* 1138416
* RUI: Orientational Relaxation of Chromophore Order in Nonlinear Optical Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2011,05/31/2015
* David McGee, The College of New Jersey
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2015
* USD 170,037.00

TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear optical materials for applications in
optical signal processing is extended to polymers, which offer greater
compositional flexibility than conventional crystalline materials. Optical
functionality in a polymer is incorporated by blending a chromophore with a
transparent polymer host and electrically poling the material to induce a
noncentrosymmetric ordering of chromophores. Research to date has largely been
confined to homopolymer hosts, which offer limited options for tuning the
chromophore micronenvironment. A promising alternate approach to achieving
stable dipolar ordering is to selectively encapsulate the chromophore in one
domain of a block copolymer. In this project, second harmonic generation and
polarized absorption spectroscopy experiments will be used to make detailed
measurements of the poling-induced order parameter and the post-poling
orientational relaxation times of chromophores encapsulated in block copolymer
domains, using the PS-b-P4VP block copolymer as a model system. Covalent and
hydrogen-bonding schemes for selective chromophore encapsulation will be used to
investigate orientational relaxation as a function of bonding mode. This model
system will help probe to what extent the disparate requirements for poling and
relaxation can be decoupled through appropriate choice of block copolymer
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear optical materials are integral to
applications such as fiber optic data transmission for Internet-based
communication. Traditional materials are crystalline, which are limited both in
cost of fabrication and ultimate bandwidth capability. Polymeric materials are
an alternative that offer flexibility in design and cost, but their long-term
stability in deployed devices has not been fully established. One promising
polymer category is that of block copolymers, which are effectively ordered
combinations of chemically distinct polymers on the nanoscale. This research
will utilize laser-based experiments to measure the long-term stability of block
copolymer materials that have the potential for use in telecommunications
devices. The project will employ physics and chemistry undergraduates in a
vigorous interdisciplinary research program at Drew University. This will
provide them with valuable experience in thin-film characterization, lasers, and
related photonic technologies, all of which are in demand by high-technology
industries and graduate training programs. Students will also benefit from
interacting with collaborators at major research institutions, including the
Johns Hopkins University and the University of Wisconsin.