* 1138114
* Effects of Single-Sex Schooling on Students' Mathematics and Science Learning: A Meta-Analysis
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Erin Pahlke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2015
* USD 313,165.00

The project will use meta-analysis to synthesize the results of research
comparing single-sex with coeducational schooling in regard to multiple student
outcomes, focusing particularly on mathematics and science performance,
interest, motivation, and attitude. The investigators, from the University of
Wisconsin and Arizona State University, will perform a comprehensive meta-
analysis of research comparing student outcomes in single-sex and coeducation
schooling in the US, and will conduct separate analyses of reseatch conducted in
other countries. Meta-analyses will focus on potential moderators of the effects
such as dosage (e.g., single-sex classrooms vs. entire schools), quality of
design (e.g., random vs. non-random assignment), gender, and others. Studies
will be coded for multiple variables as determined by the Expectancy Value and
Developmental Intergroup Theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-sex schooling is
an important policy issue in mathematics and science education in the US today,
but no broad meta-analysis has yet been conducted that examines the scientific
evidence for or against this choice. In drawing on a wide range of individua
studies conducted both in the US and abroad, the investigators have the
potential to provide definitive evidence to school districts as they make policy
decisions about instituting single-sex education.