* 1138520
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Antioxidants to Improve Thermo-Oxidative Stability of Biolubricants and Biodiesel
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,03/31/2015
* Ashok Cholli, Polnox Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2015
* USD 610,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop and commercialize cost-effective high performance macromolecular
antioxidants based on Polnox's proprietary "dual type moiety per molecule" (DT-
mPM) technology for sustainable-alternate bio-oils. Oxidative stability presents
a key issue for industrial bio-oils. These oils, which are derived from bio-
resources, have inferior stability compared those derived from fossil fuels. In
particular, fuels and lubricants derived from plant-based polyunsaturated fatty
acids are especially prone to severe oxidation. It has been demonstrated in
Phase I that the DT-mPM antioxidants are significantly more effective in
combating degradation of these bio-oils vs. state-of-the-art commercial
antioxidants. The current, state-of-the-art, commercial antioxidants do not meet
the challenges posed by plant-derived bio-oils. Current antioxidants were
developed to protect petroleum lubricants and are simply not capable of meeting
the stability issues posed by bio-lubricants. This proposal addresses the key
steps involved in the product development of antioxidants for bio-lubricants;
namely, (a) molecular design optimization, (b) cost-effective process scale up,
(c) preparation of pound scale of lead antioxidants identified in Phase I, and
(d) product storage stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to play an important role in
reducing the nation's dependence on foreign oil and providing a cleaner
environment by reducing the pollution of air, soil, water, and the eco-system.
Societal benefits from the increased use of bio-lubricants include less
potential for environmental pollution (e.g., from loss during use or improper
disposal of waste lubricants, accidental oil spillage during industrial use, or
off-shore drilling) as well as reduced dependence on imported petroleum as a raw
material. However, as oils are developed from renewable alternate energy
resources, there are some inherent issues to be addressed: (1) thermo-oxidative
stability, and (2) pour-point properties. By addressing the thermo-oxidative
stability problem of bio-oils through the development and commercialization of
new high performance antioxidants, this will enable the production of higher
quality alternate oils that are biodegradable and environmentally safe.