* 1138274
* Collaborative Research: Testing Mechanisms for Holocene Climate Change in the Southern Tropical and Mid-Latitude Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Yarrow Axford, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2014
* USD 55,395.00

This collaborative grant is collecting paleoclimate proxy data from locations in
Southern Hemisphere tropical and mid-latitudes and using these data to constrain
global circulation model (GCM) simulations of climate change. Through this
coordinated effort, the research enhances our knowledge of potential mechanisms
which influenced Holocene climate events such as the Little Ice Age. The
investigators have three specific aims: 1) developing a continuous record of
Holocene climate change near the largest tropical ice mass, Peru's Quelccaya Ice
Cap, using multiple paleoclimate proxies, including chironomid and diatom
assemblages in lake sediments; 2) tracking Little Ice Age climatic conditions
over a broader area of the Andes, from ~13 to 40°S latitude; and 3) using a GCM
to evaluate which mechanistic hypotheses explain the geographical and temporal
patterns of reconstructed paleoclimatic fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;This research
establishes a detailed multi-proxy record of the Holocene paleoclimate and
paleoenvironment in the southern tropics near the Quelccaya Ice Cap. Defined by
radiocarbon ages and supplemented by surface exposure (10Be) ages, this
chronology is comparable with higher-latitude records from both Northern and
Southern Hemispheres. In addition to the temporally detailed record from
Quelccaya, the research provides a spatially resolved reconstruction of climate
during the Little Ice Age in the southern tropics and mid-latitudes. The broader
pattern of Little Ice Age Andean glacier fluctuations in multiple climatic
regimes also provides valuable data for examining the relative influences of
temperature and precipitation on such fluctuations. These efforts interface with
ongoing NSF-funded research (EAR-0902363) investigating Holocene glacier
fluctuations in Patagonia, enhancing both research projects.&lt;br/&gt;This
research provides both paleoclimate proxy data and modeling results to further
the understanding of Holocene and recent climate change in the southern tropics
and mid-latitudes. The research tests various mechanisms for the Little Ice Age.
For example, it examines results from modeling of solar forcing during the
Little Ice Age which suggest that there were changes in tropical circulation in
addition to Northern Hemisphere climate changes. Since the paleoclimate data
from near Quelccaya Ice Cap spans a time period influenced by differing boundary
conditions, such as high and low austral summer insolation, it should be
possible to examine various mechanisms for rapid climate events. Possible
mechanisms include a latitudinal shift of the Intertropical Convergence Zone and
the strengthening/weakening of the El Niño Southern Oscillation
(ENSO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research include (1)
applying and evaluating a promising proxy (chironomid assemblages) method in a
new area (tropical Andes) and archiving sediment cores; (2) strengthening and
establishing new international and interdisciplinary collaborations among
scientists including Dr. Pedro Tapia of Peru and Chilean scientists; (3)
training graduate and undergraduate students; and (4) ensuring outreach and
dissemination to the general public of information regarding climate change.