* 1138257
* NUE: Nano-Science, Technology, Ethics, and Policy (NanoSTEP)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Jennifer Schneider, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2014
* USD 206,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE: NANO-SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ETHICS, AND POLICY (NanoSTEP)", at
Colorado School of Mines (CSM), under the direction of Dr. Corrine Packard,
seeks to introduce nanotechnology undergraduate education in engineering
emphasizing societal, ethical, economic, and environmental (S3E) issues at every
step in the humanities and social sciences course requirements at the CSM. The
goal will be pursued through three objectives. 1) For Nature and Human Values (a
first-year, four semester credit writing intensive core course). 2) For Human
Systems (a second-year, three semester credit, globalization core course). 3)
NanoSTEP will introduce nanoS3E issues into select third- and fourth-year
elective courses in both the liberal arts and technical disciplines. As a
result, all CSM undergraduate majors will be introduced to multiple levels of
teaching and learning concerning S3E issues relevant to
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NanoSTEP grows out of previous
collaborations between the Colorado Fuel Cells Center (CFCC) and the Division of
Liberal Arts and International Studies (LAIS) in ways that can serve as a model
for similar efforts at other institutions seeking to promote any broad
interdisciplinary infusion into an engineering curriculum, especially one linked
with the social sciences and humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NanoSTEP manifests
three broader impacts: 1) it strongly advances discovery and understanding (with
regard to generally neglected social justice issues) in conjunction with the
development of teaching and learning modules; 2) it will deepen participation of
underrepresented groups at CSM by integrating relevant social justice issues
into teaching and learning and will also broaden participation of globally
relevant groups through an international networking and partnership component;
and 3) it will benefit society by offering intelligent pathways for scientists
and engineers to better appreciate societal concerns and also, to some extent
through dissemination among non-technical scholarly communities, for non-
scientist citizens to better appreciate nanotechnology.