* 1138703
* NSF Workshop on Fundamental Research and Technology in Wave and Hydrokinetics Power Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Michelle Teng, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 33,160.00

PI: Reza Ghorbani&lt;br/&gt;Institution: U of Hawaii at
Manoa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: NSF Workshop on Fundamental Research and
Technology in Wave and Hydrokinetics Power Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support participant travel to the international workshop titled NSF
Workshop on Fundamental Research and Technology in Wave and Hydrokinetics Power
Systems. The workshop will be held on September 19-22, 2011 at Kona, Hawaii, as
part of the international conference OCEANS?11. The objectives of the workshop
are to 1) provide a forum to exchange ideas on the recent advances in
fundamental research and technology development related to wave and hydrokinetic
power conversion and utilization, 2) identify research needs of critical
importance, and 3) develop guidelines for research and technology development
for the next decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oceans offer the potential for abundant and clean
natural energy from ocean waves, currents, tides and thermal gradients. The
harvesting and conversion of ocean wave energy to electrical power is a
relatively new and emerging research area. In this area, research and technology
development usually requires multidisciplinary knowledge and skills, including
ocean hydrodynamics , mechanical engineering for design of energy conversion
devices, structural engineering analysis of wave-device interaction, and
electrical engineering for power storage and transmission, as well as economic
and environmental considerations. The papers to be presented at the proposed
workshop will illustrate the multidisciplinary nature of this ocean wave power,
and the complexity of the fundamental science and engineering challenges needed
to harness this renewable energy resource. In particular, new theories and
computational models to be presented at the workshop have the potential to
advance the field of wave and hydrokinetic power systems, as well as fundamental
science in fluid and solid mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will provide broader impacts in four
aspects. First, both academic scholars and engineers from industry will be
invited to attend the workshop. Therefore, the workshop offers an opportunity to
facilitate technology transfer, and to identify research topics that have both
scientific merit and industrial application. Second, both graduate and
undergraduate students will be offered an opportunity participate in the
workshop to further their career development. Third, the workshop outcomes will
be disseminated through a variety of outlets, including the conference
proceedings, special issues in two journals, and a web site. Finally, the
workshop also aspires to establish a US-based consortium on wave and
hydrokinetics power that will facilitate collaboration and information exchange,
particularly with complimentary ocean wave power consortiums in Europe.