* 1138643
* RAPID: The Tohoku Catastrophe: Volunteers and Non-Profit Organizations in Post-Kobe Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Joanne Nigg, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2012
* USD 39,998.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) provides funding to explore the
emergence and reliance on volunteer groups and organizations following a
catastrophe. On March 11, 2011, the nation of Japan experienced a catastrophe -
a great earthquake of M9.0; a near-shore tsunami, 10 meters high, that reached
the coast in less than 30 minutes and traveled inland four miles in some
locations; and a nuclear emergency in six reactors on one site, releasing
significant amounts of radiation into the air, land, and water. These events
resulted in difficult and delayed search and rescue efforts, extremely short
warning periods, evacuation and sheltering of over 500,000 people, heroic
efforts to stop the melting of cores and spent fuel rods at nuclear power plant
reactors, and confusion in risk communication to the public. Given the enormity
of the Tohoku destruction and the evident inventiveness that was required at all
stages of response, it will be argued that an entirely different framework is
needed in responding to catastrophic events. This RAPID project will investigate
one of the components of that framework - the emergence and reliance on
volunteer groups and organizations. Moreover, with what is likely to be a many-
years-long and very uncertain process of recovery, volunteers and non-profit
organizations are likely to continue to be heavily involved in a variety of
capacities over a long period of time. This RAPID project will tackle a
principal question and related concerns regarding volunteers in catastrophes:
how do volunteers (or do they) work with, coordinate with, and share information
with other organizations that are deemed to be more established or "official" as
well as with each other? What conditions facilitate different kinds of
coordination in a catastrophic milieu? What functions do volunteers undertake
when formal response systems are overwhelmed and dealing with the multitude of
subsidiary crises that comprise a catastrophe? Emergency managers and other
public officials look to the research community for guidance on responding to
disaster and catastrophe. Data-gathering methods for this project include
observation of field sites where volunteers are working; formal, semi-formal,
and unstructured interviews; and analysis of primary documents as well as media
reports. The research team will emphasize gathering of ephemeral data: that is,
data about agencies and organizations that may not exist after the passage of
time. The main analytical approach will be inductive qualitative analysis in the
grounded theory tradition, where scientific theories are built in a repeated
process of analysis, theory-building, and theory
refinement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this study will form the basis
for new theories that will make sense to the user community in building disaster
and catastrophe response organizations. Because the findings will build on
organization theory, it is anticipated that the findings will be useful in
private sector settings, where building organizations in quickly-changing,
ambiguous, and politically contested environments is a main challenge,
especially in international and cross-cultural applications.