* 1138901
* RAPID: When Online is Off: Communicating in Disaster Following the February 22, 2011 Christchurch, NZ Earthquake
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Jeannette Sutton, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 06/30/2012
* USD 29,237.00

The February 22, 2011 earthquake in Christchurch New Zealand, an aftershock of a
larger earthquake in September 2010, caused significant infrastructure and
economic damage, and life loss, to a modern city with similar population
characteristics as US metropolitan communities. In the days and weeks following
the earthquake, various risk communication strategies were utilized to reach
individuals affected by the ongoing aftershocks, including online networked
communications. By collecting data on access to and use of online information in
this critical period following the earthquake, this project will advance
knowledge about information and communication capacities as they affect coping
and resiliency in the aftermath of disaster. Specifically, the project examines
the effects of reliance on online communications on individual coping ability
and community recovery, and on the role of networked online communication among
those directly affected by disaster. These questions will be examined through a
series of focus groups and a household survey in the disaster-affected area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This research will address key
questions about information access in disaster; the effectiveness of crisis
communications using networked online technology; and links between information
access and resiliency among disaster-affected populations. It will make
substantial contributions to the literature on "crisis informatics" due to the
fact that this study will include a representative sample of a disaster affected
community rather than just technology users who are utilizing social media. It
will also contribute knowledge to the effects of information access on
perceptions of community resiliency, in a metropolitan area, linked to shifting
communication capacities in disaster. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The
project will address the effect of networked communications, and its absence, on
coping post disaster and has the potential to inform policy at the local, state,
and national levels and to improve resiliency in U.S. communities. Outcomes from
this project will include written reports, peer-reviewed articles, and
presentations to a number of audiences including the U.S. Natural Hazards
Workshop. This research will also provide support for one researcher from an
underrepresented STEM group.