* 1138995
* New Measures of University Contributions to Regional Economies: A Template
* SBE,NCSE
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Howard Gobstein, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Boroush
* 05/31/2012
* USD 49,690.00

The Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (APLU) will conduct a pair
of workshop activities in 2011 to assist development of a set of metrics to
better gauge the contributions of public universities to their resident economic
regions. The workshops are intended to bring the thinking of knowledgeable
personnel from APLU member academic institutions and of selected other experts
to bear in identifying and refining appropriate metrics for this purpose. Based
on previous work by APLU on this topic, the chief interest will be in metrics
addressing knowledge capital and human capital. One workshop will be conducted
in conjunction with the June 2011 meeting of APLU's Commission on Innovation,
Competitiveness, and Economic Prosperity (CICEP), in Portland, Oregon (estimated
100 participants). The second, follow-on workshop is planned for September or
October 2011, in Washington DC (estimated 50 participants). The overall goal of
the workshop process is to prepare a well defined set of metrics covering both
knowledge and human capital for presentation and discussion to the full APLU
membership in late fall 2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's findings should
be relevant to wide range of academic institutions, not just public
institutions, where similar issues of measuring and managing university links to
the larger economy often arise. The findings would also be of interest to the
external community of scholars, practitioners, stakeholders, and others with
interest in better measuring and/or managing the impacts of knowledge and skills
development on the economy. NSF would also directly benefit, as it seeks to
enlarge and refine its annual collection of data about the resources and
achievements of the U.S. academic research system.