* 1138911
* Integrating Science Into Afterschool: A Three-Dimensional Approach To Engaging Underserved Populations In Science
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Dale McCreedy, Franklin Institute Science Museum
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 06/30/2017
* USD 993,705.00

Integrating Science into Afterschool, an ITEST Strategies project, builds upon
prior NSF-funded work to develop a three-dimensional (3-D) strategy for engaging
underserved youth, families, and afterschool facilitators in year-round science
learning and exposure to careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). The project leverages community partnerships in urban
Philadelphia, including The Franklin Institute, public sector entities and
community organizations, to deliver the STEM education experience in the
multiple access points of afterschool, home, and community.

Integrating Science targets elementary aged students (grades 3-5) and their
families, and aims to strategically network a diverse set of stakeholders to
develop, implement, and study: 1) science project-based learning (PBL) units in
community-based afterschool programs for elementary-age children, 2)
thematically-linked home-based activities designed to engage family members in
science explorations in the comfort of their home, and 3) family science events
focused on building career linkages that will be hosted by both the community-
based organizations hosting afterschool programs as well as the museum.
Integrating Science into Afterschool will serve a total of 60 staff, 450
students in grades 3-5 and 450 families in urban Philadelphia.

Additionally, Integrating Science will build the capacity of science educators
in nontraditional learning environments, cultivate parent support for STEM, and
provide a better understanding of the ways in which communities can increase
awareness of and access to science learning and STEM careers. Integrating
Science has the potential to sustain and expand this proof-of-concept model
through existing partners regionally, statewide, and nationwide. Long-term
outcomes include using this 3-D model to address important questions within the
field including how afterschool programs impact children's sense of identity in
science, how parents can be encouraged and supported to become advocates of
science and of science career pathways for their children, and identifying ways
in which underrepresented groups come to understand, value, and promote STEM
content and careers. Evaluation of the project will include the use of
comparison groups and valid, normed surveys to understand the impact on
students, families and afterschool facilitators.