* 1138800
* Supporting US-Based Students to Attend the 2011 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2011)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Diane Cook, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2012
* USD 24,000.00

This grant provides international travel support for U.S. based graduate student
participants to attend the 2011 International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM
2011), which will be held in Vancouver, Canada, on December 11-14, 2011
(http://icdm2011.cs.ualberta.ca/). ICDM has established itself as the world's
premier research conference in data mining. It provides an international forum
for presentation of original research results, as well as exchange and
dissemination of innovative, practical development experiences. The conference
covers all aspects of data mining, including algorithms, software and systems,
and applications, as well as related areas such as data management, machine
learning and bioinformatics. The conference proceedings are published by IEEE.
The conference seeks to continuously advance the state-of-the-art in data
mining. With the growth of the Web, the Internet, and data intensive
technologies such as Sensor Networks, and Bioinformatics, Data Mining is an
extremely important area in Information Technology. Besides the technical
program, the conference features workshops, tutorials, panels, data mining
contest, and starting this year, the Ph.D. forum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong
representation of U.S. researchers at the Conference is useful in maintaining
U.S. competitiveness in this important area. The total number of ICDM
participants in the past has been in excess of 500, with a majority of the
participants from the U.S., then Europe and Asia. It is expected to provide
scholarships to 16 U.S. based graduate student participants. This grant will
partially support the travel costs for the U.S. based graduate student
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information of the Ph.D. forum can be
found at http://icdm2011.cs.ualberta.ca/phd-forum.php. The award results will be
announced at http://icdm2011.cs.ualberta.ca/travel-grants.php.