* 1138242
* 2011 HENAAC Conference
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Gary Cruz, Great Minds in STEM
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 09/30/2012
* USD 45,000.00

Proposal #1138242&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2011 HENAAC Conference&lt;br/&gt;P.I. Gary
Cruz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
HENAAC Conference, operated by Great Minds in STEMTM (GMiS), is one of the
nationally recognized STEM conferences targeting the academic and professional
development of Hispanic men and women. In its continuing efforts to foster the
professional development of K-12 educators, undergraduate and graduate students,
the HENAAC Conference introduced two new initiatives in 2010 (the Technical
Posters Competition and the K-12 Educators? Institute). The P.I. requests fund
to support the Technical Posters Competition and the K-12 Educators? Institute
at the 2011 HENAAC Conference. This request will support 60 undergraduate and
graduate students in the Technical Posters Competition, and 50 K-12 teachers and
administrators in the K-12 Educators? Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Technical Posters Competition targets undergraduate and graduate
students from underrepresented groups, especially women and students of color,
to enhance broadening participation initiatives. Solicitation for participation
is marketed to Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) and Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI). &lt;br/&gt;The K-12 Educators? Institute will recruit
approximately 50 principals, counselors, teachers, and pre-service teachers from
both local and non-local K-12 schools in Hispanic-Serving School Districts.
&lt;br/&gt;Both the Technical Posters Competition and K-12 Educators? Institute
will enhance infrastructure for research and education through the development
of networks and partnerships. For technical poster session, the forum provides
an opportunity to recognize and celebrate academic scholarships. It also
provides a networking opportunity with other STEM professionals. For K-12
educators, the Institute provides a forum for exchanging ideas, learning new
culturally relevant teaching mechanisms, and networking with STEM professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of the programs reside in the dissemination of its
knowledge. Through a Technical Posters Competition proceeding, the students'
abstracts will be disseminated and available for online viewing. The abstracts
are required to indicate the value of the proposed research to the public. The
K-12 Educators? Institute provides opportunity for educators to incorporate the
knowledge and resources gained into their curriculum. In addition, materials and
resources from relative seminars and workshops will be provided to educators.
Educators will have access to Hispanic STEM role models contact information to
invite them into classrooms during the students and parents STEM activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is cofunded by two directorates:
ENG and GEO.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is exempt from external review in
accordance with the PAM, chapter V.B.2.n&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Omnia El-Hakim,
Ph.D.-Program Director &lt;br/&gt;For Diversity and Outreach