* 1138567
* Geothermal at the Environmental, Energy and Economy Nexus Workshop in Salt Lake City, UT
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,09/30/2011
* Walter Snyder, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 150,800.00

Geothermal at the Environmental, Energy and Economy
Nexus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John Holbrook, University of Texas,
Arlington&lt;br/&gt;Walter Snyder, Boise State University&lt;br/&gt;Joseph
Moore, EGI, University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1138567&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop to be
held November 6-8 in Salt Lake City Utah will address the fundamental aspects of
basic research that are needed to facilitate the tapping of the vast geothermal
resources ambient to sedimentary basins. The workshop will address the physical
science, engineering, computational, and educational challenges inherent to
developing this sustainable energy supply. The workshop is intended to identify
a way forward that can be used to organize these broad-ranging communities
toward effective solutions. The workshop will be truly cross-disciplinary and
cross-communities involving the geosciences, engineering, and
cyberinfrastructure. It will also include representatives from industry because
it is industry that must be able to use the outcomes of NSF research to bring
geothermal energy online. Finally, there will be a concerted effort to address
the education and outreach opportunities associated with this multi-community
effort.The workshop will provide a road map for how NSF's community, through
fundamental research, facilities development, and education, can help make the
vast geothermal potential of sedimentary basins a significant part of the
nation's renewable energy portfolio. The workshop will evaluate methods for
practical transfer of findings in science and engineering toward reduction of
economic risks and will evaluate means for building the educational
infrastructure to support this sustainable energy industry. The findings of the
cross disciplinary team of experts will be summarized in a document that will be
dispersed to NSF and energy stakeholders as a roadmap toward meeting critical
needs for practical use of geothermal energy.