* 1138278
* Spore-Based Biosensing Systems: A Stabilized Dormant-Active Approach to Whole-Cell Biosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2010,07/31/2012
* Sylvia Daunert, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2012
* USD 21,265.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry program in the Division of Chemistry will
support the research program of Prof. Sylvia Daunert of the University of
Kentucky. The research program of Prof. Daunert focuses on the development of
whole-cell sensing systems. Whole-cell sensing systems are ideal analytical
tools in biomedical analysis as well as in environmental monitoring due to their
sensitivity, selectivity, and rapidity. Their potential would further be
enhanced if they could be used effectively for on-site applications. In that
regard, there is a need for methods that improve the shelf-life and
transportability of whole-cell biosensing systems, and allow for their
adaptation to miniaturized systems for field analysis. To that end, Prof.
Daunert and her students will develop a method based on the use of bacterial
spores for the long-term maintenance of the viability and activity of bacterial
sensing cells, and integrate such preserved sensor cells into portable systems
for on-site sensing. Bacterial spores were chosen as the protective component of
whole-cell sensors since they are a resting form of life that exhibit long-term
resistance towards extreme environmental conditions, and are able to resume full
metabolic activity when properly stimulated. Specifically, Prof. Daunert and her
students will develop genetically engineered whole-cell sensing systems for
various target analytes using spore-forming bacteria. They will then produce
spores as means of preservation, storage and transport of the sensing cells.
Subsequently, they will incorporate these dormant sensors into a miniaturized
compact disk-like microfluidic platform. Additionally, they will immobilize them
on paper strips as a simple ready-to-use configuration. Both systems can be
transported to the field, where the spores can be germinated to vegetative cells
and employed for sensing. Prof. Daunert envisions that this new strategy could
expand the use of whole-cell biosensors for on-site analysis, not only in mild
environments, but also in environments and applications in which they could not
be employed previously. These include extreme environments, such as deserts,
polar regions and space, as well as the remote sensing of chemical warfare
agents used for bioterrorism. The impact of this work could be strong in
developing countries, where rapid, simple and inexpensive analytical tools for
monitoring human health and the environment are needed, and limitations are
often posed by unfavorable climate conditions and inadequate distribution and
storage facilities. The project will provide excellent training opportunities to
students in a cutting edge multidisciplinary research area of high societal
impact.