* 1138329
* Enabling Participation of Hispanic Students in SHPE 2011 Graduate Activities
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Olivia Graeve, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 08/31/2012
* USD 118,261.00

Proposal # 1138329 PI: Prof. Olivia A. Graeve, Alfred University Co-PI: Prof.
Erica Corral, University of Arizona Title: Enabling participation of Hispanic
Students in SHPE 2011 Graduate Activities

Summary:

The proposers are requesting support from the National Science Foundation Human
Resource Development (ENG) to provide travel funds for undergraduate students,
both from 2-year and 4-year colleges, graduate students, high school teachers,
and faculty, to participate in the SHPE 2011 annual meeting (October 26-30,
2011, Anaheim, CA). The PI's are very experienced at providing technical
assistance with paper and poster presentations. A draft of the proposed agenda
is included in the proposal as well as evaluation information and its
implementation. The proposal well done, very cost-effective and I highly
recommend approval.

The proposal provides travel funds to enable the participation of Hispanic
students, engineering faculty and high school teachers in the Annual Meeting of
the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE). Attendance to the meeting
will promote mentorship between students and faculty; broaden the participation
of underrepresented minorities in engineering; and enhance students, faculty and
high school teacher's ability to develop engineering-related ideas and projects.
The Principal Investigator is a valuable resource for students given her work
with the SHPE meeting over the past 10 years. Student, faculty and high school
teacher's participation in the annual meeting of SHPE will lead to improved
research and mentorship, regionally and nationally, as well as to attracting and
retaining underrepresented minority students in engineering. Moreover, the
conference will give students access to faculty and researchers in the field of
engineering; thereby building and enhancing networks, partnerships, and
potential mentoring relationships between students, universities, and the
engineering research community-at-large. The results will be disseminated
nationally through the SHPE magazine and website.

Omnia El-Hakim, Program Director of Diversity and Outreach