* 1138571
* Support of an NSF-IFPRI Collaborative Summary Meeting, June 29-July 1, 2011, at the Carolina Inn, Chapel Hill, NC
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

1138571 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Behringer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding for a summary and review meeting that will consolidate results from the
NSF-IFPRI Collaboratory project to characterize the modeling of granular
materials. The meeting is to be held on June 29 to July 1, 2011 at The Carolina
Inn in Chapel Hill, NC and will bring together modelers, experimenters, IFPRI
members and others. The meeting will follow and be a part of the IFPRI annual
meeting. The key feature of this meeting will be a head-on comparison of
physical data acquired at CUNY and at Duke University with simulations carried
out by a number of groups, and in particular, by groups funded through NSF-CBET
via a proposal to IFPRI (International Fine Particle Research Institute). By
conjoining this meeting with the IFPRI AGM, we expect to achieve significant
dissemination of results from the NSF-IFPRI collaboratory within the community
of academic and industrial powder users. We will also seek the participation of
a range of young scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;In the case of powders and granular materials, it is only rarely
possible to make a detailed quantitative comparison between careful laboratory
studies and numerical simulations. Under recent NSF-CBET funding, there has been
just such a study that has been orchestrated through the efforts of IFPRI. Two
detailed sets of physical measurements were provided to a number of US modelers.
The meeting, for which support is requested here, will bring these US modelers
together to discuss the results of their simulations and to draw conclusions
about the reliability of models. It is also anticipated that non-NSF-funded
participants will attend this meeting. These latter participants, coming from
industry and from outside the US will enhance the modeling and meeting efforts,
although, to reiterate, no NSF funds have been or will be provided for
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The results of this meeting
will be used to produce a extensive public report of the success of different
models. This will be of great value to commercial users of granular materials.