* 1138401
* EAGER: Global Warming in an Independent Paleoclimate Record of the Past 100 Years
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* David Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2012
* USD 21,293.00

This award is made under the auspices of the EArly-concept Grants for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) program, to develop an independent record of the
last 100 years based on paleoclimate proxies. This is a database compilation and
analysis effort. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers will compile hundreds of
time series, many produced as the result of NSF-funded research, to composite
the individual temperature sensitive time series into a global average and
produce regional and thematic subsets suitable for addressing climate research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research by the researchers, using a
database without tree-rings data, produced a global paleo trend index from 110
temperature-sensitive proxy records. From 1880 to 1995, the index trends
significantly upward, similar to the global surface temperature (GST),
supporting the fidelity of the GST, and confirming the global extent of the
warming trend of the past century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
approach could be applied to other climate indicators with short length (e.g.,
ocean pH) or sparse geographic coverage and extend the focus of the paleoclimate
research community towards this short but critically important time period. In
this manner, the research could have broad impact on the wider science community
by catalyzing new scientific thinking using paleoclimate
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities fit well into the potentially
transformative, high risk, and exploratory nature of the EAGER programs. It also
represents a strong collaboration between NSF and NOAA scientists and archivists
at the NOAA-funded World Data Center (WDC) leveraging the resources of the NSF-
funded science community and the professional archivists at the WDC.