* 1138801
* Women with Disabilities in STEM Education Research Agenda Development Project (WWDSE)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Shari Miles-Cohen, American Psychological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2013
* USD 140,336.00

Intellectual Merit: The American Psychological Association (APA) is launching an
effort to contribute to the knowledge base on disabilities related differences
in postsecondary STEM education for women. This includes the educational,
social, and pre-professional experiences that influence student interest,
academic performance, retention in STEM degree programs, STEM degree completion,
and career choices. The "Women with Disabilities in STEM Education Research
Agenda Development Project" (WWDSE) will create a research agenda that
cultivates an emerging body of scholarly work on women with disabilities in STEM
education that will lead to broadening the participation and achievement of
women with disabilities in all fields of STEM education. APA is undertaking the
following activities: 1) conducting a pre-workshop survey of NSF and Department
of Education grantees with expertise in the areas of gender and disability, and
2) convening a workshop on supports and barriers facing women with disabilities
in STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Although several
empirical literatures within psychology address specific aspects of the issue,
currently no one line of research specifically identifies or informs our
understanding of the supports and barriers to positive educational outcomes for
women with disabilities in STEM. This critical gap in knowledge effects efforts
to maximize the human capital represented by women with disabilities in meeting
national goals of increasing STEM professionals by 2020. APA will disseminate
the resulting research agenda to encourage both junior and more seasoned
investigators to design studies to answer the questions raised. In addition, the
research agenda will serve as a potential guide to funders on ways to direct
resources to support this research and begin to provide educators and
administrators with the seeds of interventions to better support women with
disabilities in STEM education. All deliverables will be made accessible to
those with disabilities.