* 1138642
* RAPID:  Mobile Augmented Reality to Improve Rapid Assessments in Disasters
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Ian Lane, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Following an earthquake, or similar natural disaster, a key problem is rapid and
accurate on-site damage assessment to support local first responders; however,
trained experts are typically remote from the disaster and it can be time
consuming and expensive to bring them onsite. Accessing remote experts to
improve the accuracy of rapid assessments is a promising method to streamline
provisioning of emergency shelters and other resources. This project focuses on
new methods for improved rapid assessment of earthquake damaged building
structures in Christchurch, New Zealand. The methods are based on collaboration
using augmented-reality (AR) imagery, mobile phone based sensor technologies and
crowdsourcing techniques for guided remote data collection. A key element of the
system is intuitive remote collaboration. Our mobile AR system can be used to
connect a user in the disaster zone to a remote expert via audio and shared
still images and/or video, helping them to rapidly collect data on building
structural integrity. A user evaluation will be performed to compare the
performance between the prototype and more traditional approaches (e.g., waiting
for an expert to arrive on the ground), and assessment based on imagery recorded
from an untrained and unguided user. Two hypotheses will be tested: 1) a
collaborative mobile AR system can improve the quality and type of data
collected for structural assessment 2) the time to provide data from non-experts
assisted by experts to decision makers in a digestible format is dramatically
reduced as compared to traditional methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach
will enable rapid post-event damage assessment, streamline emergency
provisioning of shelters by allowing people to stay in safe dwellings, and speed
up emergency response and reconstruction. The resulting valuable dataset will
assist development of rapid assessment forms, contribute to earthquake
structural damage case studies, provide key baseline to test several computer
science research projects on improved disaster response, and provide key data
for development of life-saving tools. The international collaboration also
provides engagement of underrepresented groups in this computing research.