* 1138917
* Triennial Review of the National Nanotechnology Initiative: Phase II
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Dennis Chamot, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2014
* USD 733,000.00

CBET - 1138917 &lt;br/&gt;Chamot &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 21st Century
Nanotechnology Research and Development Act, Public Law 108-153, requires
triennial reviews of the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI). The director
of the National Nanotechnology Coordination Office (NNCO) which serves as the
secretariat for the NNI has requested the next triennial review to be done by
the National Academy of Sciences. This proposal is directed toward fulfilling
the NNI review requirement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the current study, the NNCO
is particularly interested in examining the role of the NNI
in&lt;br/&gt;maximizing opportunities to transfer selected technologies to the
private sector (e.g., in electronics; structural materials; coatings);
suggesting appropriate metrics for determining progress towards NNI goals; and
review of NNI's management and coordination of nanotechnology research across
both civilian and military federal agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves review of a federal program for
coordinating government efforts in supporting nanotechnology R&amp;D, as
requested by the US Congress and the NNCO. It is not a study of
nanotechnologies, per se. The study committee will examine the NNI management
approach, the effectiveness of efforts to transfer selected technologies to the
private sector, the goals of the program and how to assess progress towards
those goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific tasks include:&lt;br/&gt;A. Examine
the role of the NNI in maximizing opportunities to transfer selected
technologies to the private sector, provide an assessment of how well the NNI is
carrying out this role, and suggest new mechanisms to foster transfer of
technologies and improvements to NNI operations in this area where
warranted.&lt;br/&gt;B. Assess the suitability of current procedures and
criteria for determining progress towards NNI goals, suggest definitions of
success and associated metrics, and provide advice on those organizations
(government or non-government) that could perform evaluations of
progress.&lt;br/&gt;C. Review NNI?s management and coordination of
nanotechnology research across both civilian and military federal
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this review would be of value to the Congress and participating federal
agencies in planning future support for NNI projects. In addition, as a major
goal of the program is to develop technologies that would be transferable to the
industrial sector and thus contribute to US competitiveness, the report would
also be of interest to various industrial concerns and their academic colleagues
who would translate the fundamental research into industrial applications.