* 1138734
* Collaborative Research: EAGER:Studying lignocellulosic fine structure and its dynamics in enzymatic hydrolysis of biomass using molecule-recognizing AFM and computational modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Wen Zhou, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 03/31/2013
* USD 44,670.00

ABSTRACT

Lignocellulosic biomass is a composite structure with crystalline cellulose,
hydrated hemicellulose, and lignin as major components. It has long been
recognized as a potential lowcost and sustainable source of mixed sugars for
production of biofuels and other value-added chemicals. Plants have evolved
superb mechanisms for resisting assault on their cell wall structural sugars
from the microbial and animal kingdoms, collectively known as biomass
recalcitrance. These mechanisms are comprised of factors that are believed to
contribute to the inefficiency of enzymatic hydrolysis of biomass. The
lignocellulosic fine structure, i.e. the way cellulose, hemicelluloses, and
lignin are bonding with each other, and how the lignocellulosic fine structure
evolves during hydrolysis due to the molecular interactions between biomass and
enzymes, is thus crucial for logistic and specific design of enzymes and
processes to overcome the above factors that slow down the hydrolytic reactions.
However, such urgently needed information is pretty much missing because direct
detection of lignocellulose component conformation and distribution is NOT
possible so far.

In this EAGER project, Investigators Bingqian Xu from University of Georgia and
Wen Zhou from Michigan Technological University will employ a unique approach
which is to combine the newly developed CBM functionalized AFM (atomic force
microscope) technology with computational modeling to directly detect
lignocellulose component conformation and distribution, thereby overcoming the
long-standing technical difficulties in realizing the dynamics of
lignocellulosic components (conformation and distribution) during the enzymatic
hydrolysis. An EAGER grant would support this collaborated research to explore
this proposed high-risk, high-reward project by getting the much needed data.
The aim is a tool and methodology for selection and design of better enzymes and
processes to overcome the biomass recalcitrance efficiently.

The significance of the proposed research lies in the ability (1) to study the
lignocellulosic fine structure in nanometer scale with molecular recognition,
(2) to construct the 3D structural image of biomass particle, and (3) to monitor
the lignocellulosic fine structure dynamics in hydrolysis. The combination of
experimental and computational modeling methods will potentially provide a new
approach and evidence to tackle the unsolved lignocelluloses component
conformation and distribution, offering molecular scale understanding of the
lignocellulose hydrolysis process which could be critical in overcoming biomass
recalcitrance. In addition, development of the technology will also add unique
capabilities for single molecule studies in other biosystems to probe the
biomolecules and their interactions.