* 1138894
* RAPID: Tornado Hazard Perception and Warning for the April 27, 2011, Tornado in Tuscaloosa, Alabama
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* David Brommer, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 06/30/2013
* USD 35,041.00

This project will perform an in-depth layered analysis of risk perception and
communication in multiple socioeconomic groups where severe damage occurred
during the April 27, 2011 EF-4 tornado events in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. The
research will compare the use of social media with traditional outlets as
information sources about the impending event. The tornado destroyed lower-
economic sections of town that housed African-American and Hispanic
neighborhoods, and this research will investigate how these vulnerable
socioeconomic groups and older residents reacted compared to the more mobile and
younger populations at the university and what forms of communication they used
during the event. Computer-based survey methods (using iPads for those remaining
in shelters) with closed and open-ended questions will help illuminate the
communication lines used by these various groups and the impacts of previous
severe weather event "close-calls" on the behavior of residents during this
disaster. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key to this research is the way people think
about, and understand, the risk they face during well-forecasted severe weather
events. Access to warnings through various media (local TV, radio, warning
sirens, social media like Twitter, etc.) and how people in the storm's path
behaved as a result of the warnings is the crux of this research. The project
will investigate how differences in socio-demographic groups may drive the need
for diverse methods of warning communication. Results from this research will
inform community officials and weather forecasters on better communication
methods to ensure safety and reduce loss of life in future events.