* 1138325
* CRPA: Communicating Avatars: Artificial Intelligence + Computer Graphics = Innovative Science
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Avelino Gonzalez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This CRPA project will produce a human-like avatar exhibit for the Orlando
Science Center that will verbally communicate with middle and high school grade
visitors, engaging them in the subjects of computer science, artificial
intelligence, and engineering. Human-like characteristics include features to
match the demographics of the Center's clientele and verbal communication in the
English language. In addition to discussing how avatars are developed and how
artificial intelligence works, the avatar image will answer questions from the
visitors on selected topics, including subjects from the media models of Avatar
and IBM's Watson event on Jeopardy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considerable planning
and research has gone into this project to make sure that the avatar is life-
like and can engage in realistic dialog. The avatar images will resemble real
individuals who have diverse demographic characteristics in order to enhance the
human-computer interface. The system is designed to deal with background noise
and antagonistic visitors. Evaluation at all levels (front-end, formative, and
summative) will make the exhibit most effective and facilitate the goals of the
project which are to inform the target audience on STEM
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The desire to have electronic analogs of humans
has been a goal for half of a century. This project builds on prior research in
this area and is one of the most sophisticated contemporary models in the field.
It is anticipated that this work may contribute to future applications in
education and assistance for individuals with disabilities. Moreover, engagement
with the avatar may ignite curiosity among young visitors and stimulate interest
in science careers.