* 1138284
* Russian-American Workshop on Emerging Trends in Bioelectronics. To be held at St. Petersburg, Russia, on June 27-29, 2011.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Michael Shur, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2012
* USD 78,675.00

Bioelectronics is emerging as one of the priority thrusts of the American and
Russian science, with emphasis on applying nanoscience and nanotechnology for a
variety of biomedical applications, including cardio and cancer treatment. The
objective of the Workshop is to bring together leading American and Russian
scientists and engineers who are at the frontiers of bioelectronics research and
development for biomedical applications. The venue for the Workshop is the
Nanotechnology Research and Education Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences
at St Petersburg Academic University that was founded in 1997 by the NobelPrize
Winner Dr. Zhores I. Alferov, Director of the Ioffe Institute, Vice-President of
the Russian Academy of Sciences and Rector of the Academic
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed
workshop is in the exchange of research and technological challenges and
discussions of new ideas and emerging trends in bioelectronics, in identifying
of new emerging areas and short and long research needs, and in establishing new
international collaborations. The workshop topics will touch upon future
directions for bioelectronics research, review of bioelectronics trends in
cancer research, diagnostics and treatment, THz bio-diagnostics technology,
bioelectronics devices, bioelectromagnetics, neural engineering, biosensors
using magnetic nanoparticles, high-resolution retinal prosthesis, and brain-
computer interfaces for communication and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Rapid growth of bioelectronics science and technology compels the need
for information exchange and intellectual discourse. This workshop will provide
cross-pollination of ideas and methodologies that will make an impact on science
and technology in both countries. This advanced workshop will be a special forum
to gather some of the most creative minds and leading experts from both
countries. It will review the most recent and exciting breakthroughs in the
bioelectronics fields, facilitate the exchange views, establish future trends
and directions, the market pulls and determine the necessary strategies and
infrastructure needs. It will help establish future exchange programs for
graduate and undergraduate students for training the new generation of
bioelectronics scientists and engineers.The Proceedings of the Workshop will be
widely disseminated via the University web sites in both countries and made
available to students, postdoctoral associates, and young faculty. Special
emphasis will be provided to have diversity among the US participants.