* 1138919
* Translation and Dissemination Via a Digital Archive/E-Book of the Writings of Heinz Kasemir on Atmospheric Electricity
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Colleen Matan, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2012
* USD 33,130.00

This grant provides support for translation and electronic dissemination (via an
American Geophysical Union-hosted publications website) of a group of 58
scientific papers and technical reports comprising over 1000 pages of text &amp;
illustrations authored by Dr. Heinz Kasemir, a noted German physicist who later
emigrated to the U.S. where he worked within NOAA and was long engaged in
fundamental studies of lightning physics. Among key findings represented in his
body of work, which has until now not been readily accessible, around 1950 Dr.
Kasemir advanced the notion that lighting develops as a bi-directional leader
with zero net charge--a concept that was not fully appreciated in the broader
community until many decades later. Kasemir's detailed and ground-breaking
analysis of lightning channels, which established key relationships between
electric fields and charge development in upward-directed leaders, are viewed as
representing a heretofore missing link in proper understanding of the lightning
process. This and other aspects of his work will be highlighted in an
introduction and commentary on selected papers, which will serve to place this
work in the context of modern lighting research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merit of this activity derives from efforts to more comprehensively
describe the physics of lightning channel development and propagation. Broader
Impacts of this effort will come through the preservation and greatly improved
access to a large body of scientific work in the area of atmospheric electricity
research.