* 1138896
* Aerosol Pollution Impacts on Wintertime Orographic Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* William Cotton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2016
* USD 525,133.00

This project seeks to increase understanding of potential influences of aerosol
pollution on wintertime orographic precipitation and, by extension, water
resources. Research will initially focus on the Rocky Mountains of Colorado, but
will ultimately seek to understand potential generality of these results in
other regions such as the Sierra Nevada. A key question to be addressed is
whether there is a regime in which cloud base temperatures are warm enough so
that increased aerosol pollution can lead to suppression of drizzle,
corresponding increase in supercooled cloud liquid water content, and ultimately
an enhancement (vs. suppression) of precipitation. The intellectual merit of
this work rests in conducting carefully planned numerical studies utilizing the
Colorado State University RAMS mesoscale model that will both capitalize on and
extend prior observational work undertaken by the principal investigator and
colleagues over the Park Range of Colorado, as well as other recent NSF and
Department of Energy supported studies in this same region. These prior data
will be used to refine estimates of the range of aerosol pollution transported
into western Colorado, make improvements to microphysical representations within
the RAMS model, evaluate the model's performance, and ultimately to make
improved quantitative estimates of aerosol pollution impacts on winter-season
total precipitation in Colorado. Tests examining sensitivity to cloud base
temperature and evidence for the potential reversal of the sign of aerosol
impacts on precipitation (viz. enhancement vs. suppression) may have particular
relevance to warmer-based mountain ranges such as the Sierra Nevada range.
Broader impacts will include graduate student education, enhanced capabilities
for the RAMS model, and better understanding of intertwined demographic impacts
on regional climate and best practices for management of snowpack-derived water
supplies that are of key importance to growing populations bordering mountainous
regions across the western U.S.