* 1138963
* EAGER:A Meso-Scale GENI WiMAX Project
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Eugene Kwatny, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,716.00

This EAGER project will deploy an experimental wireless testbed in the downtown
area of Philadelphia. The proposed testbed will be based on WiMAX technologies
and will be jointly administered by Temple and Drexel University faculty with a
wide range of expertise, including wireless networks, sensor applications and
wireless security. The proposed platform is unique and has the following
characteristics: (a) Open Access. The testbed will be integrated into GENI,
which has a national footprint and is available at many campuses across the
country. (b) Urban location. The projected coverage area includes a metropolitan
downtown area with many tall buildings and competing wireless services. (c)
Potential for expansion. At this initial stage, two base stations are planned,
one on each campus. But both Temple and Drexel have other buildings across the
city where more base stations can be located in the future. (d) Alignment with
Digital Philadelphia. This project is a good match with the current vision for
Philadelphia, which seeks to provide gigabit connectivity throughout the
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the PIs will 1) complete the
installation and testing of the testbed and the corresponding hardware
(smartphones, laptops, sensors and vehicular devices), 2) integrate the testbed
with GENI, and 3) carry out experiments that make extensive use of the testbed.
The current portfolio of experiments include air quality sensor networks for
urban environmental monitoring, WiMAX-based data network for law enforcement,
mobile content delivery networks, sensor-based telemedicine, and location-based
services for tourists.&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the proposed
testbed will serve the research community, allowing a realistic platform on
which to conduct experiments not possible elsewhere. In addition, the testbed
will be integrated into classes at Drexel and Temple, facilitating the education
and training of undergraduate and graduate students in next generation wireless
networking, large-systems research. The testbed will also be used in outreach to
local middle and high school students.