* 1138203
* RAPID:  Geotechnical Engineering Reconnaissance of the March 11, 2011, Tohoku Earthquake, Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Nicholas Sitar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2012
* USD 81,802.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award funds field reconnaissance
with Japanese colleagues that will focus on capturing perishable data,
documenting high-value case histories, and assisting in geotechnical
characterization at key sites in regards to the March 11, 2011, Mw = 9 Tohoku
Earthquake which ranks as one of the largest in recorded history. It occurred as
a result of thrust faulting on or near the subduction zone interface plate
boundary between the Pacific and North America plates. The earthquake was
followed by a tsunami that caused tremendous damage and loss of life. The
reconnaissance team will be coordinated through the Geotechnical Extreme Events
Reconnaissance (GEER) Association and will be working closely with teams from
other organizations in the US and Japan. The damage caused by this Mw = 9.0
event and the subsequent tsunami provides a number of important lessons for the
Pacific Northwest and the West Coast of the United States. The wealth of strong
motion data from the Japanese networks dwarfs those from any of the previous
subduction zone events, providing numerous opportunities for studying the ground
motion characteristics and the effects of very long-duration shaking on ground
failure and local site response patterns. The affected urban areas provide an
opportunity to examine the performance of various parts of civil infrastructure
including the performance of underground structures, utilities and lifelines in
areas of extensive ground deformations; the performance of levee systems along
the different major rivers; the performance of natural slopes, embankment fills,
and dams; the performance of improved ground; and tectonic uplift and subduction
along the coastline. The historically unprecedented tsunami also provides
opportunity to collect data on its erosive power with respect to variety of
structures and bridge piers in particular.

Documenting and learning from observations after design level earthquakes are
invaluable to advancing the state-of-art and practice in earthquake engineering.
Building and infrastructure performance and damage patterns, the distribution of
ground failure, cases of lateral spreading and seismically induced slope
displacements, ground movements associated with tectonics, among others, provide
invaluable information that will serve as benchmarks to the profession's
understanding of the effects of earthquakes. This megathrust Mw = 9.0 event
represents an important earthquake scenario in the Pacific Northwest, and thus,
there is a real need to document its geotechnical effects. Moreover, the GEER
team includes researchers who are in the early part of their careers to help
develop their capabilities in earthquake engineering and allow them to establish
research contacts in Japan.