* 1138418
* EAGER: Solar Aware Smart Grid at Biosphere 2
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Alexander Cronin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating large amounts of solar power
into the existing electric grid is problematic because power is only produced
during daylight hours, and can be interrupted by passing clouds. This
intermittency leads to a mismatch between power production and power
consumption, which limits the adoption of solar power by utility companies and
large-scale power users who require a stable and reliable power source.
Discovering new ways to compensate for intermittency will accelerate the
adoption of solar power, will reduce CO2 emissions, and will improve national
security by conserving non-renewable resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accommodate intermittency, we will regulate industrial-scale electrical demands
on a minute-by-minute basis in response to measured and forecasted solar power.
We will conduct experiments at the Biosphere 2 in Arizona, where we will use
measured and predicted output of 70 kW of solar PV modules present at the site
to regulate the operation of two 75 HP (56kW) water pumps. &lt;br/&gt;The water
pumps transfer water from two wells into a 500,000 gallon reservoir. If the
activity the water pumps is suitably regulated based on the power produced by
the PV modules, the variability in the power production of the combined system
(PV + Pumps) will be reduced compared to that of the PV modules alone. A great
deal of theoretical work has been done in this field; the proposed project will
provide much needed experimental data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from our experiments will inform large
power users such as the University of Arizona, the city utility Tucson Water,
and the Central Arizona Project (CAP) about cost-effective and safe ways to use
more solar power. It will also enable industries to plan bigger solar farms
without net-metering. The graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from
the participation.