* 1138110
* RAPID: Aerial Robots for Remote Autonomous Exploration and Mapping
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-38110&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Kumar, R. Vijay; Michael, Nathan
D&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;Title: RAPID:
Aerial Robots for Rapid Response: Remote Autonomous Exploration and
Mapping&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project, developing and
deploying a team of autonomous aerial robots that can enter an unstructured,
hazardous environment to explore and map a facility, provides information to
human operators in safe, remote locations. The work brings together research
groups with complementary expertise in robotics to address the challenging
problem of acquiring imagery and three-dimensional maps for post-disaster
assessment. Autonomous robots will be deployed without a direct communication
link enabling access to areas in the Fukushima that are currently
inaccessible.&lt;br/&gt;Addressing an urgent need, the work consists of
redesigning aerial robotic systems to perform mapping, localization, and
exploration functions in indoor and outdoor environments without prior knowledge
of the environment or GPS (Global Positioning System). The system, to be
deployed in highly contaminated environments such as the area of Fukushima
disasters in Japan, expands the present robotic systems developed by the team.
It should be able to build maps and localize, plan, and control autonomously in
that map, but requires interactions with a base-station to communicate the
relevant information. The paradigm shifting capabilities of aerial robots to act
independently and be deployed in critical contaminated areas exhibit novelty.
The Japanese-American academic research team will be engaged in some of the
following activities: &lt;br/&gt;- Develop methods to acquire information from
highly contaminated environments, such as in case of radiation contamination.
&lt;br/&gt;- Engineer and deploy one or more autonomous robots (i.e., without
the link to the base station) equipped with cameras and laser range finders as
well as potentially carrying sensors that might reveal new insights about the
degree of contamination. &lt;br/&gt;- Develop algorithms and methods for
information gathering and map building. &lt;br/&gt;- Deploy the robots in Japan
through Japanese colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;Most UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles) are
teleoperated with several human operators engaged in the deployment of each UAV.
The cross fertilization of technologies for robotics and UAVs has potential to
create new small to medium scale autonomous UAVs with a wide range of civilian
and defense applications. This project will explore the use of autonomous UAVs
for acquiring information from environments that are impossible to access
because of radiation contamination. One or more autonomous quad rotor robots
equipped with cameras and laser range finders will be deployed to explore the
partially-known environment and build 3-D maps of the structure and potentially
carrying sensors that might reveal new insights about the degree of
contamination. These robots will have to operate without any communication link
to the base station. Thus this will represent the first deployment of a truly
autonomous robot of its kind.&lt;br/&gt;This work involves a collaboration with
Dr. Satoshi Tadokoro, a researcher in search and rescue robotics, from Tohuku
University in Sendai, Japan. A support letter has been submitted by Dr. Tadokoro
for the proposed joint research. Another collaborator from the same University,
Dr. Kazuya Yoshida, leads the project entitled ?Robotics in Extreme Environment?
and brings the ?Extreme Robotics? background to this collaborative research
endeavor. The project, expected to lose robots in extreme environment tests,
consequently requires building additional autonomous aerial robots for the
purpose of the experiments. Funding is also requested to travel to Japan for
collaborative research and experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The tragic sequence of events in Sendai and the Fukushima I and II
nuclear power plants has resulted in significant contamination due to
radioactive iodine, cesium and stronium, making it nearly impossible for humans
to enter many areas in the power plants to assess damage. First, the use of
robots to acquire information from currently inaccessible areas will have a
significant impact on post-disaster recovery operations. Second, the use of
autonomous aerial robots will establish an important milestone in robotics and
will allow the nuclear power industry to be better positioned to rapidly respond
to disasters in the future. This proposal promises an immediate benefit to
society by supporting economic recovery efforts in Japan through a participatory
research paradigm. Moreover, long term benefits for future disasters are in
evidence since emergency response and unmanned systems are both formative
domains and the data collected will advance the discovery and understanding of
intelligent, human-centered systems in unpredictable situations. Furthermore,
the use of autonomous aerial robots will establish an important milestone in
robotics allowing the nuclear power industry to be better positioned to rapidly
respond to disasters in the future. Finally, the project will train
undergraduate and graduate students and expose them to high-impact application
areas.