* 1138599
* EAGER: Collecting Training Videos for Location Estimation with Mechanical Turk
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Gerald Friedland, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Location-based services are rapidly gaining traction in the online world as they
allow highly personalized services and easier retrieval and organization of
multimedia. However, such services require accurate geolocation information
(geo-tags) to be associated with the multimedia data e.g., videos. Because only
a small fraction of available video data is geo-tagged. Hence, there is a
growing interest in systems that estimate the geolocation of a given video
automatically that does not include geo-location metadata. While machine
learning offers a potential approach to training automatic location estimators,
it requires a standardized training corpus of geo-tagged videos. Automatic
collection of videos introduces a bias toward videos that are easily processible
by machines and towards geographical locations that are over-represented in
current corpora. Hence there is a need for carefully curated standard data sets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project explores a novel, somewhat high risk, approach to collecting such an
annotated training corpus of geo-tagged videos using Mechanical Turk
(http://www.mturk.com), a "marketplace for work" for engaging workers with the
desired expertise from around the world to work on a specific task, in this
case, participating in a game that involves annotating videos with geolocation
metadata e.g., GPS coordinates. The user interface for the game will allow
participants to estimate the location of videos by clicking on a map. The
knowledge gained from this EAGER would set the stage for more comprehensive
geotagged multimedia data collection efforts. The resulting data sets and
benchmarks will be made available to the research community to enable detailed
and systematic comparative analysis of alternative methods (e.g., machine
learning algorithms for predicting geolocation information from videos).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of standardized geo-tagged multimedia
data sets will help drive advances in machine learning techniques for geo-
location prediction. The resulting advances in geo-tagging multimedia data would
enable intelligent location based services and a variety of domains including
law enforcement, personalized and location-aware media retrieval, for a variety
of applications including journalistic and criminal investigations.