* 1138235
* NUE-WSU Nanotechnology and Nanoscience Laboratory Experience
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Steven Higgins, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2014
* USD 199,957.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE-WSU Nanotechnology and Nanoscience Laboratory Experience", at
Wright State University (WSU), under the direction of Dr. Hong Huang, represents
a collaborative effort among faculty members with appointments in the
Departments of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Electrical Engineering,
Chemistry, and Physics at WSU. The primary goal is to develop a new, highly
interdisciplinary laboratory course (Nanotechnology and Nanoscience Laboratory
Experience) based on the investigators' expertise in cutting-edge nanotechnology
research and educational areas. This will be the first
nanotechnology/nanoscience laboratory on campus that will complement and
strengthen the current, well-established Introduction to Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology and Materials for Nanotechnology lecture courses at WSU. This
independent laboratory course will be open to undergraduate and graduate
students across the aforementioned departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical
concepts learned during the already established lecture courses will be
reinforced and supplemented by hands-on experience in the laboratory. Upon
course completion, students will improve or develop new skills that will be
useful in future nanotechnology endeavors in the Dayton area (e.g. the Air Force
Research laboratory and local industries specializing in nanotechnology),
regardless of their majors. This new laboraory course will support the
development of the next generation of nanotechnology scientists and engineers at
WSU through advanced, early scientific education at the undergraduate level. The
resources and results derived from this proposal will be presented to and shared
with both the local and external scientific and non-scientific communities
(e.g., open house events for K12 students, publications and conference
presentatons, and the WSU website).