* 1138977
* Mesoscale Airflow over Mountains: Wave Drag and Orographic Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 714,240.00

Mountains exert a profound influence on the weather and climate. This project
will investigate two important aspects of the interaction between mountains and
the atmosphere. The first effort will be to examine how the drag exerted by
mountains on an air stream is distributed among different vertical levels in the
atmosphere and how that drag feeds back on the larger scale flow. The second
effort will examine the way that mountains enhance precipitation and dry the air
downstream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;When an air
stream encounters a mountain barrier, "mountain waves" may be set up above and
downstream of the barrier and the low-level flow may be blocked and diverted
around the flanks of the mountain. These disturbances are too small in scale to
be resolved in global weather and climate models, but they produce an important
drag on the large-scale flow that must be parameterized. This project will
attempt to place such parameterizations on a firmer theoretical footing and also
determine the large-scale responses to orographic drag through the analysis of
high-resolution numerical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the
precipitation over mountains is largely driven by the episodic passage of large-
scale weather systems, prototypical theoretical studies of the interactions of
an isolated ridge with such systems have not yet been undertaken, due in part to
the difficulty of simultaneously modeling complex large and small-scale flows.
We will take advantage of advances in computing power and model architecture to
investigate the nature of the synergistic interactions of the large-scale
lifting and precipitation with the more localized ascent forced by the
topography. Such interactions are likely to generate more intense precipitation
than that produced in previous simulations of simple upslope flows. The strength
and downstream distribution of the dry air in the lee will also be determined
and compared to that suggested by models forced by horizontally uniform cross-
mountain flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate
students will be supported under this NSF award for their research and
professional development. Research results should help improve the
parameterization of low-level gravity wave drag in large-scale models essential
for global weather forecasting and much climate research. Orographic
precipitation is a key source of water for many of the world's civilizations. By
developing a better understanding of how precipitation is enhanced when large-
scale weather systems pass over topography, we can provide guidance to water
resource managers and hydrologists trying to maintain water supplies in the
current climate and planning for the effect of possible future shifts in mid-
latitude storminess.