* 1138051
* RAPID Response to Tohoku Earthquake: Participation in Marine Geophysical Surveys of the Quake Rupture Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Gregory Moore, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 12/31/2012
* USD 99,994.00

We propose to participate in one or two marine geophysical surveys covering the
rupture zone of the March 2011 great earthquake off Tohoku, Honshu, Japan during
summer, 2011. In response to this great earthquake, the Institute For Research
on Earth Evolution (IFREE) of the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and
Technology (JAMSTEC) has undertaken a program of marine geophysical surveys to
try to detect seafloor and subsurface structures associated with the quake?s
rupture. One cruise will include multibeam bathymetric mapping during OBS
recovery and redeployment in June-July. A more extensive MCS survey is planned
for August. Coupled with the extensive on-land seismograph and GPS network, the
offshore data set presents an unprecedented opportunity to study deformation
associated with rupture during a great earthquake. Moore and his students have
been invited to participate in the offshore to help with data acquisition and
on-board data processing and to participate in the structural interpretation and
synthesis of the offshore data sets. The main advantage of participating in the
cruises is that we will also be able to participate in the data analysis phase.
We will be able to combine the new data sets with seismic reflection and
bathymetric data collected previously by IFREE. The seismic reflection data to
be collected in the earthquake rupture zone will be used as a site survey for a
proposal to IODP for Rapid Response Drilling off Tohoku. The seismic data will
be essential for defining drilling targets. We note that the older seismic lines
in this area, while excellent for interpreting the regional tectonics, do not
image any potential drill sites, so high-quality images will be required in
advance of any drilling. The main reason why this work needs to be funded
quickly is because the Japanese will be carrying out the work as already
scheduled, whether or not we are able to participate. If we have to go through
the ?standard? proposal process, with the next proposal deadline being in
August, the work will have already been completed by the time funding decisions
could be made. We would thus lose out on this opportunity for U.S. scientists to
have early access to this large data set at relatively low
cost.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;One product of this project will be a
seismic reflection and multibeam bathymetry data set that will help characterize
the Earth?s best documented great earthquake. Although this data set will exist
within Japan, it will not be released to non-Japanese researchers for many
months (or years). Our participation will ensure that US scientists will be able
to help interpret the data. The seismic reflection data will be used as a site
survey to determine whether or not a rapid-response drilling program will have
suitable drill targets. This project will also provide valuable sea-going
experience for two graduate students.