* 1138666
* RAPID: Automating Emergency Data and Metadata Management to Support Effective Short Term and Long Term Disaster Recovery Efforts
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 07/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-38666 PI(s): Pu, Calton Institution: Georgia Institute of
Technology Title: RAPID: Automating Emergency Data and Metadata Management to
Support Effective Short and Long Term Disaster Recovery Efforts Project
Proposed: This RAPID project, collecting, processing, and disseminating
appropriate sensor data, aims to contribute to an effective recovery. The work
addresses the challenges of sensor data flood during an emergency, through
integration, evaluation, and enhancement of current data management tools,
particularly with respect to meta-data. Automation of data and meta-data
collection, processing, and dissemination are expected to alleviate the time
pressure on human operators. The fundamental tools support quality information
dimensions such as provenance, timeliness, security, privacy, and
confidentiality, enabling an appropriate interpretation of the sensor data in
the long term. For the short term, the tools are expected to help relief the
workers as data producers and consumers; for the long term, they will provide
high quality information for disaster recovery decision support systems.
Additionally, the cloud-based system architecture and implementation of the
CERCS cluster of Open Cirrus provide high availability and ease of access for
recovery efforts in Japan as well as for researchers worldwide. The integration
of techniques from several information dimensions (e.g., data provenance,
surety, and privacy) and the application of code generation techniques to
automate the data and metadata management tools constitute the intellectual
merit of the proposed research. New challenges will be encountered in the
potential interferences among the quality of information dimensions. It is also
a new challenge to apply code generation techniques in the adaptation of
software tools to accommodate changes imposed by environmental damages and
contextual as well as cultural differences among countries. The investigator
collaborates with Prof. Masaru Kitsuregawa from the University of Tokyo, Japan,
a leading researcher in data management. He is the first database researcher
from Asia to win the ACM SOGMOD Innovation Award (2009). In addition to a letter
of support and biographical sketches of the Japanese collaborator, a support
letter has been submitted by Intel to OISE, CISE and Engineering. Intel has
offered access to the Intel Open Cirrus cluster to conduct the research. Broader
Impacts: The proposed tools should contribute to improve both the quantity and
quality of data being collected by a variety of sensors, thus improving the
effectiveness of short and long term decision making. For example, measured
radiation levels in agricultural products can serve as an indication of
spreading radioactive contaminations that complement the direct readings of
radiation in soil samples. The project enables informed decisions based on
precise interpretation of real sensor data that may improve the quality of life
at both human and social levels, while reducing costs. The project will also
contribute in graduate student education.