* 1138675
* RAPID:  Post-Earthquake Fires in the March 2011 Japan Earthquake and Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Rachel Davidson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 39,993.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award provides funds to study the
fire-related aspects of the March 2011 Japan earthquake with the aims to improve
understanding of where, when, and how fires ignite; how fires spread through a
neighborhood; and how they ignite and are suppressed in industrial facilities.
The Tôhoku earthquake and tsunami caused 345 fires more recorded fires than any
other earthquake in history. By comparison, there were about 110 recorded in
Kobe (1995), 110 in Northridge (1994), 128 in San Fernando (1971), and 36 in
Loma Prieta (1989). This project will involve three main steps: (1) collecting
data on the fire-related aspects of the event through site visits, interviews
with key informants, and secondary data sources; (2) compiling the data into
easily usable, comprehensive databases that includes all data on each fire and
relevant auxiliary data in a consistent format; and (3) analyzing the data
through descriptive statistics, fitting generalized linear statistical models to
the ignition data, and comparing observations of spread to that estimated by a
new physics-based urban fire spread model. The PI and consultant on the project
have extensive background in the study of post-earthquake fires, including field
investigation of past events and development of models of ignitions, spread, and
suppression. This research will contribute knowledge on three main aspects of
post-earthquake fires ignitions, spread through a neighborhood, and fires in
industrial facilities. It will improve understanding of the number, locations,
causes, and timing of post-earthquake ignitions. The substantial inherent
randomness in the phenomenon requires use of statistical approaches that are
highly dependent on the amount and quality of available data. This project will
greatly improve the available ignition data by almost doubling the number of
observations documented in previous earthquakes; documenting areas in which
ground shaking was strong enough to induce ignitions but did not, substantially
improving our ability to forecast ignitions; by providing more consistent and
comprehensive data than currently available; and by providing data on both
ground shaking and tsunami-induced ignitions. Statistical modeling will be
conducted to determine what the data suggests about where, when, why ignitions
occur and to improve forecasting of ignitions in the future. Understanding of
fire spread through a neighborhood will be enhanced by collection of data that
allows more meaningful comparison with the emerging new generation of physics-
based urban fire models. These models are potentially powerful but they need
more comparisons to real events to improve them and build their credibility.
Finally, the project promises to provide new insights into how post-earthquake
fires start, spread, and are suppressed in industrial facilities specifically.
We will examine how the fire safety systems in place perform in the face of
extreme common cause failure mode of a major
earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improved knowledge of post-earthquake
ignitions and urban fire spread will be directly integrated into the development
of better post-earthquake fire models. Those models can then in turn be
integrated into regional earthquake loss models like HAZUS-MH, which have great
demonstrated value to society by supporting long-term emergency response
planning, urban planning, and loss estimation. The research results will be
integrated into the PIs graduate Risk Analysis course and will be presented at
professional conferences. A graduate student research assistant will participate
in all aspects of the project and the research will form an integral part of his
dissertation on post-earthquake fire modeling.