* 1138868
* Workshop: Offshore Renewable Energy - Information Needs for Resource Assessment and Design Conditions, June 23-24, 2011, Washington DC
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Larry Atkinson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Proposal ID: 1138868&lt;br/&gt;PI: Larry P Atkinson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support participant travel to a workshop titled "Offshore Renewable
Energy - Information Needs for Resource Assessment and Design Conditions". The
workshop will be held on June 23-24, 2011 in Washington DC, and will be hosted
by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Offshore wind and ocean energy is an underdeveloped
renewable energy resource. To develop that resource, research will be required
to better understand both the resource (wind, current, wave) and the effect of
those resources the on structures that are created to harvest these resources.
The workshop will address the fundamental and applied research needs for
renewable energy technologies that are likely to be deployed offshore,
especially wind and marine hydrokinetic (MHK) energy. Specific areas for which
fundamental information is needed and for which gaps will be identified include
forecasting (for operations), energy projections (including resource
assessment), technology design and validation, facility design, operations
planning/site safety, and performance monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Offshore renewable energy is seen as a significant
but untapped resource that has the potential to reduce the reliance of the
United States on fossil fuels for the generation of electricity. This proposal
will provide travel support to enable the participation of graduate students in
a unique workshop that focuses on offshore renewable energy. This workshop will
also foster collaborations between academia, industry, and government,
particularly the U.S. DOE and the National Science Foundation (NSF).