* 1139722
* RAPID: Collection of Perishable Data on Wood-Frame Building Failure Mechanisms During the 2011 Tuscaloosa Alabama Tornado
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Andrew Graettinger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 18,484.00

The objective of the research is to collect and archive perishable damage data
on structural systems to determine failure mechanisms in wood residential
buildings following the Wednesday, April 27 2011 Tuscaloosa, AL tornado. The
project will study the building damage patterns in a tornado that caused
catastrophic loss to many existing residential structures. A multi-university
team of volunteers, consisting of structural engineering faculty, wood
scientists and students will conduct forensic investigations throughout the
tornado?s damage path. The main research hypothesis is whether implementing
structural improvements similar to those adopted in hurricane-prone regions for
residential wood structures can also improve housing in tornado-prone regions.
The data collection methodology will include both active and passive collection
methods, which will establish the level of structural damage and develop general
contours of damage showing the maximum force levels throughout the tornado
track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These observations will contribute new knowledge on
spatial characteristics of tornado force. Structural failures will be
categorized into member failure or connection failure, and the prevalence of
each type (particularly of roof-to-wall-connection) will be documented. The
surveyed damage pattern will reveal the relationship between the visible debris
cloud diameter and the swath of extreme high suction on the ground. The project
will yield 1) a publicly-available database of residential buildings damage
ratings and failure mechanisms that can readily be used by the engineering
research community and 2) an estimation of damage intensity distribution (EF-
scale) within the tornado track. These results are essential field dataset for
evaluating community vulnerability from tornadoes and as support data for
developing realistic retrofit techniques for tornado-resilient housing. The
graduate students working on this project will also be exposed to unique
educational experience in wind engineering.