* 1139905
* Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD) Cohort VII (2011-2013) Program - BD Site:  TAMU
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Shannon Walton, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

The Texas A&amp;M University System (TAMUS) Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority&lt;br/&gt;Participation (LSAMP) will sponsor a Bridge to the Doctorate
Program (BD) at Texas&lt;br/&gt;A&amp;M University during the 2011-2013 academic
years. The program involves&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with the College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences (COALS), the College of&lt;br/&gt;Science (COS),
and the College of Engineering (COE) at the institution as well
as&lt;br/&gt;participation in research projects at partner institutions such as
TAMU-Kingsville.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TAMUS LSAMP BD Program aims to
increase the pool of science, technology,&lt;br/&gt;engineering or mathematics
STEM PhDs among underrepresented minorities (URM) in&lt;br/&gt;STEM fields and
to create a cohesive community of graduate students across
different&lt;br/&gt;disciplines within the university. The program benefits
society by providing opportunities and activities at graduate levels that lead
to educational and career enhancements of graduate students. The&lt;br/&gt;TAMUS
LSAMP BTD program will also enhance the infrastructure of research
and&lt;br/&gt;education by advancing pursuit of graduate and doctoral STEM
degrees at alliance&lt;br/&gt;institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2003, the
alliance has conducted the NSF LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate postbaccalaureate
program at this institution and Prairie View A&amp;M University for seven
cohorts of students from historically underrepresented groups pursuing STEM
doctoral degrees. Eleven (11) students have completed STEM doctoral programs and
16 students have completed STEM M. S. degrees. The remaining students are still
persisting at the postbaccalaureate level or have entered STEM Ph.D. programs.