* 1139321
* Global Impact of Lightning-Generated VLF Waves on Radiation Belt Electron Losses
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* John Gill, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This project is directed at assessing the global impact of lightning-generated
Very Low Frequency (VLF) waves on radiation belt electron loss, a process known
as lightning-induced electron precipitation (LEP). The project will address the
following topics: (1) Quantify the connection between injection of energetic
solar particles during geomagnetic storms, (2) Quantify the connections between
lightning parameters and resulting LEP characteristics, and (3) Derive the total
contribution of lightning to radiation belt energetic electron losses.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to quantify the role of lightning in energetic
electron losses from the radiation belts, continuous and reliable global
lightning geo-location data and a global network of observation sites to detect
these precipitation events are needed. A new lightning geo-location network
provides complete global coverage of lightning activity for the first time, and
a global network of VLF receivers now operates, allowing monitoring of
ionospheric disturbances associated with the electron precipitation. Finally,
recent efforts have yielded two major breakthroughs in modeling the physical
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the training of a
graduate student at Stanford University. The program will leverage, and
consequently strengthen, an international network of VLF receivers that was set
up under the auspices of the International Heliophysical Year (IHY). Under this
program, Stanford University has placed ¡­25 receivers in developing countries,
sponsoring and training local scientists to use the data. Stanford has built
significant infrastructure in support of this program and is continuing to hold
a series of international workshops engaging scientists around the world.