* 1139908
* Bridge to the Doctorate at UMBC 2011-2013
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* tasha inniss
* 08/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

The University System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) will&lt;br/&gt;build upon its success of training and
educating Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Fellows by proposing&lt;br/&gt;a program
for a sixth cohort. The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) is the
lead institution&lt;br/&gt;of a senior-level LSAMP and has been designated as
the BD site for 2011-2013. UMBC is dedicated to&lt;br/&gt;recruiting, retaining,
educating, and training underrepresented students in science,
technology,&lt;br/&gt;engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, and preparing
them for success in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;UMBC welcomed its first cohort
of BD Fellows in 2005. Three of those Fellows completed Ph.D.s
during&lt;br/&gt;2010-2011. Others from that cohort are persisting in doctoral
programs (full-time and part-time) or have&lt;br/&gt;received M.S. degrees and
remain in touch with UMBC's BD Program as they plan to return for
the&lt;br/&gt;doctorate. (One 2005 BD Fellow is a Ph.D. candidate at the
University of Utah, and another will begin the&lt;br/&gt;D.Eng. program at
Morgan State University in fall 2011.) The USM has four additional cohorts of
fellows&lt;br/&gt;on both the UMBC and the University of Maryland, College Park
campuses. The Fellows connect with&lt;br/&gt;one another at BD training,
professional development, and community building events. The USM
LSAMP&lt;br/&gt;began in 1995 and has been vigilant about increasing the number
of underrepresented minority&lt;br/&gt;baccalaureate degree recipients in STEM
disciplines. The BD award will enable us to strengthen both
our&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate pipelines and create an expanded
community of scholars within these&lt;br/&gt;disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;Plans for
the 2011-2013 cohort include activities that will begin during the fellows'
first week on campus.&lt;br/&gt;The program includes extensive orientation
activities such as a 2-day Summer Success Institute, the&lt;br/&gt;Graduate
School Orientation, and multi-day orientations with faculty within the STEM
departments. In the&lt;br/&gt;first year, the Fellows will be assigned a Peer
Mentor; apply for the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship;&lt;br/&gt;receive
training in public speaking; and complete a 30-50 page research preparation
project that will&lt;br/&gt;require them to network with other graduate
students, faculty, and BD Fellows at universities outside of&lt;br/&gt;the USM.
Throughout the two years, BD Fellows will participate in bi-weekly BD meetings,
attend&lt;br/&gt;monthly Graduate Student Success Seminars, and participate in
academic and professional development&lt;br/&gt;seminars with other graduate
students and faculty. By the end of the second year, the BD Fellows
will&lt;br/&gt;have learned and implemented methodologies for achieving academic
excellence, completed credits for&lt;br/&gt;the M.S. degree or early qualifying
milestones toward the doctorate (varies according to
department),&lt;br/&gt;completed 10 hours of UMBC's "Professors-in-Training"
modules, presented at two research conferences,&lt;br/&gt;participated in
numerous networking opportunities with faculty, attended workshops on thesis
completion&lt;br/&gt;and dissertation proposal planning, and developed a plan
for persisting to finish the doctorate.