* 1139350
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VisWeek 2011
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Georgeta-Elisab Marai, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 19,646.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Colloquium (workshop) of about 12
dissertation stage doctoral students, in a variety of visualization subfields,
for a day of discussions and interactions with 6 distinguished research faculty,
to be held in conjunction with this year's IEEE VisWeek meeting, which will take
place during the week of October 23-28, 2011, in Providence, RI. Visualization,
or the use of interactive graphics to support data analysis and understanding,
has become an integral part and critical component of many application areas.
IEEE VisWeek is the premier forum for visualization advances in science and
engineering for academia, government, and industry, now bringing together about
900 researchers and practitioners from around the world with a shared interest
in techniques, tools, and technology. VisWeek consists this year of five main
events: IEEE Visualization (Vis), IEEE Information Visualization (InfoVis), the
IEEE Visual Analytics Science and Technology Symposium (VAST), the IEEE
Symposium on Large-Scale Data Analysis and Visualization, and the IEEE Symposium
on Biological Data Visualization. The papers published in the special conference
issue of IEEE Transactions of Visualization and Computer Graphics are rigorously
refereed and widely cited. More information is available online at
http://www.visweek.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE
VisWeek is a research-focused meeting which has taken place annually at the
Visualization conference since 2006, and has helped launch the careers of a
number of outstanding young researchers. In 2011 the workshop will convene on
Sunday, October 23, with follow-up events during the VisWeek technical program.
A primary goal of the Doctoral Colloquium is to allow students to discuss their
research directions in a supportive atmosphere with a panel of distinguished
leaders and with their peers, who will provide helpful feedback and fresh
perspectives. The workshop supports community building, by connecting beginning
and advanced researchers, one of the objectives being to build a cohort group of
new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues across the world.
Student research will be disseminated via posters during the VisWeek technical
program, and via publication in the VisWeek Extended Abstracts. Feedback about
the Doctoral Colloquium will be provided to future conference
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The VisWeek Doctoral
Colloquium brings together the best of the next generation of visualization
researchers and allows them to create a social network both among themselves and
with senior researchers, which plays a major role in their enculturation into
the profession. Since the students and faculty are a diverse group on several
dimensions (nationality, scientific discipline, research specialization), the
students' horizons are broadened at a critical stage in their professional
development. The PI has affirmed that in managing this event he and his
colleagues will try explicitly to identify and include the broadest possible
group of highly qualified participants, that they will make an effort to
encourage the participation of women, racial/ethnic minorities, and persons with
disabilities, and they will ensure that NSF funds are used chiefly to support
participation by students enrolled in graduate programs in the United States.