* 1139864
* AF:Small:A Novel Algorithmic Approach for Real-Time Image-to-Mesh Conversion of Brain MRI
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Nikos Chrisochoides, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 481,137.00

&lt;br/&gt; A Novel Algorithmic Approach for Real-Time Image-to-Mesh Conversion
of Brain MRI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Image-to-Mesh (I2M) conversion is
the tessellation of images into simpler geometrical shapes (or elements) like
triangles and tetrahedral for 2D and 3D images, respectively. In Computer
Assisted Surgery (CAS) this tessellation (or finite element mesh) is a critical
component for patient-specific bio-mechanics and bio-fluid finite element (FE)
simulations. In this project, we target I2M conversion for image guided
neurosurgery and endoscopic neck and head surgery. Specifically, we focus on FE-
based non-rigid registration methods which use patient-specific bio-mechanical
models to fuse pre-operative intra-operative brain images (eg. Magnetic
Resonance Images and/or Computed Tomography Scans).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to extend the Delaunay refinement algorithms and
theory for guaranteed quality I2M conversion that meets additional requirements
related to: (1) accuracy of non-rigid registration of brain images, and (2)
real-time constrains imposed by neurosurgery or head and neck surgery. The
intellectual merit of this work is the development of novel theoretical
framework which extends existing point insertion methods for both scalar and
parallel guaranteed quality Delaunay mesh generation. These extensions increase
algorithm flexibility which is important to satisfy application-specific
requirements like fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will have a
broader impact on several areas in both CAS and Computer Aided Design (CAD).
Non-rigid registration of medical images is an enabling technology for many
applications in CAS which is a rapidly growing area in health care industry. Our
algorithms will contribute in the prevention of medical errors and
the&lt;br/&gt;use of new (more effective/accurate) technologies which can lead
to products (i.e., image guided neuro-navigation systems) that will help reduce
medical and hospitalization expenses. Specifically, (1) image guided
neurosurgery increases the percentage of successful tumor resections while
minimizing the potential for neurological deficit by preserving critical tissue
and hence improves prognosis for patient, and (2) minimally invasive endoscopic
surgery results in less blood loss and reduced post-operative pain lead to
faster recovery and earlier discharge of patients. In addition technology based
on our I2M conversion algorithms can be used in medical simulators which can
improve doctor training and minimize errors in medical procedures. &lt;br/&gt;