* 1139510
* ITEST Research: Effects of STEM/ICT Aspirants' High School Experiences on STEM and ICT Course-Taking
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2015
* Kathryn Borman, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 11/30/2015
* USD 763,564.00

The proposed project is a three-year, longitudinal, multiple-method study that
addresses questions about high school students' course-taking in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) or information &amp;
communication technologies (ICT). In particular, it focuses on the effects of
STEM/ICT academies--secondary schools that specialize in these subjects. The
project will contribute greatly to our understanding of factors that may support
or hinder students' interest and persistence in STEM/ICT courses. The project is
also timely, in that there is growing interest in understanding the impacts of
STEM/ICT academies and similar ways of structuring schools to emphasize STEM
content topics--either as career-focused schools or as themed
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a very robust research base
for its conclusions, drawing on both complete state-wide databases as well as
rich case studies of schools. The quantitative analysis portion will examine
data drawn from the Florida Department of Education, which provides data on
students' courses, demographics, and performance--matched with data from the
NCES High School Study, which provides data on schools' and districts' courses
and curriculum. Qualitative data will be collected from purposefully selected
school cases and analyzed to provide more depth and richness in understanding
the findings from the quantitative study.