* 1139928
* CAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program (Cohort 7) - University of California-Riverside
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Howard Gillman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

The University of California System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (CAMP) under the leadership of the University of California-
Irvine, will sponsor its seventh (7th) Bridge to the Doctorate program at the
University of California-Riverside (UC-R) for the 2011-2013 academic year. UC-R
is a Hispanic-serving institution. The program will consist of a cohort of 12
students from historically underrepresented minority populations pursuing
graduate studies in science, technology, engineering and technology (STEM)
fields at the institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will support LSAMP
students exclusively for two years and offer newly-minted B.S. degree recipients
an opportunity to matriculate in graduate education with support from STEM
departments and/or external fellowship funding for the duration of the doctoral
program. Collaborative ties with the Office of Graduate Studies as well as the
academic deans ensures timely and appropriate implementation of the BD
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will provide a rich set of graduate
student development opportunities that in addition to rigorous training in
specific STEM disciplines will also include intensive faculty mentoring,
extensive professional development, and activities that promote leadership in
the scientific and engineering communities. This proposal leverages the
distinctive strengths of several graduate and undergraduate research programs
throughout the California Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
overall and UCR specifically to prepare BD scholars to be successful scientists
and role models who can diversify the faculty ranks in research institutions.
Students receive rigorous academic and research training experiences that
support completion of the Ph.D. as well as future contributions to our nation's
scientific and engineering expertise. Best practices for recruitment and
retention of graduate researchers are implemented and builds upon lessons
learned from previous host sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bridge to the
Doctorate activity at UC-R adds considerable strength to the institution and
alliance which already exemplifies robust commitment to increasing diversity in
STEM disciplines. The findings, lessons learned, and impact of the program will
be disseminated through multi-media networks, publications, presentations at
national meetings, and data sharing with NSF-affiliated initiatives with the
express purpose of sharing experiences as best practices to improve the
participation of underserved minorities in all STEM fields.