* 1139701
* Support for the Cascadia Initiative Expedition Team
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Douglas Toomey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,919,396.00

The vital importance of gaining a better understanding of seismic (earthquake)
and volcanic hazards and risks related to the process of subduction was
dramatically underscored by the recent megathrust earthquake in Japan, and its
catastrophic consequences. A heavily populated region of North America that is
subject to similarly conditions is Cascadia, which extends from southern British
Columbia to northernmost California. The Cascadia Initiative (CI) is an
onshore/offshore seismic and geodetic experiment that will deploy an array of
seismometers on the seafloor to complement an array of stations onshore, with
the aim of addressing questions ranging from megathrust earthquakes to volcanic
arc structure to the formation, deformation and hydration of the Juan de Fuca
and Gorda plates. These diverse targets are components of the overall subduction
zone system and require an array of seismometers crosses the shoreline and
encompasses relevant plate boundaries. The experimental design and objectives,
specified at meeting held in Portland, Oregon in 2010, are described in the NSF
Cascadia Initiative Workshop Report, which spells out the scientific objectives
of the CI, the resources involved and the community-defined OBS deployment plan.
This award will support a team of scientists tocaary out and oversee the first
year of CI OBS deployments (summer 2011), the planning and operational efforts
of the Cascadia Initiative Expedition Team (CIET) and the initial Education and
Outreach (E&amp;O) effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief broader impact of the
Cascadia Initiative is its very high societal relevance. Achieving a better
understanding of seismicity and volcanism in regions such as Cascadia is key to
mitigating risks and planning for the potentially devastating effects of
volcanic eruptions and great earthquakes. This proposal includes important
outreach and education activities as well. The CIET Education and Outreach
program will develop two opportunities during the first year. First, the
'CC@sea' project will support community college ('CC') student participation in
OBS deployment, retrieval and pre-cruise and follow-up outreach activities in
CCs, high schools and the community. The second Cascadia Initiative E&amp;O
program develops activities in high school classrooms in Oregon (initially),
Washington and northern California.