* 1139824
* 2011-2013 Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Bridge to the Doctorate (BD Site - OSU)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Mark Payton, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 987,000.00

The Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Miniority Participation (OK-LSAMP) under
the&lt;br/&gt;leadership of Oklahoma State University will sponsor as sixth
cohort of Bridge to the&lt;br/&gt;Doctorate (BD) students at the institution.
The program will focus on the&lt;br/&gt;recruitment, retention, mentoring, and
graduation of the students from STEM fields&lt;br/&gt;pursuing M. S. and Ph.D.
degrees in science, technology, engineering, and technology&lt;br/&gt;(STEM)
fields. Special emphasis will be placed on increasing Native American
representation in STEM graduate programs and retention to the STEM doctoral
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program objectives for this cohort are: (i)
recruitment of 12 LSAMP graduates to the&lt;br/&gt;BD program, (ii) completion
of coursework by each BD Fellow within the first two years of the graduate
study, (iii) identification of a research mentor by the start of the 2nd year in
the program, and (iv) each BD fellow earning at least one graduate degree in a
STEM field. The program has also identified four key educational outcomes that
each BD fellow must achieve prior to graduation. These outcomes are: (i)
knowledge of learning methods and effective teaching strategies, (ii) ability to
communicate&lt;br/&gt;effectively, (iii) ability to perform research
independently, and (iv) an understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the importance of life-
long learning. To achieve these objectives and outcomes, the program has
developed a strong and ambitious plan which includes workshops, seminars,
socials, meetings, international research&lt;br/&gt;experiences, conference
activities for the BD fellows and research mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evaluation of the program objectives and the assessment of the achievement of
educational outcomes include input from students, external program evaluator,
and the BD Council. BD Council consists of&lt;br/&gt;members from OU and OSU
including the PI of the Oklahoma Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity involves the furthering the research on what constitutes
best&lt;br/&gt;practices for the recruitment, retention, and graduation of
underrepresented minority&lt;br/&gt;students with doctoral degrees in STEM
fields. Collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between the BD program and projects funded
through the NSF Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR)and other public and private section organizations at the university
will not only benefit the BD Fellows but also the faculty engaged in research
targeted towards promoting diversity in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential impacts of the proposed activity are multidimensional. At the
institutional&lt;br/&gt;level, success of the BD program will positively impact
institutionalization of the best&lt;br/&gt;practices. Diversity in the graduate
STEM programs will promote diversity in the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate programs and
vice versa. Institutional commitment to diversity as evidenced by a diverse
student population will undoubtedly support the efforts of diversifying STEM
faculty. For Oklahoma, it will lead to stronger relationships between K-12
schools including tribal establishments and&lt;br/&gt;STEM programs,
diversification of the pipeline for STEM education, and
further&lt;br/&gt;stimulating economic development in the state. At the national
level, graduation of at&lt;br/&gt;least 12 additional BD Fellows with Ph.D.
degrees who have achieved the four key outcomes&lt;br/&gt;stated for the program
will have a significant impact on the gender and ethnic profiles
of&lt;br/&gt;STEM faculty in academia, as well as industry and other government
agencies&lt;br/&gt;employing Ph.D. graduates. Dissemination of best practices
through archival paper&lt;br/&gt;publications and presentations at professional
conferences will&lt;br/&gt;broaden the impact as more institutional will
implement the best practices which will in&lt;br/&gt;turn transform the ethnic
and gender distribution of the STEM workforce and also&lt;br/&gt;increase the
number of graduates from STEM disciplines.