* 1139977
* Enhancing Undergraduate Education Through Student-Led Research in Biomass Renewable Energy
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Peter Liu, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 12/31/2015
* USD 198,695.00

Using an investigative learning model, this project is engaging undergraduate
students (and a limited number of high school students) in a series of student-
led research activities on biomass renewable energy. Students design and
implement their own research plans based upon available biomass resources. The
adoption of a student-led investigative approach is a potentially transformative
model in biomass renewable energy education. Students identify biomass sources,
test heat value and moisture content of the biomass, process the biomass into a
useful form, gasify the biomass to produce combustible syngas, use the syngas to
drive an internal combustion engine and an electrical generator, charge a bank
of batteries, and invert to provide 110 VAC power output. Through the experience
of participating in design and implermentation of a complete cycle of renewable
energy generation and utilization, undergraduate students develop a real
passion, knowledge and skill for using renewable energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Exemplary learning materials are being developed to enable other higher
education institutions to transfer the methodology into their respective
curricula. With a systematic assessment, the project adds to our knowledge of
how students learn biomass renewable energy through a series of student-led
research activities. The project contributes to the national effort to reduce
our dependence on foreign oil and to maintain a sustainable social, economic and
environmental system for many generations to come.