* 1139329
* METABOLOMICS: Identification of inducible bioactive plant metabolites
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Eric Schmelz, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* scott jackson
* 11/30/2015
* USD 504,408.00

METABOLOMICS: Identification of Inducible Bioactive Plant Metabolites
&lt;br/&gt;Japan: Yutaka Okumoto, Naoki Mori, and Naoko Yoshinaga (Kyoto
University) &lt;br/&gt;USA: Georg Jander (Boyce Thompson Institute); Eric
Schmelz and Alisa Huffaker (USDA-
ARS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Plants produce an
enormous variety of toxic and deterrent metabolites to protect themselves
against pathogens and herbivores. These chemical defenses include well-studied
molecules like caffeine in coffee and capsaicin in hot peppers. However, less
than 10% of the metabolites in any given plant species have been identified.
Many defense-related compounds are absent in non-stressed plants, but accumulate
locally to very high levels following attack. The targeted identification of
these small molecules, which accumulate in response to infection or herbivory,
will result in the discovery previously unknown plant defenses. In the current
project, defense-induced metabolites will be identified in four well-studied
plant species, maize, soybean, rice and Arabidopsis. By focusing on these key
species, it will be possible to make use of well-developed genetic tools and an
extensive body of prior research to speed the discovery genes and pathways that
are required for the synthesis of previously unknown plant metabolites. The
defensive functions of the newly identified plant genes and metabolites will be
confirmed with insect and pathogen bioassays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Analysis of induced defenses in plants will lead to the identification
of previously unknown molecules that have practical applications in the control
of pests and diseases. A mechanistic understanding of natural plant defenses
will enable targeted trait improvements that reduce energy inputs and the use of
agricultural chemicals, which are required when cultivating plants for food,
animal feed, and biofuel production. Interactions between American and Japanese
scientists will be enhanced through this highly collaborative research project.
Samples for analysis will be exchanged between research teams, scientists from
the US will receive training in Japan, and undergraduate students from Japan
will participate in a well-established undergraduate research program at the
Boyce Thompson Institute. A new generation of plant scientists will be prepared
for future careers in academia, industry, and government service.