* 1139338
* EAGER: Development of a Heterogeneous Multiscale Model as Scale-Bridging Method for Chemically Reacting Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Matthias Ihme, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 59,891.00

1139338&lt;br/&gt;Ihme&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rapidly growing energy
demand and environmental concerns, the utilization of advanced combustion
technologies and alternative fuels is gaining increasing attention. However,
associated with these emerging energy-conversion strategies is an increasing
need for accurate and reliable information about reaction rates, transport
properties, and other constitutive relations that are required for the system
characterization on a macroscopic level. Since our current knowledge about these
constitutive relations and rate coefficients primarily relies on experiments, a
critical need exists to complement these studies with computational
investigations that extend current modeling efforts and are able to fully
account for the coupling between processes occurring on macroscopic and
atomistic scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this exploratory
research program is the development of a heterogeneous multiscale method (HMM)
for chemically reacting systems. In this HMM-formulation, the macroscopic model
is described by the conservation equations for mass, momentum, energy, and
species, and incomplete or unreliable data for constitutive relations, reaction
rates, and other macroscopic quantities are evaluated from a detailed atomistic
model. To demonstrate the potential of this approach, a canonical combustion
problem is considered. To facilitate the successful application of HMM,
fundamental scientific issues associated with the rigorous definition of scale-
bridging operators for micro-macro coupling and the necessary reduction of the
HMM model complexity will be systematically addressed in this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed exploratory research program
enables the holistic investigation of complex combustion systems, and eliminates
dependencies on incomplete and unreliable information about constitutive
relations. Algorithmic developments addressing the reduction of the
computational model complexity will be critical to enable the HMM application to
complex combustion problems. More broadly, this research on the HMM model is
general and can be applied to a wide range of industrial problems, including
catalytic processes, combustion in fluidized beds, surface oxidation, and other
problems for which information about detailed chemical mechanisms and other
constitutive relations are not available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this research arises from the improved understanding about chemical
kinetics and combustion processes, which will complement experimental
investigations. The research program closely integrates education and outreach
activities. Specifically, courses on combustion and propulsion will be
complemented by lectures on alternative energy systems. In addition, research
activities for undergraduate students will be organized during the academic year
and the summer. In these research activities, students will work on topics
related to sustainable energy generation and address fundamental aspects on
basic thermodynamics and combustion physics.