* 1139426
* ITEST (Scale-Up) COMPUGIRLS SCALE-UP
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Kimberly Scott, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1,775,868.00

The COMPUGIRLS Scale-Up project utilizes a culturally relevant technology (CRT)
program to prepare girls ages 13-18 from the Phoenix high needs district to
enter the STEM workforce. This project builds on the successful NSF-funded
COMPUGIRLS award (DRL 08-33773), which uses social justice-based multimedia
projects to engage young women in activities that increase knowledge,
understanding, and awareness of careers in STEM and information and
communications technology (ICT). Arizona State University, will implement this
project in partnership with Colorado's Mathematics, Engineering, and Science
Achievement (CMESA) program, Education Development Center, YMCA Boulder, Phoenix
Union High School District, Gila River Indian Community, and Whiteriver Junction
Apache Indian Community. The objectives of the COMPUGIRLS Scale-Up are to
increase the number of girls from under-resourced areas exposed to a CRT
program; to sustain and replicate the best practices from the ITEST Strategies
project; to develop a sustainable and replicable online professional development
community; and to create community and academic presentations based on research
findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COMPUGIRLS uses a theoretical framework that
includes Culturally Responsive Practices and Future Time Perspectives which
complement the career focus of the project. The project design includes both a
research and evaluation component. The mixed-methods, participatory research
design seeks to increase understanding of how a problem-based multimedia
curriculum that incorporates evidenced-based culturally relevant pedagogy
affects underserved and underrepresented girls' dispositions to enter the
STEM/ICT workforce; how the scale-up process of a girl-centered culturally
relevant program operates across learning contexts; and how technology
operationalizes professional development and peer networking in different
contexts that adopt the COMPUGIRLS program model. The evaluation plan will
assess the impact on students' science and STEM learning dispositions, intent to
pursue STEM careers, and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
deliverables include dissemination to six sites (YMCA-Boulder, Colorado MESA,
Whiteriver Unified School District, and ASU Polytechnic and Mercado), four
revised courses, an 80-hour professional development course, an online learning
community, and an annual cross-site event. The young women participate in four
technology courses over a one-year period (e.g. Introduction to Social Justice;
SCRATCH, Introduction to Second Life, Second Life Capstone), ending with a 4-8
week summer internship at a local business site. Professional development for
teachers utilizes a hybrid approach that incorporates an 8-hour face-to-face
course and 100 self-paced online activities. The COMPUGIRLS Learning Community
(CLC) is an online learning platform designed to support both students and
teachers with social networking, training webinars, and opportunities to
showcase completed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support
nearly 700 students and teachers. It is anticipated that the research studies
will help increase understanding of the effect of the COMPUGIRLS program on self
concept in technology, academic possible selves, and self regulation in girls of
color, in addition to the affects of the model on indigenous girls' cultural
selves as expressed in understanding and commitment to cultural traditions.
Research findings will be disseminated through the National Center for Women and
Information Technology, peer reviewed journals, conferences and meetings, and
the COMPUGIRLS Learning Community.