* 1139929
* UT System LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (2011 - 2013 Cohort) - BD Site:  University of Texas (EL Paso)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Helmut Knaust, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

The University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) proposes to implement a Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) project at the
University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), the lead institution of the Alliance and
a Hispanic majority serving institution. This effort will provide full support
to twelve talented students from under-represented minority (URM) groups who
will obtain doctoral degrees in the STEM disciplines and upon completion either
enter the technical workforce or choose a career in academia.&lt;br/&gt;The
program will build on the experiences gathered from previous BD cohorts at UTEP
and sister UT System institutions. The program will target primarily students
with prior undergraduate research experience who are bridging to Ph.D. programs
in STEM disciplines. A high quality pool of qualified applicants who have
participated in LSAMP activities as undergraduates and plan to begin doctoral
studies at UTEP in the fall of 2011 or spring of 2012 will be created.
Applicants will be carefully screened through a process that will include
personal interviews conducted by the PI, co-PIs, and STEM doctoral program
directors.&lt;br/&gt;Students accepted into the BD program will identify a
faculty mentor and a research topic during their first semester as doctoral
students. Besides full financial support, BD fellows will receive quality
advising and mentoring from the PI and co-PIs through weekly seminars and one-
on-one meetings. These sessions will be designed to help the BD fellows achieve
their academic goals by providing advice on how to prepare a research plan with
milestones and deliverables, and mentoring to prepare them to be knowledgeable
and competent professionals. BD fellows will also be coached to apply for
competitive funding from the NSF Graduate Fellowship Program, the GEM fellowship
program, and the Ford Foundation Fellowship program. BD fellows will be expected
to attend at least one professional meeting in their discipline per year and
will also participate in the Joint Annual Meeting of the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project will contribute to the knowledge
base concerning intrusive advising interventions and seminar sessions that shape
qualified students from under-represented minority groups and prepare them to
successfully complete a doctoral degree. The PI and Co-PIs have ample experience
with the many challenges minority and first-college generation students face as
they transition to graduate studies, and have already shown to be successful in
tailoring strategies to their students' needs. The project benefits from a
proven model that includes goals, objectives, activities, and anticipated
outcomes. The resources available for the project include the support services
of the UT System LSAMP staff, admission and professional development services
offered by the UTEP Graduate School staff, the evaluation services of the UTEP
Center for Institutional Evaluation, Research, and Planning, as well as the
research laboratories and offices in the College of Science and Engineering in
which BD fellows will conduct their dissertation work.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact.
The proposed program will lead to the enhancement of successful strategies for
URM graduate student success that are applicable to other institutions of higher
learning with characteristics similar to those of UTEP, which is an urban
research university with a high proportion of non-traditional students. The
program will contribute to the national goal of increasing the number of
underrepresented minority students in STEM disciplines with terminal degrees in
their area of expertise.