* 1139702
* Data Coding, Analysis, Archiving, and Sharing for Open Collaboration: From OpenSHAPA to Open Data Sharing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Karen Adolph, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2012
* USD 40,562.00

Researchers now have access to richer and more detailed behavioral data than
ever before. For example, when studying how children learn to walk, researchers
can collect eye-tracking data from miniature head-mounted cameras recording the
infant's eye movements and field of view, making it possible to see exactly
where the child looks while navigating through the environment. Simultaneously,
researchers can collect high-speed motion-tracking data detailing the
trajectories of the child's limb movements and video data about the child's path
relative to caregivers and obstacles, interactions with people, objects, and
surfaces, and affective responses while walking, falling, and interacting.
Despite the widespread availability of video and other recording technologies,
behavioral researchers typically settle for analyzing only one variable in one
stream of data, rather than seeking relations among multiple variables across
multiple data streams. Powerful data analysis tools and sophisticated data
management practices are needed to integrate different kinds of data and relate
them to each other tools and practices that few researchers have. In addition,
researchers usually work in isolation, seldom sharing data that might illuminate
others' research. Without richer analyses and data sharing, theoretical progress
in developmental psychology and other fields of behavioral science is hampered.
The purpose of this workshop is to delve into the conceptual, technical, and
management issues that, when resolved, will allow researchers to perform richer
analyses across large, shared, data sets. The workshop will focus in part on the
future development of an emerging open-source software tool, OpenSHAPA, and will
explore how OpenSHAPA might be extended to encompass new data exploration and
visualization tools and promote data management and data sharing. Twenty-two
researchers will participate in the workshop, representing the fields of
cognitive, perceptual, social, language, and motor development, human-computer
interaction, visual analytics, computer science, eResearch, cognitive science,
and human factors. Collectively, the invited researchers have experience with
different aspects of the problem of exploring rich behavioral data, such as
performing massive data visualization, innovative data analyses, integrating
multiple data streams, performing custodianship of shared data sets, and
creating eResearch communities and data management tools.

The outcomes from the workshop will help to improve the quality of behavioral
science. First, findings from the workshop will have an immediate impact on
further development of the OpenSHAPA tool, where development is shared across a
burgeoning community of users. Possible directions are changes to the
architecture to prepare for expansion of data management and data sharing
capabilities, building links to existing software, creating libraries of scripts
for users to manage data in standardized ways, creating web-based user guides
and best practices, expanding user forums, and providing efficient technical
support. Research community members can freely adopt OpenSHAPA, expand their
current use of it, or build bridges between it and other open source tools, and
will bring new users into the community of current users and developers. Second,
the richer data analysis that results should support richer theoretical
insights. Better data management practices will support more reliable and
replicable research, and will better preserve data for future use within and
across laboratories. A community of open data sharing practices will lead to
greater transparency and efficiency in research and teaching by allowing
researchers to inspect each other's data sets and analyses, thereby reducing
puzzling failures to replicate, generating new hypotheses, and exposing students
to original footage of tasks and findings.