* 1139317
* An Innovative Hybrid Program For Diversifying And Building Capacity In The STEM/ICT Workforce: ISTEM
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Rosi Andrade, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Rivet
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,251,549.00

This strategies project develops a program combining in-school mentoring with
out of school informal education experiences involving the use of three types of
mentors; college students, STEM professionals, and volunteers from the
participant group community. The project targets Native American and Hispanic
students in grades 3 - 8. The project recruits, trains and retains a minimum of
60 mentors during the 3 year project. Mentors from the three groups including
members of the Pascua Yaqui Native American community and tribal members are
paired with like numbers of mentees. The groups meet twice a month and engage in
a minimum of 5 out of school informal science experiences during each year of
the program. Program activities are guided by a culturally relevant theoretical
framework, Funds of Knowledge, to determine the effectiveness of the combined
effect of mentors from the three groups and the hybrid in-school and after
school program. Funds of Knowledge provide mentors with theory and methods on
how to identify, document, and build on the "hidden resources" found in the
life-world of students to help them contextualize problems for ease of
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program activities are be based on four of
fourteen grand challenges in engineering from the National Academy of
Engineering Grand Challenges for Scholars; 1) Energy and Environment, 2) Health,
3) Security and 4) Learning and Computation. The program intends to determine
the comparative effects of the three mentoring groups. They will attempt to
determine which group of mentors, if any, are more effective in engaging mentees
in STEM fields. The use of the "learning-together" model as a metaphor for
family and community involvement through volunteer mentors from the target
community is tested as a new approach to increasing effectiveness of the mentor
model. The project also tests whether the model will increase the likelihood
that minority engineering undergraduates who serve as mentors will persist and
graduate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops and provides structured
technology intensive activities for mentors to use during their time with
mentees at school that align with the informal out-of-school learning
experiences. In addition, the program is aligned with each of the two
participating schools science curriculum to assure continuity and mutual support
of the activities.