* 1139716
* International: Collaborative Advancement in Analytical and Theoretical Metapopulation Statistical Genetics
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Peter Fields, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 07/31/2013
* USD 14,795.00

This project supports a collaboration between Dr. Douglas Taylor and his
student, Mr. Peter Fields, in the Department of Biology at the University of
Virginia, and Dr. Oscar Gaggiotti in the Laboratoire d?Ecologie Alpine at the
University of Grenoble in France. This proposal will fund two long-term visits
for Fields to the University of Grenoble in the Fall of 2011 and Summer of 2012.
The collaboration will develop analytical and computational methods to analyze
genetic data from natural populations. The proposed research leverages
Gaggiotti?s expertise in population genetic analysis and software design and an
unparalleled 24+ year metapopulation dataset of the angiosperm Silene latifolia.
This collaboration is an exciting opportunity to refine statistical tools and
ground truth population genetics methods with a long-term metapopulation
dataset. The proposed research will allow for better understanding of the
genetics of spatially distributed populations, or metapopulations. Additionally,
the proposed research will parse out the relative roles of random and selective
forces in shaping patterns of genetic diversity. Understanding evolutionary
processes in metapopulations is of practical and applied importance for
conservation biology, invasion biology, and for understanding potential
responses to habitat fragmentation. In terms of deliverables, resulting software
will be made freely available to researchers, being published under the GNU
General Public License and distributed by the Free Software Foundation
(http://www.gnu.org/licenses/).