* 1139888
* The University of Puerto Rico (Rio Piedras) Bridge-to-the-Doctorate Initiative: Providing Multidisciplinary Training in STEM Disciplines at the Ph.D. Level - Cohort IX)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Ana-Rita Mayol, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 987,000.00

The University of Puerto Rico (Rio Piedras),lead institution for the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PR-LSAMP), will administer its ninth
(9th) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program at the institution during the
2011-2013 academic years. This program will provide multidisciplinary training
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines at the
Ph.D. Level to enable a seamless transition from the STEM baccalaureate degree
to STEM graduate studies ultimately to obtain a terminal degree and enter the
STEM workforce. The award supports&lt;br/&gt;twelve STEM graduate students
during the 2011-2013 academic years, increasing to 106&lt;br/&gt;the total
number of BD fellows supported by this alliance since the start of the
NSF&lt;br/&gt;Bridge to the Doctorate Activity in 2003.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program builds on the strengths developed by the
University of Puerto Rico (UPR) in several STEM fields, especially
multidisciplinary fields. The recruitment plan involves strategies targeted to
mainland LSAMP students as well as students from the
territory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eligible students must be admitted to one of the
following UPR PhD programs: Biology,&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry, Chemical Engineering,
or Chemical Physics. BD fellows will participate in the BD Support Program that
was successfully implemented with the eight previous cohorts in order to enhance
their academic&lt;br/&gt;preparation. Students are encouraged to complete a
summer research internship at national and international strategic partner
research centers of PR EPSCoR and the Institute of Tropical Ecology (ITES). The
program continues to coordinate its activities with other NSF-funded projects
that are managed by the Resource Center for Science and Engineering (RCSE) and
by pertinent UPR graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After completing the
first two years in the BD program, BD fellows apply for fellowships in the
following RCSE/UPR programs: GK-12, NSF-EPSCoR IFN, NASA EPSCoR, NASA Space
Grant,&lt;br/&gt;DoE EPSCoR, CREST-CATEC, and RISE. This large array of research
and educational&lt;br/&gt;programs also benefit from the recruited BD fellows
while they facilitate completion of&lt;br/&gt;their doctoral degree. A tracking
system, designed by PR-LSAMP, documents&lt;br/&gt;participant progress,
including completion of degree until they enter the workforce,
and&lt;br/&gt;beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of the UPR BD
Activity develops a highly competitive&lt;br/&gt;STEM education and research
enterprise required to advance Puerto Rico?s economic&lt;br/&gt;development and
meets the national need for diverse STEM professionals. By&lt;br/&gt;increasing
the number of STEM professionals, more college students, in
particular&lt;br/&gt;those at 4-year colleges, where the largest population of
first-generation college will be taught by PhD level professors/researchers.
Moreover, the former BD fellows become role models for other students from
historically underrepresented minority groups across the Nation, who become
interested in pursuing STEM careers.