* 1139963
* Collaborative Research: Science with LWA1
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Steven Ellingson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 02/28/2017
* USD 451,259.00

This is a collaborative award to the University of New Mexico and Virginia Tech
to operate the first station of the Long Wavelength Array (LWA1). LWA1 was
completed in April 2011 and is currently an operating radio observatory,
performing observations resulting from its first call for proposals in addition
to a continuing program of commissioning and characterization. The instrument
consists of 256 dual-polarization dipoles, which are digitized and combined into
beams. Four independently-steerable dual-polarization beams are available, each
with two windows of 16 MHz bandwidth that can be independently tuned to any
frequency between 10 MHz and 88 MHz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LWA1 provides unique
new capabilities for Galactic science, pulsar science, solar and planetary
science, space weather, cosmology, and searches for astrophysical transients.
Results from the LWA1 will detect or severely constrain the presence of hot
Jupiters within 50 parsecs of Earth. The LWA1 will provide high resolution in
frequency and in time to examine phenomena such as solar bursts, giant pulses
from the Crab Pulsar, and pulsars over a 4:1 frequency range that includes the
poorly-understood turnover and steep-spectrum regimes. The Epoch of Reionization
will be explored via an NSF-supported project called LEDA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the area of broader impacts, LWA1 will develop
engineering talent required for future instruments such as the Hydrogen Epoch of
Reionization Array (HERA), will increase the participation of Hispanics in
astronomy, and will provide opportunities for the direct involvement of K-12
students in observing with no impact on its primary science mission. LWA1 is a
university-developed instrument in which students and post-docs have played, and
should continue to play, an essential role as developers and users.