* 1139176
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Tectonic and Paleomagnetic Study of the Early Cenozoic Rotation and Extrusion of Asian Crust Around the Eastern Himalayan Syntaxis
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2011,12/31/2011
* John Geissman, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2011
* USD 116,607.00

A research team from the University of New Mexico and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology is investigating the processes by which continental lithosphere is
deformed to form syntaxes, regions within orogenic belts where there is a
pronounced change in the orientation of structural fabrics over a short
distance, in the actively deforming region around the Eastern Himalayan
syntaxis. Previous work on the upper Jurassic to lower Tertiary redbeds in the
Lanping Simao fold belt of western Yunnan indicates that the process of early
Cenozoic extrusion of southeast Asia is complicated and heterogeneous.
Specifically, clockwise vertical axis rotation of parts of the crust have been
as large as 120 degrees in the western part of the Lanping Simao fold belt,
whereas the eastern part remains apparently unrotated. It is inferred that the
two parts of the belt are separated by a previously unrecognized shear zone that
played a major role in the extrusion process. These results suggest that the
prevailing paradigm for extrusion at the eastern Himalayan syntaxis and other
syntaxial areas, involving translation of discrete blocks that remain internally
undeformed, is inconsistent with several observations. Similar complexities
probably exist for other parts, namely to the west of the Lanping-Simao belt, of
the extruded Indochina crustal fragments. This project extends paleomagnetic and
tectonic studies into other regions of the extruded Indochina crustal fragment
to define in more extensive detail the deformation, including translation and
rotation, of crustal fragments around the eastern Himalayan syntaxis. The
primary focus is on: (1) the Baoshan tectonic element in far southwest Yunnan
province, where lower Tertiary strata are exposed close to important structures;
(2) northwest Vietnam, where the southernmost part of the Lanping Simao fold
belt is exposed; (3) the Qiangtiang elements in eastern Tibet, where Cretaceous/
Paleogene rock, as the northward continuation of the Lanping-Simao belt are
exposed (4) selected parts of the Chuxiong basin, northeast of the Red River
Fault system; and (5) the Chengling-Mengliang and Linchang elements, immediately
west of the Lanping-Simao belt, where Jurassic red beds are well-exposed. This
project will better define the regional extent of parts of Southeast Asia that
have experienced large magnitude crustal rotations and integrate this
information with observations to better understand how the entire top down to
bottom up Asian lithosphere has deformed during India's collision. The study
area, as well as the entire Himalayan region as part of a broad collisional belt
stretching from the Iberian Peninsula to the tip of Southeast Asia, has been the
subject of considerable geological interest for decades and the genesis of the
great syntaxial regions remains a first-order controversy in tectonics. This
project will provide important insight into the processes by which these large
structures form. Undergraduate and graduate students are gaining valuable
experience in the laboratory and field components of this study. Importantly,
they and their mentors benefit from close collaborations with scientists from
People's Republic of China and Vietnam.