* 1139501
* Strategies: Smart Clothing, Smart Girls:  Engineering via Apparel Design
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Lucy Dunne, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 09/30/2016
* USD 290,745.00

Smart Clothing, Smart Girls is a strategy proposal using apparel design as a
vehicle to attract middle school girls to STEM learning and engineering careers.
Based on a theoretical framework that supports mechanisms for engaging young,
female participants in STEM, the project team has thoughtfully designed an
intervention that is hands-on, collaborative, and relevant - all combinations
that have shown to improve how girls develop STEM identities, build self
efficacy, and become motivated to pursue STEM-related activities. The project is
developing two types of curricular models, one for on-campus experiences at
Cornell and University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, and one for summer camp
experiences with partners at 4-H and Girls Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
applies iterative design research to develop and test the construction of four
modules. Relevant STEM topics are introduced each module focusing on the
essential components of wearable technologies, which includes understanding
material properties (thermal properties, impact protection, etc.), electrical
circuits and electronics, 2D to 3D visualization, and the engineering design
process. During the first year of the project, curricular modules are being
designed and evaluated for a 40 hour summer experience on each campus. The
second year, the camp experiences are refined and repeated, informed by
evaluation of the first year. 4-H and Girls Inc. educators are deeply involved
in the curricular module development so as to become familiar with the content
and how to facilitate the modules. And in year three, the project team adapts
the modules to formats which will be used by 4-H and Girls Inc. in off-site
interactive experiences. Dissemination materials for this project include a
detailed website, interactive video clips, and teaching kits (materials and
curriculum). A total of 200 girls will test the content modules over three
years. Eight leaders from 4-H and Girls Inc. will also be trained in project
content delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make significant
contributions to the field by furthering what is known about effective
engagement strategies for underrepresented populations from urban and rural
environments, particularly middle school females, thus changing the way they
perceive STEM and STEM careers. It also provides ample opportunity for enhancing
the way emerging technologies are incorporated into informal learning
environments.