* 1139199
* Fear, Food, and Infections:   Linking Host Behavior to Disease Transmission in the Ranavirus-Salamander System
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Jesse Brunner, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2013
* USD 194,565.00

Jesse L. Brunner, Proposal EF- 0914418, Fear, Food, and Infections: Linking Host
Behavior to Disease Transmission in the Ranavirus-Salamander System.

Detailed knowledge of how infectious agents are transmitted is key to predicting
whether an infectious disease will invade, persist, and spread, and to designing
control strategies.. Yet we know very little about how transmission works in
real world systems. Much of our present understanding stems from models that
assume hosts contact each other randomly, like molecules colliding in a chemical
reaction. Animals are not molecules; they mate, forage, fight, and flock, and
these behaviors can drive the spread of disease. This project will use a
salamander-virus model system coupled with simple mathematical models to
evaluate how common host behaviors, such as foraging for food and avoiding
predators, shape transmission dynamics. Experiments are proposed to evaluate how
certain host behaviors (e.g., by introducing a predator) influence the spread of
a virus through the population. For instance, one would predict that when
animals aggregate together in the face of a predator, disease transmission will
increase. Alternatively, when hosts reduce their movements (e.g., when hiding)
transmission may slow.

This study will provide the foundation for a predictive, behavior-based theory
of disease transmission. This study may also lead to novel ways of intervening
in disease outbreaks (e.g., by carefully arranging food resources or refuges
from predators). The investigator will offer short workshops on wildlife disease
epidemiology and modeling to students and wildlife professionals, and train
undergraduate and graduate researchers in behavioral ecology, disease ecology,
epidemiology and statistics, as well as in laboratory and field methods.