* 1139554
* Affective and Deliberative Processes in Decision Making Across the Adult Life Span
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Joseph Mikels, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2015
* USD 393,151.00

Many Western societies are rapidly aging - in the United States, for example,
demographers project a dramatic increase in the number of older adults in the
next 20 years due to the increase in life expectancy over the past century. This
trend raises concern among decision researchers and policy analysts because
older adults are being charged more and more with the task of making crucial,
complex decisions in such areas as retirement planning, financial management,
and healthcare at the same time they are experiencing declines in deliberative
psychological processes critical to decision making. The proposed research will
examine whether the reasoning strategies older adults employ might help them
overcome the cognitive deficits associated with aging and allow them to make
effective choices in the most consequential life domains. That is, the proposed
research will examine whether motivational shifts toward emotional goals and
intuitive reasoning in later life could help assuage the declines in the
deliberative cognitive processes critical to optimal decision making. More
specifically, the research will: (1) examine the extent to which younger and
older adults rely on affective/intuitive versus cognitive/deliberative decision
processes and the factors associated with the different strategies employed by
younger and older adults; (2) explore how the myriad changes that occur with
increased age - including cognitive decline, preservation of emotional
processes, motivational shifts toward emotional goals, and increased life
experience - impact decision making; and (3) uncover the positive and negative
downstream consequences of affective versus deliberative decision processes
across the adult life span. By pursuing these three aims, this project promises
to increase our understanding of affective and deliberative processes in
decision making across the adult life span, and guide the way to proscriptive
recommendations for how to improve decision making among both older and younger
adults.