* 1139754
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Environmental Variability, Settlement and Status Differentiation at Uxbenka
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,10/31/2014
* Keith Prufer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2014
* USD 9,017.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Keith M. Prufer, Mr. Ethan K. Kalosky will conduct
a study of household decision-making strategies and the origins of wealth/status
inequalities at the Classic Period (ca. AD 250 -900) Maya site of Uxbenká.
Located in southern Belize, Uxbenká is an ideal site to undertake this study.
Ongoing research at Uxbenká has revealed that the site possesses the oldest and
longest occupational history in the region. Most settlements consist of small
rubble mounds that are the household remains of Uxbenká's agricultural populous.
Mr. Kalosky has spent a number of field seasons surveying the landscape at
Uxbenká to produce a more detailed understanding of the spatial distribution and
extent of settlement at this site. His dissertation will examine social and
ecological variables that may have influenced household decisions regarding
where to settle on the landscape, the potential impact of those decisions on
status and wealth differences that are evident between households.

The intellectual merit of this project resides in its contribution to ongoing
discourse regarding the origins of social complexity in the Maya Lowlands and
throughout the world. Furthermore, the resulting model may prove to have utility
for similar environmental-settlement studies conducted elsewhere. The work can
provide insight and place in deep chronological context patterns observed in
small scale village organization in a contemporary context in many regions of
the developing world.

Previous research on the origins of social complexity in the Maya Lowlands has
often taken a top-down approach, focusing on the role of elite political actors
in shaping the fabric of society. More contemporary research, however, suggests
that societal organization may in fact be more influenced by the aggregate
decisions of individuals and households who make up the majority of a society's
populous. This project will employ a combination of continued archaeological and
landscape survey, excavation of household remains, and chronology building to
generate a predictive model for the most suitable areas for habitation on the
Uxbenká landscape. The model will in turn allow one to better understand factors
that influenced household decisions regarding where to settle on the landscape
across space and time. Consequently, one can then begin to explore how
settlement location acted as a potential source for variation in household
organization and status in the context of demographic expansion throughout the
Classic Period occupation of the site. It is suspected that in-filling of the
landscape generated new opportunities for previously equitable households to
differentiate their status, leading to more hierarchical and heterarchical forms
of social organization throughout Uxbenká's Classic Period growth. One of the
primary hypotheses is that established occupation and use of highly valued
settlement locations provided one means by which households could achieve
increased status in a dynamic social environment. Determining how certain
variables influenced the values placed on different settlement locations is a
critical component for better understanding the circumstances in which social
complexity emerges and is maintained.

The broader impacts involve aiding in the intellectual and professional
development of young scholar. Additionally, this project places emphasis on
collaboration with modern descendants of the ancestral Maya to directly engage
in educational programs related to their own cultural heritage. Results will be
disseminated to broader audiences via peer-reviewed journal publications, and
presentations at public forums in the US and abroad.