* 1139225
* Conference: 2012 Biomolecular Interactions &amp; Methods GRC &amp; GRS to be held in Galveston, TX January 14-20,2012
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Linda Nicholson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Ringe
* 08/31/2012
* USD 5,370.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award is in support of a Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) on "Biomolecular Interactions and Methods" (BIM) will be held on January
15th - 20th, 2012 at the historic Hotel Galvez in Galveston, Texas. In addition,
the second associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will be held at the same
location on the preceding weekend (January 14th - 15th, 2012). The 2012 GRC/GRS
will provide an international forum for information exchange that will
incorporate a broad array of both experimental and theoretical approaches and
catalyze new connections between the atomic and cellular levels, enhancing our
understanding of how intact biological systems carry out their complex functions
through tightly regulated interactions. The GRS is specifically designed to
encourage and enrich young scientists. This meeting will provide a unique
opportunity for a diverse group of scientists to share their ideas and discuss
the latest research that underpins biological interactions, from atoms to
organisms, to push the frontiers of quantitative biological research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Dynamic interactions between
biological molecules underlie the cellular processes that govern all living
organisms. While molecular biology and genetics approaches identify key players
in a given biological process, the detailed characterization of these players
and the timing of their interactions is required to develop an in-depth
understanding of their functional roles in the cell. Current methods are now
capable of providing a time-resolved view of isolated biological interactions.
Moreover, theoretical frameworks have been established to model not only
specific molecular recognition events, but also systems of interacting
molecules, bringing us tantalizingly closer to the prediction of cellular
outcomes. This meeting will gather together a highly interdisciplinary group of
scientists, with expertise ranging from computer simulation to experiments
including single molecules, biochemistry, biophysics, live cell imaging and
studies of intact systems, in order to define the frontier of research to
predict how events at the individual molecule level must be correlated to
overall cellular processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The GRC
organization has a strong commitment to supporting diversity in the sciences.
For the 2012 GRC BIM, 50% of the formal leadership roles are being held by
women: two of the four meeting organizers, four of the eight Discussion Leaders,
and one of the two GRS /GRC keynote speakers are women. We have identified one
Hispanic scientist (Bertrand Garcia-Moreno, Johns Hopkins U.) and one African
American scientist (Paul Adams, U. Arkansas) as speakers. Of the proposed
additional GRC speakers, 25% are women and 7% are underrepresented minority
scientists, for a total of anticipated participation of women and minorities as
highly visible speakers at this meeting. The GRS is organized by and for
graduate students and postdocs, and is dedicated to the training and mentoring
of these young scientists. The GRC and GRS planned programs are highly
interdisciplinary, with a key objective of fostering exchange of concepts and
ideas across diverse areas of science to break down barriers and generate novel
directions of investigation.&lt;br/&gt;This conference and seminar are supported
by the Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster, in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.