* 1139178
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Identifying activity areas at ancient Maya salt works, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Heather McKillop, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,800.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Heather McKillop, E. Cory Sills will conduct
dissertation research to clarify the organization of craft production at one
Early Classic (A.D. 300-600) and one Late Classic (A.D. 600-900) ancient Maya
salt work in Paynes Creek National Park, Belize. Ms. Sills seeks to identify
evidence of salt production and/or other activities. Were the sites dedicated to
a single activity, household workshops, or used in "multicrafting"? Ms. Sills
conducted her dissertation fieldwork as part of the ongoing NSF "Ancient Maya
Wooden Architecture and the Salt Industry" project directed by Dr. McKillop.
Wooden architecture and ceramics are preserved underwater on the sea floor in a
peat bog at the Paynes Creek salt works. The peat has preserved wood, botanical
remains, and large ceramic vessels, but not bone. Ongoing research indicates the
sites were salt works identified from the large quantities of briquetage -
pottery used to boil brine over fires to make salt. This evidence suggests that
the salt works may be specialized and not associated with households, an
interpretation that will add a new aspect to the study of economic production
and distribution for the ancient Maya and other ancient civilizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context the research is significant because
it will provide insight into the intersection of economic and social realms in a
traditional society and how these changed over time. Archaeology provides the
ability to examine change over long time scales - centuries and millennia - and
thus discern patterns which might otherwise be invisible. In many traditional
societies in the world today, production proceeds in a family context and the
results of this research may provide increased understanding of such
situations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The importance of salt production in the
ancient Maya economy is known. In order to evaluate the organization of
production, transect excavations were conducted at two of the Paynes Creek salt
works by Ms. Sills in June of 2010. In this NSF grant, Ms. Sills will use
chemical analysis of marine sediment along excavated transects to detect if
there is evidence of household waste not preserved in the peat. Neutron
activation analysis will identify if the pottery is of local or non-local
manufacture. The results of the compositional analysis of ceramics will aid in
determining if the salt works were organized locally or integrated into a larger
production and exchange system. The 3D imaging of pottery sherds will help to
define the shapes and sizes of containers. Clusters of wooden posts from both
sites will be radiocarbon dated to refine site chronology since the briquetage
is not temporally sensitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are
multiple. Project participants will promote the results of the project within
the United States and internationally. The researchers will publish reports and
data obtained in their project to a diverse array of interested stakeholders
including both public and professional audiences. Public outreach efforts in
Belize will include producing replicas of artifacts for displays in Punta Gorda,
Belize as part of an Archaeological Institute of America Site Preservation Grant
to Dr. McKillop. These efforts will seek to improve public understanding of the
ancient Maya through the development of science, archaeology, and anthropology.
This project will further the mentorship and scientific training of
undergraduate and graduate students working in the archaeological lab and
Digital Imaging and Visualization in Archaeology (DIVA) lab at Louisiana State
University by involving them in the analysis of artifacts and development of
public outreach in southern Belize.