* 1139850
* 2011 FGLSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate - BD Site:  University of South Florida
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

University of South Florida will serve as the 2011-2013 Bridge to the Doctorate
(BD)&lt;br/&gt;Project site for the Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority Participation&lt;br/&gt;(FGLSAMP) Program. The goal of the program is
that the alliance BD fellows admitted directly into doctoral programs will
complete degree requirements in five years (post
bachelors).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In accordance with the goal of the National
Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;and FGLSAMP's commitment to providing experiential
exposure opportunities, the new&lt;br/&gt;FGLSAMP USF BD Program extends the
successful outcomes and best practices of&lt;br/&gt;previous training grant
awards (AGEP, CREST BD, IGERT, GK-12 and Sloan) to all STEM&lt;br/&gt;fields,
including mathematics, earth system sciences, biological &amp; physical sciences
and&lt;br/&gt;engineering/computer Science. The 2011-2013 cohort involves
international research experiences and leverages the NSF-DoE Cooperative
Activity to the graduate arena. The proposal improves an already successful
mentoring and training model used in the previous cohorts to this selection of
students and the entire USF graduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique
feature of this program is that it leverages extensive institutional
commitment&lt;br/&gt;from across USF, Sloan Foundation and McKnight Foundation
with commitment from&lt;br/&gt;companies in the Tampa bay community and
collaborators all over the world are committed to ensuring success of both, the
trainees and the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2003, 14 STEM BD doctoral
degrees have been conferred through the Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation.