* 1139143
* Topics in the geometry of Banach spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/16/2010,04/30/2013
* Daniel Freeman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Loredana Lanzani
* 04/30/2013
* USD 61,238.00

This project specifically addresses problems in the geometry of Banach spaces
with a focus on the analysis of coordinate systems such as bases and frames.
Coordinate systems are widely used in both application and theory, strongly
connecting these problems to other areas of mathematics such as approximation
theory, descriptive set theory, and differential topology. For example, new
Banach spaces are often constructed by explicitly building a basis for the
space. In this spirit, this project will address the construction of new Banach
spaces with the property that every bounded operator on the space is a multiple
of the identity plus a compact operator. Moreover, the project will also study
the greedy approximation properties of coordinate systems in Banach spaces.
Greedy approximation is based on the idea of always taking the "biggest piece"
in each step of an iterative algorithm. This project will consider the existence
of greedy bases and the convergence of greedy algorithms in particular Banach
spaces. Beyond greedy approximation, this project intends to extend the
descriptive set theory approach to bases, which has given remarkable insight
into the structural theory of Banach spaces, to that of frames. Furthermore,
this project will work on adapting the techniques and structure of Hilbert and
Banach frames to the continuously varying setting of vector
bundles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structural attributes of Banach
spaces and Hilbert spaces make them ideal settings for analyzing many problems
in mathematics and engineering. A common example is encoding and transmitting
signals. Bases in a Hilbert space or Banach space give a unique representation
for the vectors in the space while the representation given by a frame is
redundant. Signal encoding and transmission is often accomplished by sending
coefficients with respect to some basis. This strategy, however, is not robust
in the face of error, as any loss or corruption of basis coefficients results in
the loss of entire dimensions of the signal. This is where frames come in as
their redundancy distributes error loss over the whole space instead of
concentrating it in isolated dimensions. Frames now play an important role in
signal processing, and the study of their geometry in both Hilbert and Banach
spaces is a growing area of research. Additionally, sometimes it is important to
consider not just a single vector space, but some related collection of spaces.
For example, the tangent bundle of a surface is the collection of tangent planes
to the surface. In this case we want a basis for the tangent space at each point
which moves smoothly over the surface. It is impossible to find such a basis for
many surfaces. On the contrary, it is always possible to find a
redundant&lt;br/&gt;frame for the tangent space which moves smoothly. Given
this, it is naturally of interest to study such frames.