* 1139230
* Artwork diagnostics: an onsite electrochemical monitoring method for early detection of coating failure
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Tami Clare, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Tami Clare of Portland State University and researchers at
the Seattle Art Museum (SAM) will develop an analytical methodology, based on
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) that will permit the measurement of
the coating integrity of outdoor artwork. The project aims to overcome
significant barriers that prevented widespread use of EIS by the cultural
heritage science community. Most notably, electrochemical testing typically
requires artwork to be conductive and wired to instrumentation at an uncoated
region of the artwork. PI Clare and her coworkers will fabricate and use
surface-mounted electrodes that can be quickly attached (and cleanly removed)
from the coating surfaces. They will investigate surface-electrode strategies,
identify specific analytical parameters in the laboratory using test panels
subjected to accelerated aging, and use this knowledge to conduct routine,
onsite testing at the Olympic Sculpture Park in Seattle, WA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diagnostic tool for rapid analysis of coatings on works
of art would be transformative to the field of cultural heritage science and
beyond. It has the potential to impact the practice of infrastructure
maintenance (buildings and bridges). Methods and electrode developments explored
in this project are transferrable to any museum in the world and will allow for
tailored maintenance regimens that are artwork-specific. The project provides a
unique opportunity to engage the public in science literacy education, and
highlight the use of modern analytical tools in the science of cultural heritage
preservation. It will provide excellent training opportunities to students who
wish to train in state of the art analytical methodology and in the field of
cultural heritage science.