* 1139915
* EAGER:  Social Information Dissemination: A Market Based Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Vishal Misra, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,993.00

Social network services have transformed daily lives and have influenced most
aspects of society in the developed world, including politics, entertainment,
sports and education. These services provide information that is both generated
and consumed by their users. In some cases it has resulted in billions of
dollars of commerce, but in other cases the search for a revenue stream
persists. The true economic value of this information and its dissemination is
neither understood today nor recognized by providers of online social network
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project entails a research approach combining
the analysis of competitive market equilibria and their computational
properties, analysis of online social networks and their communication
properties, and cooperative game theory, to reach such an understanding and
provide mechanisms to benefit from it. The project will also illustrate and
validate the mechanisms on case studies. More specifically, the project aims to
understand the impact of social influence on the Arrow-Debreu market model. The
project investigates the nature of utility functions, the nature of social
influence graphs, and the mix of traders in the information dissemination
market. It aims to understand the effects of these on the computational
complexity of market equilibria as well as the convergence of market
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide fundamental insights on
the economics of social information dissemination. It will enable a better
understanding of these complex systems and will provide fundamental tools for
more efficient and robust designs. A successful completion of the project will
not only provide theoretical and technical contributions, but will affect the
design and implementation of the next generation of social networks and the
information market that exists therein. The results can aid in the public
understanding of such complex systems as well as inform policy debate.