* 1139869
* The Revenge Motive: Understanding Public Bellicosity and Closure in a Post-9/11 World
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* John Dennis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2013
* USD 70,000.00

Although some would argue that American's support for the Afghanistan and Iraq
Wars has been based on increased needs for security in a post-9/11 world, there
is also evidence that public support for these wars has been more deeply rooted
in needs for retribution and vengeance. Which explanation accounts for support
for U.S. involvement in Afghanistan and Iraq has important theoretical and
practical implications. This research empirically tests competing hypotheses
about what Osama bin Laden's (OBL's) death means to U.S. citizens, with a
particular focus on the implications of his death for people's policy
preferences with respect to continued American military involvement in the
Middle East. OBL's death is a watershed moment and opportunity to study (a) how
people cope with terrorist attacks, (b) the role that needs for and achieving
vengeance play in Americans' public policy preferences, and (c) how important
vengeful motives are relative to other concerns such as security,
incapacitation, and deterrence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants for this
study are a subsample of approximately 7,000 individuals who completed surveys
in either 2001 or 2003 that included measures of desires for revenge/vengeance
for the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the
Pentagon. Although a great deal of time has passed since the initial surveys,
the advantages of returning to these participants are numerous, including not
having to rely on retrospective accounts of how vengeful people felt in the more
immediate aftermath of 9/11, and the ability to more firmly establish that
proposed causes (e.g., post-9/11 needs for vengeance and support for an expanded
war against terrorism) preceded the proposed effects (e.g., a sense of "mission
accomplished" at the death of OBL). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study adds to the
still limited knowledge of how Americans respond to terrorist threats, and the
full post-attack consequences of terrorist attacks for public opinion and policy
preferences. This RAPID proposal fulfills the NSF RAPID funding criterion of the
need for urgent support as well as the other funding criteria of intellectual
merit and broader impacts. NSF reviewed this proposal internally.