* 1139836
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Settlement, Political and Social Transformation in Armagh, Northern Ireland
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Timothy Chevral, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Tina L. Thurston, Jennifer Shaffer-Foster will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. Building on two past seasons of
archaeological fieldwork she will conduct a geochemical survey followed by small
scale excavation in County Armagh, Northern Ireland. Armagh contains both an
Iron Age (700 BC-AD 400) civic-ceremonial center and an Early Medieval (c. AD
400-1200) Christian administrative center, legendarily founded by Patrick. The
region thus has the potential to shed light on how social and politicas
structures developed and changed over this extended time span. Ms Shaffer-Foster
will identify sites belonging to a variety of social classes, permitting
consideration of both the role of ruling authorities and community-based
conditions. This will provide a more balanced understanding of changing
sociopolitical relationships, an approach that has applications in both
prehistory and the present. It will also provide insight into how, in
subsistence based societies social institutions serve to provide stability and
mediate change. Archaeology has the ability to trace change over long periods of
time and the lessons learned are applicable in third world regions of the world
today.

During the Irish Early Medieval period, raths, circular domestic enclosures with
a wall and ditch, were constructed across the island. Archaeological work has
focused on these structures because they are highly visible, are sometimes very
wealthy, and because unenclosed, or ?flat? sites lie hidden under ubiquitous
pasture beyond the scope of visual prospection. Yet understanding these little-
studied flat sites is crucial, as they appear contemporary with raths and likely
housed the majority of the population from a range of socioeconomic backgrounds.
Because of their near-zero visibility, the project uses geochemistry to
systematically identify flat sites, determine their use vis-Ã -vis raths, and
examine how property was distributed, providing a ?bottom-up? as well as a
revised ?top-down? perspective in an era that saw shifts from a typically more
egalitarian Iron Age basis to a more centralized organization. Full coverage
geochemical survey, managed within a GIS database, will reveal sites in the
landscapes surrounding five raths, progressively further south from Armagh and
thus the oversight of newly established authorities. Results of test excavations
in ordinary settlements indicated by elevated phosphate can be compared with the
better-known elite sites that dominate the region's archaeology.

Results will be made publically available online and the project will further
Ms. Shaffer-Foster's academic and intellectual development.