* 1139158
* Making Sense at Scale with Algorithms, Machines, and People
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2020
* Michael Jordan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 10,000,000.00

Making Sense at Scale with Algorithms, Machines, and People&lt;br/&gt;University
of California, Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world is increasingly awash in
data. As more and more human activities move on line, and as a growing array of
connected devices become integral part of daily life, the amount and diversity
of data being generated continues to explode. According to one estimate, more
than a Zettabyte (one billion terabytes) of new information was created in 2010
alone, with the rate of new information increasing by roughly 60% annually. This
data takes many forms: free-form tweets, text messages, blogs and documents;
structured streams produced by computers, sensors and scientific instruments;
and media such as images and video.&lt;br/&gt;Buried in this flood of data are
the keys to solving huge societal problems, for improving productivity and
efficiency, for creating new economic opportunities, and for unlocking new
discoveries in medicine, science and the humanities. However, raw data alone is
not sufficient; we can only make sense of our world by turning this data into
knowledge and insight. This challenge, known as the Big Data problem, cannot be
solved by the straightforward application of current data analytics technology
due to the sheer volume and diversity of information. Rather, to solve it
requires throwing away old preconceptions about data management and breaking
down many of the traditional boundaries in and around Computer Science and
related disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Algorithms, Machines, and People
(AMP) expedition at the University of California, Berkeley is addressing this
challenge head-on. AMP is a collaboration of researchers with a wide range of
data-related expertise, committed to working together to create a new data
analytics paradigm. AMP will produce fundamental innovations in and a deep
integration of three very different types of computational resources:&lt;br/&gt;
1. Algorithms: new machine-learning and analysis methods that can operate at
large scale and can give flexible tradeoffs between timeliness, accuracy, and
cost.&lt;br/&gt; 2. Machines: systems infrastructure that allows programmers to
easily harness the power of scalable cloud and cluster computing for making
sense of data.&lt;br/&gt; 3. People: crowdsourcing human activity and
intelligence to create hybrid human/computer solutions to problems not solvable
by today's automated data analysis technologies alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMP
research will be guided and evaluated through close collaboration with domain
experts in key societal applications including: cancer genomics and personalized
medicine, large-scale sensing for traffic prediction and environmental
monitoring, urban planning, and network security. Advances pioneered by the
project will be made widely available through the development of the Berkeley
Data Analysis System (BDAS), an open source software platform that seamlessly
blends Algorithm, Machine and People resources to solve big data
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more information visit
http://amplab.cs.berkeley.edu