* 1139068
* Educational supplement for the 30th Summer Symposium in Molecular Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Ann Daniel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susannah Gal
* 05/31/2012
* USD 6,864.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The 30th Penn State Summer Symposium in Molecular
Biology will be held June 21-24, 2011 at University Park, PA. The topic of this
symposium is "Chromatin and Epigenetic Regulation of Transcription". The
symposium will cover chromatin organization and the mechanistic basis for
genetic and epigenetic regulation of transcription. The session topics are as
follows: Genomics, Nuclear Organization, Chromatin Mechanisms, Epigenetics, and
Elongation Control. The roster of 22 invited speakers is composed of
internationally acclaimed scientists who lead research in the field of chromatin
structure and epigenetics. The unique intellectual strength of the Penn State
Summer symposium is that it is combines the top scientific level of the meeting
with location at a big University campus that makes it readily accessible to a
wide body of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students undergoing summer
training at the Penn State Hershey and University Park campuses. A group of
faculty at Pennsylvania State University have assembled a list of 22 invited
speakers with an additional 30 oral presentations selected from submitted
abstracts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The summer symposium
will provide a vehicle for exchange of information between scientists at Penn
State and other institutions. It is financially accessible to undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, who comprise about 75% of attendees.
Many of these students are members of underrepresented groups or represent rural
areas in central Pennsylvania. The plenary lecture is open to the general
public.