* 1139986
* Collaborative Research: ARI-MA: Very large area, high sensitivity neutron detection system
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* MANUEL QUEVEDO, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 261,245.00

The overall technical goal of this program is to study the science and
technology needed to develop very large area, rugged, high sensitivity, low
power, pixilated, thermal neutron detectors. Very large area detector systems,
meters on a side, provide the large aperture needed to quickly scan large
containers with high sensitivity. There are three technology areas that will be
addressed to meet the goals; 1) the neutron conversion layer, 2) the charged
particle detection layer, and 3) the high sensitivity active matrix pixel
electronics for low parasitic capacitance detection and signal amplification to
allow large arrays. For each of the three technologies there are multiple
approaches we will pursue to provide both performance and reliability. For the
neutron conversion layer our first approach is to evaluate nanoparticles
containing Boron-10 and/or Lithium-6 dispersed in a polymer-based matrix in
contact with a thin-film sensor (converter-on-diode). Our longer term approach
is to evaluate nanoparticles containing Boron-10 and/or Lithium-6 dispersed in a
solution processable semiconductor diode (converter-in-diode). For the charged
particle detection system we will develop a fundamental understanding for the
current generation and collection in thin-film semiconductor diodes induced by
charged particles. To maximize sensitivity while maintaining selectivity we will
develop high sensitivity pixel electronics, which will require very low noise
amplifiers. We will evaluate new amplifier designs based on thin-film
transistors. A significant goal of this project will be developing models to
simulate device performance, as well as system performance to evaluate system
sensitivity for different detection scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of
the quickly dwindling supply of Helium-3 a new neutron detection technology is
needed. Our project will develop a novel thermal neutron detection system that
will provide performance never seen before in nuclear threat detection. The
overall concept is based on the idea that overall sensitivity scales with the
area of the detector and that the overall selectivity vs. false positives scales
with the ability to locate the source of the neutrons by pixelating the
detector, increasing the signal-to-noise. Because the proposed technologies are
compatible with flat panel display manufacturing technology, the detectors
should be relatively inexpensive. Also, because all of the proposed processes
are compatible with low temperature plastic substrates, ruggedness is inherent
in the design, rather than an afterthought. A significant part of the program is
the training of undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students that will
learn about nuclear threat detection all the way from the fundamental
interactions of neutrons and charged particles with matter to testing devices
for sensitivity and radiation hardness, an opportunity available to few students
anywhere. As part of the training we will develop a series of classes that can
be taught at the senior undergraduate / graduate level, or as a short course for
people working in nuclear detection. University of Texas at Dallas and Arizona
State University have teamed to work together to develop these large area
thermal neutron detectors, with close collaboration with the Army Research Labs.
Prototypes will be fabricated in the Flexible Display Center at ASU, providing a
path to making the technology available.