* 1139918
* ARI-MA Scale-up to Success: Pioneering Crystal Growth of Large High Resolution Scintillators
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Charles Melcher, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2013
* USD 385,137.00

The Scintillation Materials Research Center at the University of Tennessee will
carry out research that addresses a critical need in national security.
Currently the ability to detect radioactive materials at border crossings and
ports of entry is limited by the availability and cost of the materials that are
used as radiation sensors. This research will address fundamental aspects of
manufacturing technology that directly impact the affordability of the high
performance detection materials that are needed for effective high speed
scanning of cargo. Innovative synthesis techniques will be developed with the
goal of improving the sensitivity and lowering the cost of materials that have
the capability of uniquely identifying specific nuclear threats. If successful,
this technology will yield improvements in both efficiency and sensitivity of
nuclear threat detection as well as significant increases in availability and
affordability. The same nuclear detection technology is likely to also find
applications to other areas serving the public interest including nuclear
medicine and sensors used in the exploration for energy
reserves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the Scintillation Materials
Research Center will address a grand challenge in radiation detection by
developing crystal growth technology aimed at enabling the production of large
size (&gt; 1 cubic inch) gamma-ray scintillators with less than 1% energy
resolution at 662 keV. The properties of currently available detection materials
limit the performance of radiation detection systems. For most gamma and neutron
detection applications, these materials must be available in large size at a
reasonable cost while maintaining the required energy resolution to
unambiguously identify various nuclear signatures. For gamma-ray and neutron
detection applications, scintillators currently offer more options for room
temperature operation and large-scale production while semiconductors tend to
have better energy resolution. New fundamental understanding of the materials
properties of recently discovered scintillators will be coupled with numerical
simulations of fluid flow and heat/mass transport to drive the design of new
crystal growth furnaces and new growth protocols aimed at demonstrating the
potential of large scale production. The effort will focus on recently
discovered scintillators that appear to have inherent advantages for large-scale
production. A key strategy of the program is the tight integration of research
and education that will provide opportunities for students to develop a deeper
knowledge, expertise, and appreciation of this important field.