* 1139345
* Conference: 2011 Neuroethology: Behavior, Evolution &amp; Neurobiology Gordon Research Seminar;  Stonehill College, Massachusetts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* stephen vessey
* 01/31/2012
* USD 14,125.00

This proposal requests partial support for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows to attend an international meeting on neuroethology as part of the
Gordon Research Conference series. The meeting will be held at Stonehill
College, Massachusetts, USA, August 14-19, 2011, and will be preceded by a
Gordon Research Seminar (August 13-14) developed specifically for graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers. The long-term goal of this ongoing
conference is to increase our understanding of the development, function, and
evolution of neural circuits. The 2011 meeting features several sessions that
investigate how animals live in their species-specific sensory worlds. The key
question: Can we use our understanding of sensory systems to link neuroscience
and ecology? The specific aim of this meeting is to convene leaders representing
the forefront of neuroethology research for a 5 day conference in an academic
setting selected to foster interaction. The organizers of the Gordon Research
Seminar and the Gordon Research Conference will target financial support to
minorities underrepresented in science, and will give priority to graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows attending their first Gordon Research
Conference. The broader impact of the Gordon Research Seminar will be the
creation of an opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to
discuss the present and the future of neuroethology in an open, informal
atmosphere that will prepare young scientists to derive maximum benefit from the
full Gordon Research Conference that follows.