* 1139735
* ITR-SCOTUS: A Resource for Collaborative Research in Speech Technology, Linguistics, Decision Processes, and the Law
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2011,08/31/2011
* Jerry Goldman, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 102,520.00

This project will create a digital audio archive that will enable scientists in
several fields to approach novel research issues in speech and language studies,
issues in group decision-making, and issues at the leading edge of human
communication scholarship. The Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS) has
been recording its public proceedings since 3 October 1955. These recordings -
now in the National Archives - span nearly five decades and consist principally
of oral arguments in which justices and attorneys engage in various forms of
persuasion and communication between bench and bar and, obliquely, among the
justices themselves. The arguments have been transcribed professionally across
the entire period, creating a matchless collection of audio materials coupled
with highly accurate transcripts. The audio - along with other activities
captured on audio such as the announcement of opinions - offers a unique
opportunity for researchers across a wide spectrum of disciplines to engage in
novel and transforming research projects that were once thought beyond the reach
of investigators.

The chief result of this work will be a complete and continuing archive of more
than six thousand hours of SCOTUS audio. It will provide synchronized (i.e.,
time-coded) transcripts of the collection, identify and tag individual speakers,
build new mark-up tools for these new domains, and share the corpus with
researchers and faculty. The result of this interaction among political
scientists, legal scholars, linguists, and computer scientists will yield: new
knowledge in the modeling of multi-party discussions with complex goals, novel
strategies in small group decision process analysis, and path-breaking
approaches to extended collaborative commentary addressing the dynamics of human
communication.

The SCOTUS archive will be maintained as a shared public resource to enhance
study and understanding of the Supreme Court of the United States. It will be
available to anyone with World Wide Web access. Based on past experience,
principal audiences include: researchers across diverse domains, teachers and
students, lawyers and litigants, and the visually- and hearing-impaired.

Today, more than a million unique users access selected SCOTUS materials each
month. With a complete and updated SCOTUS archive and improved ability to query
and search, the number of users should expand substantially.

By exploiting common interest and beneficial interactions among diverse research
communities, this project will create a vast collection of digital objects.
Working with partners experienced in data-sharing, the effort aims at
revolutionizing the ability to collaborate with physically distributed teams of
researchers and their students.