* 1139956
* Third International Symposium on Shallow Flows; Iowa City, Iowa; June 4-6, 2012
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* George Constantinescu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2012
* USD 12,000.00

This grant provides partial travel support for students and early-career
scientists attending the Third Symposium on Shallow Flows, a joint meeting of
scientists and engineers to be held 4-6 June 2012 at the University of Iowa.
This meeting, which is co-sponsored by the International Association of
Hydraulic Research, will facilitate exchange of the latest findings and
approaches relevant to diverse phenomena including stable atmospheric and
oceanic boundary layers, river- and hurricane-induced floods, flow through
riparian-zone vegetation and associated hydrological processes, and transport of
contaminants by these flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this
activity derives from exchange of information focused on the improvement of
experimental and eddy-resolving numerical techniques necessary to investigate
large-scale quasi two-dimensional coherent structures and their role in the
transport of mass, heat and contaminants in the geophysical environment. Broader
Impacts will occur through improved assessment and forecasting of near-surface
meteorological, hydrological and ecological processes and associated socio-
economic impacts (such as those from flooding), and by furthering the
educational development and diverse representation among students and early-
career researchers.