* 1139400
* Collaborative Research: Maximizing Mentor Effectiveness In Increasing Student Interest And Success In STEM: An Empirical Approach Employing Robotics Competitions
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Susan Thomas, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 07/31/2016
* USD 515,289.00

This collaborative project is conducting a research study to delineate the
effective components of mentoring for underrepresented and non-underrepresented
students in STEM, utilizing a robotics educational program. To understand STEM
expectations of success and interests in pursuing STEM careers, it is imperative
to understand the achievement-related choices people make when deciding what
areas to study and what careers to pursue. If mentoring is to be used to its
fullest capacity in increasing students' interest in pursuing STEM careers, it
is imperative to delineate what type of mentoring is most effective in
increasing STEM self-efficacy and achievement-related
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is addressing the following research
questions: "Can a general 'best practices' mentoring approach be effective or is
a specific self-efficacy approach needed? Is a combination of the two approaches
optimal? In addition, does student ethnicity moderate the impact of the
mentoring approaches?" Forty-eight teams of approximately 480 male and female
participants represent middle school classes that have not previously
participated in robotics or a similar STEM activity. Team mentors are divided
into those receiving best-practices mentor training, self-efficacy mentor
training, a combination, and no mentor training (control group). All teams
participate in a Botball regional robotics competition organized by the KISS
Institute for Practical Robotics. Employing a mixed factorial design, the study
examines three types of mentor training for their impact on STEM self-efficacy
and expectations of success and/or STEM achievement-related choices. The results
along with the feedback from mentors will be used to develop a mentor-training
package that could be used in all robotics programs and be generalized to other
similar STEM activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on students
who have not participated in a previous robotics competition and are not 'self-
selected' (i.e. have not already voluntarily enrolled in a robotics
competition). Therefore, the research will inform the field if the experience
itself generated a disposition to pursue STEM without the confounding factor
that the participants were already so inclined before the study began.