* 1139318
* Metabolomics: Development of novel metabolic analysis system for 1-butanol production
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2017
* James Liao, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Crane
* 11/30/2017
* USD 2,406,267.00

Biological engineering offers great promise for the production of next
generation biofuels that are a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels. This
research project will use novel high-throughput technologies to understand how
microorganisms, such as baker's yeast and photosynthetic bacteria, produce these
fuel molecules as part of their natural metabolism. Just as advances in DNA
sequencing technology have made it possible to read whole genomes, new methods
allow scientists to measure the metabolome, all the chemicals produced by the
cell's metabolism. This project will combine a deep understanding of the genes
and the chemical processes inside the cell and use novel computer modeling
approaches to guide genetic engineering approaches that will boost the
production of butanol, an advanced biofuel.

Broader Impacts This project will integrate advanced training opportunities for
young scientists in both the US and Japan through collaboration between the
University of California, Los Angeles, Osaka University, Kobe University, and
the Kaiteki Institute of the Mitsubishi Chemical Company in Japan. The training
of students and postdoctoral fellows will be enriched through an exchange
program between the participating laboratories, and by participation in an
international workshop on the new technologies being developed in this project.
A goal of this project is to train the next generation of researchers in the
field of environmentally-conscious biofuels.