* 1139706
* EAGER: Development of a new rock deformation apparatus for investigating Earth's upper mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Philip Skemer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This EAGER project will perform the initial design and development of a new rock
deformation apparatus. The purpose of this apparatus is to study microstructural
and rheological phenomena at the pressures and temperatures of Earth's
lithosphere and upper asthenospheric mantle. As rock deformation apparatus are
not readily available on a commercial basis, funding through the EAGER process
will support the exploratory stage design of the new
apparatus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a new rock deformation
apparatus will benefit the earth sciences community in a number of ways. The
apparatus will be optimized for a critical and under-investigated range of
deformation conditions, which will open doors for new research into the nature
of Earth's upper mantle and the interiors of other terrestrial planets. This
project will assist the development of an early-career scientist; support of
this kind is essential given the small size of the rock deformation community.
Educational opportunities for students and postdoctoral researchers in the PI's
lab will be significant, as they will participate in all phases of the design,
calibration, and implementation of the new apparatus. This participation will
enhance their development as independent scientists, as they learn about some of
the underpinnings and assumptions behind their research. The design of the new
apparatus will be made publically available, and the details of its construction
will be disseminated via the Internet. Access to these designs will benefit
early-career scientists and established researchers as they plan their first
labs or expand existing labs.