* 1139165
* CEDAR: The Role of Gravity Waves in Coupling Longitudinal Variations in the Troposphere to the Thermosphere and Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Thomas Immel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 07/31/2016
* USD 276,834.00

This is a data analysis and modeling effort to be undertaken as part of the
Coupling, Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions program. Atmospheric
waves are one means by which energy and momentum can be transported between
different layers of the atmosphere. Recent results show that the source of non-
migrating tidal waves in the atmosphere -- the uneven distribution of deep cell
convection zones in the troposphere associated with the land-sea contrast --
also gives rise to a varying source of atmospheric gravity waves. The main goal
of this effort is to quantify this source and its potential effects, which is
currently missing from models of the upper atmosphere and ionosphere and may
force a revision in our understanding of how the apparent tidal signature in the
ionosphere is driven by waves in the atmosphere. Global datasets of temperature
and wind from satellite observations together with several advanced global
atmospheric and ionospheric circulation models will be used to determine the
spatial, temporal and spectral characteristics of large-scale gravity waves,
their global effects on tidal variation, and the ionospheric impacts.

Gravity waves are a significant forcing source on Mesosphere-Lower Thermosphere
(MLT) dynamics and their effects strongly impact general circulation and climate
models. In addition, numerical weather prediction models, despite their
tropospheric focus, have been shown to make better predictions when the upper-
atmospheric dynamics are more accurately modeled. The work will be performed
mainly by a post-doctoral scholar and a graduate student, both mentored by the
principal investigator (PI), and in collaboration with data-analysis and
modeling experts at Berkeley and at NCAR.