* 1139495
* Impact of Sahara Dust Layers on Convective Cloud Development and Precipitation over the Tropical Eastern Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Qilong Min, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2016
* USD 399,719.00

The indirect effect currently produces the greatest uncertainty in climate
predictions among all known climate forcing mechanisms. Although tropical deep-
convective cloud systems have great impacts on large-scale atmospheric
circulation, few studies investigate the aerosol impacts on deep convective
cloud systems. To improve our understanding of the aerosol indirect effect, and
to better quantify their role in regional and global climate changes requires
innovative approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research is to utilize comprehensive observation
analysis and cloud resolving simulations using Weather Research and Forecast
(WRF) model coupled with a spectral bin microphysics (SBM) scheme to assess how
mineral dust affects the development of tropical deep-convective cloud systems,
and to understand mechanisms responsible for the observed changes of dust
indirect effect. The combination of our integrated satellite and in-situ data
from multiple instruments/platforms and our innovative analysis techniques will
greatly benefit research community to address key questions of aerosol-cloud
interaction and to develop and validate the realistic representation of aerosol-
cloud-precipitation interactions in advanced models on regional and global
climate model-grid scales. Two outcomes are expected from this research effort,
i.e., (1) the mechanisms responsible for the observed changes in convective
core, stratiform/anvil, and precipitation from the dust-free sector to the dust
sector, and (2) an estimation of the changes in cloud properties and
precipitation imposed by dusts on the deep convective
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;As one of the major
sources of aerosols, Saharan dust can be transported across the tropical North
Atlantic and into the Caribbean region as well as into Europe. Dust affects
cloud properties by the semi-direct effect through changing the radiative
heating, and by the indirect effect through acting as cloud condensation nuclei
(CCN) and ice nuclei (IN). The heterogeneous nucleation imposed by dust occurs
at warmer temperature in a deep convective cloud could potentially change the
vertical profile of latent heat and the vertical distribution of supercooled
water. These changes in the tropical deep convective systems will have
substantial impacts on large scale circulation as well. Nevertheless, the
aerosol-cloud interaction is the least understood aspect in the climate system,
of which our understanding of the impact of aerosols on mixed-phase and ice
clouds by acting as ice nuclei (IN) is the poorest. It is vital to have
comprehensive observations and model simulation to assess and understand the
physical processes of the indirect and semi-direct effects of dust aerosols on
clouds. The outcomes of this work will complement our understanding of aerosol-
cloud-climate interactions and benefit the climate community to estimate of the
contribution of dust to climate change. Through student training and education
outreach, students from various levels will gain some understanding on current
climate issues.