* 1139644
* METABOLOMICS: Integrating cheminformatic resources for investigating photoautotrophic and mixotrophic metabolism in algae.
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2018
* John Labavitch, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 11/30/2018
* USD 2,510,859.00

The metabolome is the sum total of the products of chemical reactions in the
cell; it comprises a diverse set of chemicals that is species-specific and that
is strongly influenced by the environment. Thus, despite decades of biochemical
research, metabolomics is a field that is still in development, and no
comprehensive database captures the complement of species-dependent metabolites.
This project will capture the metabolome of 10 photosynthetic microorganisms
(algae) by identifying all detectable metabolites that are synthesized as
building blocks during their growth under conditions with variable sources of
carbon (for example carbon dioxide and other organic compounds, including those
found in wastewater). These data will greatly increase our knowledge of algal
metabolism and carbon utilization. A major goal of this project is to integrate
and improve existing metabolomic databases and libraries and to build new tools
for the fast identification of metabolites. The resources resulting from this
project will be made freely available to foster collaborations across multiple
disciplines including engineering, analytical chemistry and bioinformatics. This
project will facilitate the development of more efficient technologies for
biofuel production based on photosynthetic microorganisms.

Broader Impacts This project, through collaborations with researchers at the
University of Tokyo and Osaka Prefectural University, will integrate and freely
disseminate information and tutorials about libraries of chemical data,
chemistry software, laboratory protocols for metabolism studies and results from
the algal metabolomic studies. Web-based access will enable researchers and
others interested in using these tools to compare the biochemistry of different
species under various environmental conditions. In addition to the international
training and education of the next generation of researchers, there will be
outreach by project participants to students and pupils in K-12 education
through the NSF-REU and GK-12 programs. Project staff will participate in the
BioTech SYSTEM biotechnology program for teachers by providing educational
activities for high school students and by partnering with local schools with
large populations of under-served and under-represented minority students.