* 1139803
* CSU-LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Northridge (Cohort 9)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Helena Noronha, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2013
* USD 986,999.00

California State University (CSU) Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation&lt;br/&gt;(CSU-LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program (cohort
9) is a collaborative effort between&lt;br/&gt;the National Science Foundation
and California State University institutions to increase&lt;br/&gt;the quality
and quantity of underrepresented minorities matriculating to completion
of&lt;br/&gt;the doctoral degree in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics fields (STEM)&lt;br/&gt;fields. The program at California State
University, Northridge prepares students to meet&lt;br/&gt;the challenges of
completing doctoral programs of study and for academic careers
in&lt;br/&gt;higher education. In addition, the program develops leadership
skills necessary for&lt;br/&gt;success in the STEM workforce nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and education, the BD
fellows are nurtured over two years as a&lt;br/&gt;cohort community that
benefits from a program of academic and personal&lt;br/&gt;development
activities as well as social support to sustain their commitment
and&lt;br/&gt;success to the terminal Ph.D. STEM degree. Program activities
include linkages with&lt;br/&gt;Graduate Education in the Professoriate (AGEP)
institutions and other graduate&lt;br/&gt;education programs to advance students
in Ph.D. programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twelve students from underrepresented
minority populations in STEM fields will&lt;br/&gt;participate in the program at
California State University, Northridge during the&lt;br/&gt;2011-2013 academic
years. Results from this support broadens the participation
of&lt;br/&gt;African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and Pacific-
Islanders in the STEM&lt;br/&gt;pipeline globally. Results from rigorous
evaluation of the project adds to the body of&lt;br/&gt;literature in the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority students
in&lt;br/&gt;STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project anticipates that at
least 95% of the new participants will complete Master's&lt;br/&gt;degrees, and
that at least 90% of these students will earn STEM doctorate
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;This project not only targets a student population that might
not otherwise pursue&lt;br/&gt;doctoral level training, but also makes a special
effort to target STEM disciplines that&lt;br/&gt;have relatively low overall
doctorate degree production and the lowest shares of URM&lt;br/&gt;students. In
these disciplines (specifically, geological sciences, physics and
astronomy,&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, engineering, and computer science), small
increases in the number of&lt;br/&gt;doctorates awarded to URM students will
have a significant impact on
discipline&lt;br/&gt;demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BD project activities
include a variety of valued "best practices" for supporting
and&lt;br/&gt;advancing LSAMP students. Specifically, the project provides the
following:&lt;br/&gt;- rigorous Master?s-level course-work&lt;br/&gt;- a two-
year research experience with the guidance of a faculty mentor;&lt;br/&gt;-
professional development workshops and activities, including participation in
scientific&lt;br/&gt;conferences;&lt;br/&gt;- monthly meetings to monitor
student progress,&lt;br/&gt;- networking with other BD Fellows in doctoral
programs, and&lt;br/&gt;- provide assistance with graduate school and fellowship
applications.