* 1139096
* Sahelian Savanna Disturbance Experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Niall Hanan, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 352,945.00

Savannas are defined by the simultaneous presence of trees (or woody shrubs) and
grasses in seasonally dry areas of the tropics and sub-tropics. This coexistence
of very different types of plants is important in terms of the functioning of
the ecosystem (e.g., vegetation growth, water use, carbon storage), but also in
terms of how humans benefit from and manage these unique systems (e.g., grazing
cattle or fuel-wood harvest). In Africa, savannas are key areas of economic,
cultural and bio-diversity. The US and Malian collaborators in this project have
designed a comprehensive field experiment to examine interactive effects of fire
and large herbivores at five sites across the West African rainfall gradient,
from dry Sahel in the north to wetter savannas in the south. At each site,
fences and fire-breaks exclude domestic livestock or fires, respectively, from
experimental plots. The team will monitor vegetation growth to examine how these
disturbances affect survival and growth of trees and grasses, alter plant
species composition, and differ in their effects across the rainfall gradient.
The experiment will provide much needed empirical data on tree-grass
interactions in West African savannas and complement research elsewhere in
Africa, Australia and South America. This work thus will contribute to
development of ecological theory for savannas and a better understanding of the
role of disturbance in plant species coexistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Sahel-Sudan zone of West Africa is crucial for the economies of Africa north of
the equator and for the livelihoods of the region's pastoral and agricultural
peoples. The region is subject to frequent drought, with problems of food
security, environmental degradation, and desertification. An understanding of
how human management practices impact ecological processes will enhance sound
management in the face of future changing climate. The project will provide
unique research experiences and international scientific/cultural exposure to US
and African students, and facilitate development of a collaborating nucleus of
African and US researchers that will endure well into the future. This award is
co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering.