* 1139707
* IT Virtualization for Disaster Mitigation and Recovery
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-39707 PI(s): Tsugawa, Mauricio; Figuereido, Renato J.;
Fortes, Jose A. Institution: University of Florida Title: IT Virtualization for
Disaster Mitigation and Recovery Project Proposed: This RAPID project, aiding
the process of recovering Information Technology (IT) infrastructure damaged by
catastrophic events, conducts research on the use of virtualization technologies
to provide such aid. The work includes IT infrastructure needed to recover
damages to non-IT infrastructures and human beings. Machine virtualization
offers key mechanisms to move applications from one location (e.g., a data
center) potentially affected by a disaster to another safe location. The project
responds to many challenges such as: The - Inability to migrate Virtual Machines
(VMs) from a disaster site to an unaffected site maintaining live services; -
Severe limitation of power of network failures that limit the ability of
performing live-migrations; - Need for coordination with recovery efforts to
effectively prioritize critical services. Machine virtualization offers the
ability to checkpoint VMs, thus enabling the creation of back-ups not only of
data but also of partial application executions. VM checkpoints can be used to
recover an IT infrastructure in a different location with minimal loss of data.
The challenge lies in how to efficiently manage the massive amount of data and
network traffic generated by the VM check-point process. With the main goals of
keeping alive IT services as long as possible, and restoring recovery-critical
IT services as quickly as possible during and after a disaster, the project
focuses on - Analyzing data and events associated with damaged IT services due
to the Great-East Japan Earthquake, - Studying scalability of wide-area VM live-
migration and Back/checkpoint, and - Developing a resilient architecture to
partial physical infrastructure failure in order to deploy IT infrastructures in
virtualized and distributed datacenters. The investigators collaborate with Dr.
Satoshi Sekiguchi, Director of the Information Technology Research Institute
(ITIR) within the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology (AOST), an Institution under the Ministry of Economy, Trade, and
Industry (MET), Japan. This group are experts in the area of virtualization and
has had some interactions with the Florida group. Broader Impacts: The work
develops an understanding of how well virtualized IT systems can cope with
partial physical damages, of what changes in hardware, software, and general
practice are needed, and how to determine the best way to adopt them. In the
long term the project should enable informing the adoption of a virtualized
datacenter to host essential IT services. Hence, the project is likely to enable
informed decisions and should also contribute in graduate student education.