* 1139810
* International Research and Education Opportunities for US Graduate Students in the Cognitive Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Christopher Kello, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 02/28/2013
* USD 24,560.00

This proposal seeks to support US graduate student participation in the 2012
annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society in Sapporo Japan, along with
research interchanges and collaborations with Japanese labs immediately
subsequent to the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For 33 years, the Cognitive
Science Society has been the premiere international organization for research in
Cognitive Science. The Society brings together researchers from many fields that
hold a common goal: understanding the nature of cognition as it appears in
biological organisms and finds its pinnacle in humans, and as it is simulated in
artificial systems. In general, the meeting provides a forum for the first
communication of state-of-the-art research in cognitive science, focusing on a
broad range of disciplinary and interdisciplinary topics, with representation
from psychology, computer science, neuroscience, linguistics, and
anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, the annual meeting includes a rich
selection of tutorials and workshops available to students. Workshops and
tutorials can be helpful in any academic discipline, but they are especially
needed in cognitive science because it is very rare that students come from
programs with expertise spanning the breadth of the field. Research in many
areas of cognitive science has flourished over the past decade in Japan. The
time is therefore ripe for fostering international, interdisciplinary research
interchanges and collaborations.