* 1139756
* 2011-2013 Alabama LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Activity (BD Site - UAB)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Thomas DiLorenzo, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

The Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ALSAMP)under the
leadership of the University of Alabama (UAB) will sponsor its ninth (9th)
cohort of Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) students at the institution. The program
will focus on the recruitment, retention, mentoring, and graduation of students
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields at the
postbaccalaureate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twelve NSF-sponsord historically
underrepresented minority students pursuing science, technology, engineering and
mathematics disciplines will participate in the program for the 2011-2013
academic years. UAB has a proven record of recruitment, retention, graduation
and placement of STEM students in doctoral degree programs. BD participants
receive an assigned faculty mentor and the opportunity to attend and participate
in at least one professional scientific meeting each year. In addition, BD
participants attend special topic seminars concerning graduate school
matriculation designed specifically for the program and procedures for applying
for NSF and other fellowships. Linkages will be established with the NSF
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) and other research
and academic programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the end of the two year award
period, BD students are guaranteed continuation of the same level of financial
support through a combination of departmental fellowships and additional
financial support from the university. BD students not remaining at UAB will be
connected to doctoral programs at other institutions and are assisted in
securing fellowship and other support at the selected institution. All BD
students will be tracked into doctoral degree programs and the workforce,
including the professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation and assessment data
will be collected and evaluated at intervals during the two year program.
Dissemination of results and success will be published in vsrious venues. The
magazine is an excellent source of publicity for the BD program as well as an
important networking tool for BD students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
an important step in advancing the knowledge of underrepresented minority
students in STEM. The experiences gained by these students working with science
and education faculty will position them for excellent career advancement and
contribute to the nation's great need for minority scientist in both research
and the professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project broadens participation
of underrepresented groups in graduate education with the real prospect of
increasing the number of such groups attaining doctoral degrees in STEM and
entering the professoriate. Discovery and understanding resulting from this
project will be disseminated to other institutions and programs focusing on
graduate education.