* 1139906
* An Advanced Laboratory in Biological Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Stephen Hagen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2015
* USD 140,524.00

Research in the life sciences is becoming increasingly interdisciplinary. More
biological and biomedical scientists are using new tools and techniques that
have been developed by physical scientists, mathematicians, and engineers. At
the same time, growing numbers of physicists and engineers are seeking careers
in biological and biomedical fields. Recognizing these trends, national panels
have urged that the training of the next generation of life scientists should
much more closely integrate the biological sciences with the physical sciences
and mathematics. This project directly serves to enhance the integration of
physics and biology in undergraduate education by developing and testing
advanced physics laboratory experiments involving biological physics. Four new
student experiments that explore biological applications of experimental physics
are being designed and implemented. These labs train undergraduate students in
the use of state-of-the-art physics techniques to measure and probe the
properties of individual biological molecules and individual living cells.
Experiments include measuring the size of individual DNA molecules by observing
Brownian motion, probing the elasticity of DNA molecules through gel
electrophoresis, using fluorescence correlations to measure the strength of
interactions between biomolecules, and building "laser tweezers" to gauge the
forces generated by a swimming bacterium. The project envisions a wide range of
institutions (from research universities to small colleges) being able to
provide similar training experiences to their students, and instructional
materials are being written that can be shared with physics faculty and staff at
other institutions. Such materials enhance the dissemination of these
experimental experiences to the broader physics teaching community through the
American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) and the National Science Digital
Library (NSDL), and through presentations at national and regional professional
meetings. The broader impact of this work is also enhanced by the training of
faculty members from other institutions through open-house laboratory
immersions, coordinated through the national Advanced Laboratory Physics
Association (ALPhA). The educational impact of the experiments is being
determined by a formal evaluation program using both a Student Assessment of
Learning Gains (SALG) instrument and student interviews.