* 1139148
* Collaborative Research: Socially Assistive Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2021
* Fei Sha, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,583,000.00

Socially Assistive Robots&lt;br/&gt;Lead PI/Institution: Brian Scassellati, Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;This Expedition will develop the fundamental computational
techniques that will enable the design, implementation, and evaluation of robots
that encourage social, emotional, and cognitive growth in children, including
those with social or cognitive deficits. The need for this technology is driven
by critical societal problems that require sustained, personalized support that
supplements the efforts of educators, parents, and clinicians. For example,
clinicians and families struggle to provide individualized educational services
to children with social and cognitive deficits, whose numbers have quadrupled in
the US in the last decade alone. In many schools, educators struggle to provide
language instruction for children raised in homes where a language other than
English is spoken (over 20%), the fastest-growing segment of the school-age
population. This Expedition aims to support the individual needs of these
children with socially assistive robots that help to guide the children toward
long-term behavioral goals, that are customized to the particular needs of each
child, and that develop and change as the child does. &lt;br/&gt;To achieve this
vision, this Expedition will advance the state-of-the-art in socially assistive
human-robot interaction from short-term interactions in structured environments
to long-term interactions that are adaptive, engaging, and effective. This
progress will require transformative computing research in three broad and
naturally interrelated research areas. First, the Expedition will develop
computational models of the dynamics of social interaction, so that robots can
automatically detect, analyze, and influence agency, intention, and other social
interaction primitives in dynamic environments. Second, the Expedition will
develop machine learning algorithms that adapt and personalize interactions to
individual physical, social, and cognitive differences, enabling robots to teach
and shape behavior in ways that are tailored to the needs, preferences, and
capabilities of each individual. Third, the Expedition will develop systems that
guide children toward specific learning goals over periods of weeks and months,
allowing for truly long-term guidance and support. Research in these three areas
will be integrated into socially assistive robots that are deployed in schools
and homes for durations of up to one year. &lt;br/&gt;This Expedition has the
potential to substantially impact the effectiveness of education and healthcare
for children, and the technological tools developed will serve as the basis for
enhancing the lives of children and other groups that require specialized
support and intervention. The proposed computing research is tied to a
comprehensive student training program, bringing a compelling, engaging, and
grounded STEM experience to K-12 students through in-school and after-school
activities. It also establishes an annual training summit to provide
undergraduates with the multi-disciplinary background to engage in this
promising research area in graduate school. Finally, by establishing a brand
name for socially assistive robotics, this effort will create a central
authority for the distribution of high-quality, peer-reviewed information,
providing a coherent focal point for enhancing outreach and
education.&lt;br/&gt;For more information visit www.yale.edu/SAR