* 1139277
* Student Travel Support for the ACM SIGCOMM 2011 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Arun Venkataramani, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

The ACM SIGCOMM Conference will be held from August 15 to August 19, 2011 in
Toronto, Canada. ACM SIGCOMM is the flagship annual conference of the Special
Interest Group on Data Communications, a special interest group of the
Association for Computing Machinery. This award assists approximately 12
graduate students and 3 postdoctoral students from US institutions to attend
this conference. Participation in conferences such as SIGCOMM is an extremely
important part of the graduate school experience, provides students with an
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers and exposes them to leading
edge research in the field. The support requested in this proposal will enable
people in the above categories to attend the main SIGCOMM 2011 conference, who
would be otherwise unable to do so. The travel grant chairs are committed to
encouraging the participation of women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will provide
travel support for US-based graduate and postdoctoral students to attend the
main SIGCOMM 2011 conference. SIGCOMM is the flagship conference in the
networking community and a highly competitive venue (with acceptance rate around
10%). Its rich program exposes participants to new ideas and cutting-edge
research and allows for interaction between researchers from all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project integrates research and
education of students through exposure to a premier technical meeting in
computer networks and communications. Students will have the opportunity to
observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior researchers in the
field. The proposed student participation is expected to have a positive impact
on the students? research interests and quality. Second, the project will
promote diversity by encouraging and enabling women and other under-represented
minorities to participate. Furthermore, the truly international flavor of
SIGCOMM as an annual conference is well-known and reflected in the composition
of the Technical Program Committee as well as in the authors of the submitted
and accepted papers. As such, it cultivates international research interactions
and presents a tremendous opportunity to students to increase their breadth of
ideas, research approaches, and technical perspectives.