* 1139902
* RAPID: Time Series Sampling for Radionuclide and Biogeochemical Fluxes at F1 Time-series Station, Offshore Fukushima Dai-ichi Nuclear Power Facility
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Chris German, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2014
* USD 199,774.00

The 2011 Tohoku earthquake off Japan resulted in a tsunami that severely damaged
the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power facility. Emergency cooling using seawater,
in response to overheating of the facility?s reactor units 1, 2 and 3 and
uncontained spent fuel pools, has led to run-off of contaminated waters to the
adjacent Pacific Ocean that, cumulatively, measure &gt; 10,000 higher than pre-
tsunami levels and exceed the release of radionuclides to the marine environment
from Chernobyl accident. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding through this Grant
for Rapid Response Research (RAPID), a research team at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution will participate in a JAMSTEC-led cruise in June-July
2011, and deploy a time-series sediment trap mooring at a station 80km off the
coast of Japan. The specific goal will be to collect settling particulate
radionuclide matter over the coming weeks and months through to an already-
scheduled cruise to recover the moorings in May, 2012. By deploying traps at
500m and 1000m, the team will intercept particle-attached radionuclide settling
out of the upper ocean and assess their fluxes into the deep ocean interior.
They will collect fresh samples approximately every 2 weeks at each depth
throughout the sampling period to complement ?snap-shot? sampling that will be
conducted aboard the JAMSTEC cruise at the start and end of the deployment
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will also collaborate closely with Dr. Ken
Buessler at WHOI (already funded separately, including a complementary NSF-RAPID
project) who will be responsible for radionuclide analyses of particulate
samples at no additional cost to this proposal. This project will handle
preparation, deployment and recovery of the time-series sediment trap mooring as
well as preliminary sample splitting, characterization of samples for
biogeochemical properties and sample archiving. Radionuclides of primary
interest at this time include 137Cs, 134Cs, 106Ru, 144Ce and 147Pm; other
species (e.g. Pu isotopes) may also prove to be of interest within the lifetime
of the deployment. Thus an important part of the project will also be to stand
ready to provide further splits of these well characterized samples to US,
Japanese and other interested international research groups in the future, as
need arises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As learned in the aftermath
of Chernobyl, establishing the distributions and activities of radionuclides
present in the environment as soon as possible post-release is important to
understanding the severity of the releases that have occurred, their
implications for public health, and to establish "time zero" conditions against
which the wider oceanographic community can subsequently track the fate of long-
lived (conservative and biogeochemically-active) radionuclides. In addition to
the strong international (WHOI-JAMSTEC) collaboration that has already been
developed for this project, the team will share all data (banked with BCO-DMO at
Woods Hole) and samples collected by this work with the wider national and
international science community and public.