* 1139962
* RAPID: Relative impacts of density- and trait-mediated effects on a top predator: how has the Deepwater Horizon oil spill affected Brown Pelican population biology?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Paul Leberg, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2013
* USD 199,883.00

This project uses the environmental disturbance generated by the BP Deepwater
Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico to assess the relative importance of
density vs. trait-mediated effects in regulating populations of the brown
pelican. The investigators will combine post- and pre-spill data to quantify the
effects of different levels of oil exposure on population density and
ecologically relevant traits, and on the population-level consequences of
different exposure scenarios. By providing a detailed analysis of how traits
such as foraging behavior combine with population density to influence the
dynamics of a top predator, the study will further our understanding of the
ecological factors that regulate population dynamics and the long-term, non-
lethal effects of major anthropogenic disturbances.

The brown pelican was completely extirpated from Louisiana in the 1960's and
only recently removed from the Endangered Species list. Since then, it has
become a culturally important symbol of ecosystem resilience in the Gulf of
Mexico. The project will raise public awareness about how exposure to
environmental contaminants may affect this and other colonial nesting seabirds
affected by the oil spills, and results will inform conservation practitioners
and wildlife biologists about effective management of these populations. The
proposed research will also provide training to one undergraduate student and
one female post-doctoral fellow.