* 1139308
* GreenTECH 2011
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Marc Lesser, Solar One
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,080,565.00

GreenTECH is a three-year project focusing on green technology and careers at
the high school level. Partners are: Solar One, a Green Energy Arts and
Education Center; MOUSE (Making Opportunities for Upgrading Schools &amp;
Education), a youth development program that prepares young people to serve as
technology experts; the Wallerstein Collaborative for Urban Environmental
Education at New York University, and the New York City Department of Education
(DOE). Over three years, the GreenTECH model will reach over 600 students and 30
teachers in grades 10 and 11, and will combine the successful methodology of the
Solar One Green Design Lab program with the highly effective approach of MOUSE
Technical Squads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GreenTECH is a program that engages
students in creating sustainable school buildings. Students develop solutions
and recommendations to sustainability issues, and develop workforce skills
through participation in MOUSE Technical Squads. Students who successfully
complete the program earn a Specialist Badge in sustainable technology. This
project uses: hands-on study of the school and surrounding community; intensive
technical training of high school students along with development of youth led
projects; career development and planning for technology careers, particularly
in green industries; and professional development for teachers. The GreenTech
curriculum introduces students to real-world career skills designed to meet
environmental challenges such as water infrastructure, sustainable architecture,
and solar design. Two theoretical frameworks guide the program: Social Cognitive
Career Theory (SCCT) and place-based education. Project-based activities with a
strong design component engage students and teachers in the construction of
solutions that require knowledge of the science concepts and how technology can
be used to address environmental problems. Place-based education is fundamental
to the GreenTech curriculum, as it uses the school building as the unit of
study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Greentech curriculum employs design-thinking
strategies and creative problem solving to address the need for improving energy
efficiency and sustainability in school buildings. Students use their newly
acquired STEM skills to solve local environmental challenges in their school and
community. The curriculum then connects these STEM skills to career pathways,
with the intent of preparing students for emerging green STEM jobs. GreenTECH
has the following goals: 1) impacting students' understanding, knowledge, and
decisions about pursuing STEM careers; 2) increasing self-efficacy and decisions
about future STEM education and careers through place-based lessons; and 3)
increasing students' interest and motivation in pursuing future STEM education
and careers. GreenTECH is an important model for enhancing students' STEM skills
and enthusiasm for STEM-related careers and will: increase students' knowledge,
skills, and persistence with respect to the technologies, careers, and STEM
content of renewable energy and sustainable design; build young people's
capacity to serve as specialists in the technologies essential to sustainable
design; create leadership roles for young people to use those technologies at
their school site; and test whether a strategy that uses the school building and
its environs as the focus for learning leads to increased interest and
persistence in STEM.