* 1139953
* Denoising, Decomposition, and Deconvolution of Moment Sequences by Convex Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Benjamin Recht, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2014
* USD 215,149.00

Recovering signals from incomplete, noisy measurements is one of the
foundational problems in signals and systems theory. In a variety of
applications, from RADAR to spectroscopy, signals are combinations of a few
basic sine waves. But, to extract information from the system, one must first
identify the frequencies of these sine waves from a noisy, incomplete collection
of acquired samples. Unfortunately, most popular techniques for signal analysis
provide few guarantees in the presence of noise and require a great deal of
prior knowledge about the structure of the signal to be estimated. This research
addresses these problems by applying key insights from contemporary applied
mathematics, analyzing signals as part of a unified approach to decompose
systems into simple building blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the
investigator's recent work on recovering signals from highly incomplete
information, this project revisits these fundamental, algebraic problems in
signal processing with a modern perspective based on convex optimization. This
research applies the theory of atomic norm minimization to the practical
problems of denoising mixtures of moments in signals, systems and controls. This
study develops an abstract theory of atomic norm denoising and a general program
for computing mean-square-estimation rates. This work focuses on spectrum
estimation problems and will be evaluated in terms of the shortcomings of
previous subspace-based approaches. Finally, this research program applies the
atomic norm framework to Hankel operator problems in control theory,
investigating new approaches to open problems in system identification and
model-order reduction.