* 1139718
* Inventory, Review and Development of REU Modules for the Ethical Conduct of Research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* John Pijanowski, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2014
* USD 97,461.00

This award to the University of Arkansas will allow the PIs, Marty Matlock and
Robyn Hannigan, to develop readily available resource for ethical and
responsible conduct of research (ERCR) training of undergraduates participating
in the NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program. The PIs plan to
1) Inventory and review at least 40 existing ERCR educational materials; 2)
Evaluate their appropriateness and completeness for application in the NSF REU
program; 3) Develop new modules for specific use of the BIO REU Program; 4)
Pilot test modules at three REU programs; and 5) Develop and implement
assessment tools to evaluate effectiveness of the pilot
modules.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Teaching ethics to undergraduate students
is an integral part of the NSF REU program. This requirement for ethics training
provides an opportunity to enhance the effectiveness of delivering directed
curricula to large and diverse students. The modules and assessment tools will
represent new knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will
benefit all NSF REU programs by providing standardized educational materials to
support training in research ethics, and will provide assessment of the
effectiveness of developed new modules. Instruments for assessing student
learning will be published through the NSF REU program. The results of the
project will be posted at the http://www.bioreu.org website.