* 1139893
* Using Metagenomics to Realize an Education Partnership and Stimulate Curriculum Development
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Peter Blair, Earlham College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 168,739.00

The primary goal of this project is to increase in-class research using data
that have local/global relevance, utilize modern technologies and computational
approaches, and integrate molecular and organismal biology. Data on the soil
bacterial communities present in corn and soy (industrial and organic)
agroecosystems are collected using next generation sequencing technology. These
data are then used to develop full courses and modules for courses ranging from
introductory/core courses (that also serve non-majors) to upper-level electives.
In each course, while the hypotheses addressed and the tools used to address
them differ in content, they are complementary to each other and illustrate the
power of using an interdisciplinary approach to science. For example, students
in one course examine community differences in species composition while in
another they look at how the communities differ in terms of metabolic pathways.
Knowledge surveys are used at the beginning and end of each course. Comparisons
within and between courses evaluate changes in student perceptions and learning
over the short and long-term. Each module also includes a summative assessment
in the form of an analysis of students formal papers or presentations and an
evaluation of the students' abilities to use the tools involved and to interpret
the results they generate.

Intellectual merit: Students exposed to this project have a fresh appreciation
of the complexity of the soil biome, especially as they pass through the
midwestern landscape dominated by corn and soy. They gain first-hand knowledge
of bacterial prevalence, diversity, and importance. They use real DNA sequences
to identify organisms, to find out what biological processes are occurring in
the soil, and throughout use computer programs to organize, query, and analyze
the data. Faculty and students collaborate to write results for publication in
peer-reviewed scientific journals. The data are helping to answer such questions
as: How do different crops and different agricultural practices influence soil
bacterial communities? Are some potentially harmful bacteria facilitated or are
important nutrient pathways absent depending on the agroecosystem?

Broader Impacts: The team includes a broad array of faculty, institutions and
students so the project acts as a test site for the strength of such breadth.
The faculty team for this project includes evolutionary ecologists, molecular
biologists, a biochemist, and a computer scientist spread across two
institutions, only four miles apart, that have different missions and serve
different populations of students. One institution is a residential liberal arts
college (Earlham College) and the other a branch of a state university (Indiana
University East). The students and faculty at both institutions interact in
course preparation, research, and the sharing of results. These interactions
expose students to a greater range of faculty and faculty to a greater range of
students, as both institutions work together to transform their curricula. The
project also increases the ways by which underrepresented groups can participate
in research; IU East enrolls a high proportion (~40%) of first-generation
college students and the McNair program at Earlham College promotes the
involvement of underrepresented groups in research. In addition, most of the
course materials are organized as modules that can easily be adopted without a
major change in the structure of established courses. The data and modules
developed are being made freely available and actively disseminated, via new and
already established repositories for teaching resources, and also through
presentations at research and teaching workshops and national meetings.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts
toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.