* 1139313
* Preparing Responsive Educators using Place-Based Authentic Research in Earth Systems (PREPARES)
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Douglas Crevensten, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 1,316,282.00

This project expands, implements and conducts research on a previously developed
framework for providing indigenous students with the workforce skills and
knowledge needed for future Earth system science careers. The framework proven
effective for Inupiat students during the NSF/ITEST-funded Arctic Climate
Modeling Program (ESI-0525277) will be scaled up to develop culturally
responsive STEM instruction for 1500 Yup'ik and Native Hawaiian middle school
students and their 60 teachers. The multifaceted scale-up project includes: a
broader research setting, more school districts, diverse indigenous cultures,
additional STEM workforce practices, and a broader expert pool. The goal of the
scale-up is to answer the research question, "Under what circumstances are the
PREPARES framework for offering culturally responsive STEM instruction effective
in increasing indigenous student disposition toward participating in future
Earth system science careers?" Student objectives include assessing three
indicators of student disposition toward STEM careers: (a) STEM academic
achievement, (b) interest in STEM careers, and (c) STEM workforce skill
readiness. Teacher objectives related to program sustainability include
increasing educator STEM content knowledge and pedagogical strategies aligned
with STEM workforce practices. Research by randomized controlled trial will
determine framework transferability and identify circumstances and steps needed
to expand its adoption to a broader array of U.S.
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a professional development program
for non-Native teachers of indigenous students. The project offers training that
helps teachers provide culturally responsive science, technology, engineering
and math (STEM) instruction in areas, such as Alaska and Hawaii, that support
strong indigenous populations, but where the vast majority of teachers are non-
Native. The research component will gather data and information that will
advance the understanding of a framework for broadening indigenous participation
in STEM study and careers. The activity targets middle school students because
research indicates that middle school is a time when engagement in STEM studies
begins to decline. Encouraging indigenous students to view completing high
school as a step toward STEM careers is important because Native students
compose a high percentage of the dropout population in Alaska and Hawaii.
Culturally responsive STEM training is needed because many STEM teachers enter
their preparation programs with little or no inter-cultural experience and with
beliefs and assumptions that undermine the goal of providing an equal education
for all students.