* 1139220
* Ancient Fossils, New Discoveries
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Mary Schweitzer, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,402.00

This CRPA award will provide the audience at the North Carolina Museum of
Natural Sciences with a contemporary science story about a 68 million year old
dinosaur. In the research behind this exhibit, soft tissue (proteins and DNA)
has been isolated and will reflect various characteristics of the animal and its
habitat. Scientifically, this is a very exciting venture in that up to this
point it was assumed that the soft tissue was lost and could not be derived from
fossils. So, this is a modern day break through on the vast field of fossils
that will provide unique details in the future. In addition, the scientific
processes and instrumentation shall be elaborated to provide the visitor with
scientific thinking and work as well as a marvelous lesson in comparative
biology. Finally, the scientist in this project is a women and it is hoped that
this will be inspirational for girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exhibit will be
focused on a dinosaur in a new specially design wing of the natural sciences
museum. The areas immediately around the fossil will be populated with
explanatory modules elaborating various aspects of the fossil and the pertinent
science. Some hands on equipment will be in the Hall as well. The presentation
is aimed at youth, families, and especially girls. In an adjacent set of rooms,
there will be research scientists doing research and available for answering
questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this presentation is
contained in its integration of ancient creatures with modern science thinking
and processes. It appears as a science exhibit, but it is intended to be
inspirational to individuals who are among underserved groups who are seldom
given the opportunity to imagine and learn.