* 1139170
* 2012 Renewable Energy: Solar Fuels GRC &amp; GRS, Lucca, Italy, May 12-13, 2012 and May 13-18, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Thomas Mallouk, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 01/31/2013
* USD 34,250.00

1139170&lt;br/&gt;Mallouk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support
for graduate student and postdoctoral research associate participation in the
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Renewable
Energy: Solar Fuels. The GRS and GRC will be held in Lucca, Italy on May 12-13,
and May 13-18, 2012, respectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRS, which will be primarily attended by graduate
students and post doctoral research associates, and the GRC, which features oral
presentations by the leading scientists in the field, will bring together senior
and junior researchers, including engineers, materials scientists, chemists,
biologists, and physicists to explore the scientific advances needed to achieve
efficient solar energy driven transformation of carbon-neutral sources to
energy-dense molecules. This problem is of key importance in developing a
sustainable energy economy, as solar fuels may have the potential to provide a
sustainable supply of transportation and aviation fuel from domestic, renewable
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRS program will feature oral and poster
presentations accompanied by informal and formal discussions with a small number
of attendees (60 participants). The presentations will be divided into three
sessions, in which the most important aspects of the solar fuel research will be
addressed. The first session will be devoted to the light capture and charge
transfer in solid-state and biological/ biomimetic systems. The second session
will be focused on materials and molecules that can catalyze reactions desirable
for the development of solar fuel cells. The concluding session will handle
homo/heterogeneous catalytic systems effective for solar fuel production.
Approximately half of the GRS participants are expected to attend the GRC, where
attendance will be capped at 200. The GRC program will include invited and
contributed oral and poster presentations by both younger and more established
researchers, focusing on the best emerging science in the field. The GRC will
provide participants a state-of-the-art view of the interdisciplinary science of
solar fuels, with eight topical sessions, two poster sessions, and one final
session of late-breaking results and short talks drawn from the poster
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
GRC and GRS will promote international collaboration in the science and
engineering that underpins the development of a future solar fuels technology.
This forum will also provide networking opportunities, mentoring, and
perspectives on new research for younger participants at a critical stage in
their scientific careers. The requested funds will be used to defray
registration fee and/or travel costs of a diverse group of graduate student and
postdoctoral participants in the GRC and GRS.