* 1139364
* RAPID/IUCRC: An International University Collaborative Research Program between the Center for Friction Stir Processing (an NSF I/UCRC) and Tohoku University
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Tracy Nelson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,950.00

Proposal #: CNS 11-39364&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Nelson, Tracy
W.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Brigham Young University&lt;br/&gt;Title: RAPID/IUCRC:
An International University Collaborative Research Program between NSF/IUCRC
CFSP Center and Tohoku University &lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
RAPID project, enabling graduate students from the Kokawa Laboratory from Tohoku
University in Japan to go to Brigham Young University (BYU) to use the
facilities and equipment available within the CFSP (Center for Friction Stir
Processing, an NSF ENG I/UCRC) to continue performing essential research for
short periods of time (2-6 weeks), responds to the disaster in the labs caused
by the March 11 earthquake in Japan. Sensitive Optical and electron microscopy
equipment were rendered unusable and are currently not on the priority list for
immediate repair. Thus, the project aims to satisfy the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;- Enable students to continue their research;&lt;br/&gt;-
Engage graduate, undergraduate, and underrepresented students and faculty from
five different countries in an international collaborative effort; &lt;br/&gt;-
Expose students to a wider breadth of research and development in
FSW&amp;P;&lt;br/&gt;- Expand international networking opportunities;
and&lt;br/&gt;- Enlarge the international database of Friction Stir Welding
(FSW) processes and practices.&lt;br/&gt;The research work at both universities
has a long history of producing outstanding intellectual results, as evidenced
by more than 60 publications in Tohoku and more than 30 at BYU in this area in
recent years. While at BYU, the students will be performing joint research
in:&lt;br/&gt;- FSW of steels, stainless steels, and titanium
alloys,&lt;br/&gt;- Tooling for FRW&amp;P, and&lt;br/&gt;- Grain boundary
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;The USA researchers collaborate with the Japanese
investigators from Tohuku University, Dr. Hiroyuki Kokawa and Dr. Yutaka Sato.
The former has co-authored a relevant book in the area, while the latter has
spent a sabbatical year at BYU. Thus, a useful collaboration already exists. A
letter of support and biographical sketch of the Japanese collaborator is
included in the supplementary document. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Students representing five different countries, along with faculty
from Japan and USA will be engaged in this international collaborative research
effort. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be invited to present
their work to more than 20 industrial sponsors from around the world during
annual and semi-annual CFSP meetings. The research will be broadly disseminated
in the technical community in the form of journal papers and technical
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;Obviously, contributing equipment to help in the
completion of on-going research should enhance the USA students while enabling
the exchange of ideas. In general, the project also contributes to train
graduate and undergraduate students exposing them to high-impact application
areas.