* 1139922
* 2011-2016 LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program at Jackson State University   (Cohort 9)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Ashton Hamme, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

Jackson State University (JSU) and its LSMAMP partners are pleased to submit
this competitive renewal proposal to support an ninth (9th) Cohort in the Bridge
to the Doctorate (BD) Program, which addresses our continued efforts to solve
the critical shortages of underrepresented minorities (URM) in STEM disciplines.
This will be accomplished by continuing the synergy between LSMAMP partners that
have transformed the instructional, research and administrative aspects of
cooperation among these institutions in ways never before envisioned. STEM
disciplines targeted for BD include: chemistry, mathematics, biology,
environmental science, computer science, and engineering. The requested support
will continue to accelerate and increase the numbers of minority students
entering the Ph.D. pipeline. The success of the BD is based upon the theory that
minority students who pursue the MS degree, have the potential to complete the
PhD degree in STEM areas if provided sufficient financial support, rigorous
curricula, committed mentoring and national and international extensive research
experiences. The addition of an ninth Cohort will increase the number of
students who have been supported by the program to 106. The impact of the
LSMAMP-BD has been profoundly dramatic in achieving the goal of increasing the
number of underrepresented (URM) PhD participation. To date, of a total of 94
students, 72 have been admitted into PhD programs, 11 have earned their PhDs,
and 40 are completing their dissertations or coursework (from Cohorts 1-6).
Furthermore, 90% of the students in Cohorts 1 through 6 were admitted into Ph.D.
programs. In Cohort 7, so far, nine (9) students have been admitted into Ph.D.
programs and three (3) have applied to doctoral offering institutions and are
expected to start during fall 2010. Cohort Eight (8) students are progressing
well and are currently acquiring international experience before they begin
their summer internships.&lt;br/&gt;The BD is an intensive, highly interactive
program covering the first two years of the students' graduate tenure leading to
the MS degree. Students are expected to continue their work through to the
doctorate. The first year the students satisfy the required core courses and
select their research advisor. The first summer, the students are exposed to
scientific and technical workforce environments internships at national or
international laboratories, corporations and universities. During this time,
students and their faculty advisors continually interact on the learning
experience and initiation of research projects. The second year is dedicated to
research, writing the MS thesis, specialized courses and applying to doctoral
programs and fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of the LSMAMP
BD Program is to establish a secure pathway for underrepresented minority
students to obtain doctoral degrees in STEM disciplines. This proposed project
will build upon existing relationships between JSU and major national and
international universities; national laboratories such as LBNL and LLNL; and NSF
programs such as CREST, AGEM, IGERT, etc. to increase the number of minority
students enrolling and matriculating in MS and Ph.D. STEM graduate programs
within and outside of the state of Mississippi. Disciplines targeted for
graduate studies include: chemistry, physics, mathematics, biology,
environmental science, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The LSMAMP
program will increase the number of Ph.D. degrees in STEM areas awarded to
minorities, especially African-Americans. The project will provide well-
qualified and diverse faculty members for U S universities and colleges, as well
as impact the number of scientists and engineers holding the doctorate. This is
already taking place as exhibited by the number of BD students placed in Ph.D.
programs and by the number of those who have earned the Ph.D.