* 1139887
* 2011-2013 NEW YORK CITY Bridge to the Doctorate Activity - BD Site:  City University of New York Graduate School
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Neville Parker, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 987,000.00

Statement of Objectives&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Bridge to the Doctorate
proposal is to recruit and retain recent LSAMP STEM Graduates into a
research/academic career that leads to the completion of a Ph.D. degree at CUNY
or at other doctoral granting institutions. The LSAMP Bridge program in CUNY is
not based at any one campus site as the Graduate Center is the primary
institution that grants the Doctoral degree in CUNY.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The approach presented by the NYC Alliance builds on the efforts
established over the previous nineteen years of activities in increasing the
number of underrepresented minorities in STEM. Central to the approach is
changing the atmospherics regarding undergraduate inclusion in research and
establishing a CUNY wide list of partners at the student, faculty and staff
level.&lt;br/&gt;Methods to be Employed&lt;br/&gt;Recent LSAMP graduates from
the National LSAMP pool of graduates, and LSAMP graduates who have completed no
more than one full-time semester equivalent of graduate study shall constitute
the group that will be invited to apply for the Bridge to the Doctorate program.
LSAMP senior undergraduates will continue to be allowed to participate in Bridge
activities. Bridge students will be beneficiaries of a proactive retention and
professional enrichment program that will include academic and research
mentoring, GRE workshops, roundtable discussions with advanced doctoral
students, faculty and administrators, and attendance and participation at local
and national professional conferences. The at-large faculty pool associated with
the CUNY Graduate Center, and CUNY Institute/Center Directors will serve as
Bridge faculty/research advisors. The Alliance will continue to partner with
Brookhaven National Labs to provide cutting-edge research training during the
academic year and summer terms. International research experiences will also be
integrated into the training of all selected BD scholars.&lt;br/&gt;Expected
Results&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the NYC LSAMP Bridge program will add 125
students to the Ph.D. pipeline from Cohorts 1-9 (2003 through
2013).&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY&lt;br/&gt;A critical
infrastructure component for research and education is the availability of
competent and committed students. The Bridge program will continue to serve as a
catalyst for raising financial support for graduate students to a level that
would attract US citizens into the STEM research pipeline in numbers sufficient
to sustain the national STEM enterprise. LSAMP will continue to use the level of
support provided by the Bridge program to leverage an increase in STEM graduate
student compensation across the board, in order to sustain an increase in Ph.D.
throughput beyond its two-year duration.