* 1139664
* Collaborative Research - Strategies: GLOBE California Academy Program (CAP) ITEST Strategy Grant
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Art Sussman, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 03/31/2016
* USD 895,877.00

WestEd and the University of California-Berkeley are improving student learning
and workforce preparation in science as well as information and communication
technology by embedding the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the
Environment (GLOBE) program into curricula of selected high school-level green
energy career academies in California. Embedding GLOBE within California's green
energy academies will pave the way for broader GLOBE implementation in
California and other states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GLOBE California Academy
Program (CAP) is engaging students, particularly at-risk students, in research
related to climate science and renewable energy technologies, providing
professional development and support for academy teachers, connecting scientists
and industry to academy classrooms, and linking students to GLOBE's
international student community. GLOBE's data collection and analysis activities
will become an integral and sustainable part of a rigorous inquiry-based
approach to science education that prepares students for postsecondary education
and science careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating GLOBE into CAP will
produce a replicable model program that improves high school students'
preparation for postsecondary education and careers in science and technology
fields. Outcomes for students include improved science/technology knowledge and
skills, higher grades, increased interest in pursuing postsecondary education
and science/technology careers, and development of 21st century workforce
skills. Outcomes for teachers include increased facility with GLOBE and
scientific practice.