* 1139854
* Satellite Detection of Effects of Absorbing Aerosols on Clouds over Urban Areas
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Mark Jacobson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2014
* USD 218,914.00

This project will use satellite retrievals of aerosol optical depth versus cloud
optical depth and cloud fraction to examine whether "boomerang" curves can be
detected in three regions of the world that are sources of significant
anthropogenic emissions from fossil fuels and/or solid biofuels. "Boomerang"
refers to an increase followed by a decrease in cloud optical depth (COD) with
increasing aerosol optical depth (AOD), which has been observed over Brazil
where biomass burning is a dominant influence on atmospheric composition. The
regions to be examined will include one urbanized region in China, one in India,
and a third in Southern California. For each region, analyses of five years of
satellite data will be carried out. The reason polluted urbanized regions will
be targeted is because changes in COD and AOD should be more detectable than in
non-urbanized regions. Nevertheless, the regions selected will be large enough
to include rural as well as urban areas. As a result, differences between rural
and urban areas can and will also be examined to determine whether microphysical
or radiative effects dominate more in urban versus rural areas. Data from the
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer (MODIS) instrument onboard the Aqua
satellite with overpasses at approximately 1:30 PM local time will be used. This
instrument provides relatively high spatial resolution (250 to 500 meters) data
with near global coverage on a daily basis. MODIS Swath Level 2 aerosol, cloud,
water vapor, and stability products will be employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results will provide input for future modeling studies to reduce one of the
greatest uncertainties surrounding the effects of aerosols on climate, that of
absorbing aerosols on cloudiness. This will ultimately advance understanding of
the effects of absorbing aerosol (particularly black carbon) on climate because
the cloud absorption effect has been ignored in all international assessments to
date. A graduate student will be trained through participation in the project.