* 1139870
* Greater Philadelphia Region LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort IX) Project at the University of Delaware
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2015
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 01/31/2015
* USD 987,000.00

Drexel University, as a representative of the Greater Philadelphia Region Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Philadelphia AMP), requests Bridge
to the Doctorate funding for a two-year period for a Cohort IX program, to
expand and intensify the consortium?s on-going efforts to substantially increase
the number of qualified African American, Hispanic and Native American
(hereafter referred to as "minority") students entering graduate study in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), attaining doctoral
degrees, and moving into the professoriate. The Philadelphia AMP represents a
diverse alliance of nine institutions consisting of public and private, 2- and
4-year research and non-research, Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and majority institutions. The University of Delaware has been selected
to host the Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD) Cohort IX activities because of: 1)
the key role it has played in the successful development and implementation of
the Alliance?s BTD Cohort I-VIII programs , 2) its continued efforts to leverage
the relationship between Majority Institutions and HBCUs as the candidacy pool
for the Ph.D. granting institutions, 3) its institution-wide commitment to
increase diversity in STEM at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, and 4)
its advancements in the research enterprise. The goals of Philadelphia AMP's
Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort IX) project are to: (1) recruit twelve students
into Master's or Ph.D. degree programs at the University of Delaware; (2) retain
these students through the completion of the Master's or Ph.D. program,
providing the Master's students with full qualifications for admission into a
highly regarded Ph.D. program in their chosen STEM specialty with full financial
support; (3) enable the Master?s students? admission and smooth transition into
a Ph.D. program; and (4) monitor all student progress through Ph.D. completion
into the professoriate and beyond. Intellectual Merit includes management
expertise and advancing knowledge and understanding in the STEM fields. The
proposed Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort IX) Program rests on a solid foundation
of partnerships, resources, effective practices and experiences derived from
sixteen (16) years of collaboration, cooperation and concerted efforts focused
on minority student achievement under the current Philadelphia AMP and Bridge to
the Doctorate (BTD) Cohort I-VIII programs. In particular, this experience has
helped the Alliance's STEM graduate programs mature considerably, to the benefit
of all STEM graduate students, not just the BTD Fellows. University of
Delaware's successful implementation of Cohort I makes them well qualified to
host the proposed Cohort IX project. The proposed effort builds upon the
existing infrastructure to advance underrepresented minority students into
participation in engineering and the sciences at the highest levels. Broader
Impacts include: (1) increasing the number and quality of students from
underrepresented groups at AMP institutions completing STEM M.S. and Ph.D.s and
entering the professoriate; (2) advancing knowledge in the STEM disciplines
through the promotion of research activity and the dissemination of information
about best practices used to promote the retention of students from
underrepresented groups; and (3) enhancing the infrastructure for research and
education through the development of support networks and partnerships within
the Philadelphia AMP and beyond.