* 1139997
* RAPID: Sediment, water, and nutrient flux and fate in Lake Pontchartrain from the 2011 Bonnet Carre Spillway Opening.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Nan Walker, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2013
* USD 99,957.00

RAPID: Sediment, water, and nutrient flux and fate in Lake Pontchartrain from
the 2011 Bonnet Carre Spillway
Opening&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1139997&lt;br/&gt;Samuel Bentley, Sibel Bargu,
Chunyan Li, Nan Walker, John R. White&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The lower Mississippi River
Delta (MRD), inhabited by &gt;2 million people, is a critical national resource
in terms of maritime transport, fisheries, and energy. MRD wetlands and waters
are degrading at alarming rates, losing wetlands equivalent to the area of
Delaware since the 1930?s, and more over the next century. The health of coastal
waters and the fate of wetlands are strongly governed by the flow of fresh water
and accompanying sediments and nutrients, which are now largely controlled by
engineered structures along the river. For these reasons, conservation and
restoration of the MRD is one of the outstanding environmental and socioeconomic
challenges faced by our country over the next century. Understanding and
managing water, sediment, and nutrient flux and fate into the MRD coastal zone
is central to this challenge. &lt;br/&gt;The Spring 2011 hydrograph of the
Mississippi River is reaching levels exceeding the Great Flood of 1927 in many
locations in Louisiana. To provide relief to river levees, water is being
released through the Bonnet Carr√© Spillway (BCS) into Lake Ponchartrain (LP), a
large mostly enclosed estuary within the MRD (Fig. 1). BCS opening on May 9 is
now producing record fluxes of water (&gt;8800 m3 s-1, 126% of design capacity)
into LP, likely along with record fluxes of sediment and nutrients.
Understanding the dynamics and impact of this plume in LP is important for
several reasons: (1) nutrient loading to the lake will produce potentially toxic
algal blooms; (2) fresh water flux will cause strong exchange of the fresher
lake with the saltier coastal ocean; and (3), measurement and study of sediment
supply and deposition will provide important information for use of sediment in
engineered diversions for delta restoration. &lt;br/&gt;PIs will sample water,
sediment, nutrients, and plankton over time to understand impacts to the lake,
in order to better understand impacts from future manmade diversions for delta
restoration. Because LP has strong similarities to other MRD estuaries, and
engineered diversions of river water and sediment are primary tools planned for
MRD conservation and restoration, results of this work will be directly
applicable to large regions of the MRD in need of conservation and restoration.