* 1139798
* 2011 International Year of Chemistry (IYC) Symposium on Stratospheric Ozone and Climate Change; Washington, DC; November 7-10, 2011
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Renyi Zhang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 25,000.00

In observance of the 2011 International Year of Chemistry, this symposium is
being convened to recognize the contributions of scientists, policy decision
makers, industry, and intergovernmental agencies to characterize and counteract
the threat that industrially produced halocarbons posed to the Earth's
protective stratospheric ozone layer. The American Meteorological Society (AMS),
American Geophysical Union (AGU), and American Chemical Society (ACS) are the
primary co-sponsors for this symposium. International co-sponsors include the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP - Ozone Secretariat), World
Meteorological Organization (WMO - Research Department), and the International
Commission on Atmospheric Chemistry and Global Pollution (ICACGP) of the
International Association of Meteorology and Atmospheric Science (IAMAS). World-
renowned atmospheric chemists and other scientists, who have made important
contributions to stratospheric ozone research, will be invited to deliver
keynote speeches. In addition, invited presentations on the regulatory and
policy aspects of stratospheric ozone and climate changes will be planned from
the policy and industry communities. The last day of the symposium will be
dedicated to a young scientist forum: the agenda will include both oral and
poster presentations from young scientists, covering the topics of research in
stratospheric ozone and climate change, policy decision making, and integration
between science and policy.