* 1139746
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Models and Observations to Assess Effects of Turbulence on Warm Rain Initiation
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Patrick Chuang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 360,551.00

While the "warm rain" process--in which ice-phase microphysics play little or no
role in development of precipitation-size particles--is thought to account for
as much as one-third of all tropical precipitation, yet a number of
uncertainties remain regarding its exact mechanisms. In particular, the classic
theory of condensational growth followed by collision-coalescence accompanying
gravitational settling is unable to explain the oft-observed rapid development
of rain in clouds confined to temperatures warmer than 0 degC. It has gradually
become recognized that turbulence could play a critical role in accelerating
this process, but realizable predictions have been difficult to achieve because
quantitative research approaches are lacking. Recent advances in theory and
computational capacity have enabled more quantitative assessment of turbulence
effects on the collision-coalescence rate, and several preliminary
parameterizations of turbulent collection have been developed. The goals of this
research are to (a) incorporate representation of realistic turbulence-driven
collection (i.e. droplet growth) in a large-eddy simulation (LES) model of cloud
behavior using a bin microphysical scheme, and subsequently (b) to evaluate
resulting predictions using existing in situ observations of real clouds to
identify those conditions under which this newly-represented process affects and
improves model predictions. Owing to their long lifecycle and a large amount of
high-quality observational data available to facilitate real world-model
comparisons, marine stratocumulus clouds will be emphasized. A hybrid direct
numerical simulation (DNS) approach will be used to develop more accurate
parameterization of turbulent collision-coalescence in conditions of low-to-
intermediate mean flow dissipation rates, and statistical methods to incorporate
such a parameterization into the LES framework will be explored. This approach
will be complemented by phenomenological modeling of Reynolds number effects on
airflow, and in so doing the LES model will be improved to allow for differing
cloud entrainment mixing scenarios. The intellectual merit of this study will
center on a more accurate and systematic evolution of the effects of turbulence
on realistic stratocumulus conditions and improved assessment of our current
ability to represent such effects quantitatively in a predictive mode. Broader
Impacts of the effort will include development of findings that should
ultimately be applicable to other types of clouds (e.g., more vigorous cumulus)
and improved quantitative representation for warm-rain development in more
coarse-grained numerical weather prediction and climate models, as well as
through enhanced collaboration across the cloud microphysics and computational
sciences. This setting will provide a vibrant and multifaceted education and
training ground for a mix of undergraduate and graduate students at the two
involved institutions.