* 1139227
* BIOMIMETIC METHODS BASED ON SOLUBLE AMMONIUM PHOSPHATE PRECURSORS FOR THE CONSOLIDATION OF WALL PAINTINGS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Benjamin Wu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
(SSMC) program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR), this project will
develop hydroxyapatite (HAP) based, inorganic mineral systems to preserve and
consolidate powdery wall paintings composed on calcium carbonate (CaCO3) rich
plaster layers of archaeological, historic and artistic value. Biomimetic
principles are used to induce HAP formation in the decohesive plaster by
triggering reactions between the carbonate substrate and the peptidic and
ammonium phosphate precursors. Spatially, structurally and compositionally
sensitive analytics including scanning electron microscopy, 3D-CT imaging,
dynamic vapor sorption methods and mechanical and fluid-transport analyses are
applied to quantify HAP treatments. From a scientific perspective, the research
describes: (1) chemical interactions and reactions between the phosphate
reactant and the CaCO3 plaster and (2) the impact of HAP formation on
strengthening the microstructure, and improving the painting?s durability while
maintaining the original optical/aesthetic properties. The interdisciplinary
nature of this research, at the interface of conservation science, biotechnology
and materials science develops tailored conservation treatments that consider
fundamental characteristics of the substrate chemistry and structure to
prescribe and metricate treatment protocols. The research advances our ability
to design, manipulate and evaluate consolidation treatments for porous
polychrome surfaces and allows for improved methodologies to preserve global
cultural heritage. Significantly, the effort develops conservation strategies
for historic objects ranging from paintings and rock-art to stone structures,
paleontological fossils and archaeological bone with a basis rooted in the
physical sciences and materials engineering.

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT Wall paintings provide a testimony of artistic,
cultural, and intellectual developments and are consequently of profound
archaeological, historical and cultural significance. Unfortunately, with the
passage of time, wall paintings experience considerable degradation due to their
exposure to human activity and environmental forces. While several methods have
been proposed to limit or halt such degradation, these methods often compromise
the intrinsic quality and attributes of the painting. Through a multi-
disciplinary collaboration at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA),
this research develops hydroxyapatite-based consolidation treatments to enable
the protection of multi-layered, polychrome, heterogeneous wall paintings from
weathering and deterioration induced by passage-of-time and environmental
effects without causing significant change to their physical and chemical
properties. By using analytical tools sensitive to the composition and structure
of the material, treatment methods are applied and metricated in a context
sensitive fashion; i.e., with attention to the characteristics of a specific
painting and its execution technique (i.e., fresco or secco). The research and
academic training provided to a post-doctoral researcher, a graduate student and
several undergraduate students imparts knowledge to a new generation of
conservation scientists who can contribute to preserving our collective cultural
heritage. Through interactions with national and international collaborators the
research offers a platform for academic excellence/exchange and at the same time
creates new knowledge of conservation practices applicable across diverse
geographical domains. Finally, the research also develops knowledge with
applications in bioengineering for tooth/bone reconstruction and for
infrastructure rehabilitation in civil engineering. This research is supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program in the Division of
Materials Research (DMR).