* 1139479
* Temporal-Spatial Evolutions of Low-Frequency Climate Variability and Warming Trend
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Zhaohua Wu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2015
* USD 396,805.00

This project has the following goals: (i)to adaptively and locally separate the
varying global warming trend and the multi-decadal climate variability, both
spatially and temporally; (ii)to reveal the characteristics of temporal
evolution from 1850 to present of some observed low-frequency climate modes,
e.g., Pacific multidecadal variability, Atlantic multidecadal variability, and
the North Atlantic Oscillation; &lt;br/&gt;(iii) to compare these
characteristics to their counterparts of low-frequency climate modes in climate
model simulations; and (iv)to search for physical mechanisms of the evolution of
low frequency climate modes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main tool that will be
used is the Multi-dimensional Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition (MEEMD)
(MEEMD), developed less than one year ago by the PI. The MEEMD is a novel
extension of a sparse time series decomposition method without a priori
determined bases, the Empirical Mode Decomposition, for spatial-temporal multi-
dimensional data analysis. By applying the method to historical climate fields
and Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP3/CMIP5) model simulations, the
researcher will examine spatial-temporal characteristics of the evolutions of
multidecadal variability and trend of the climate of the past one and a half
centuries, as well as their counterparts in model simulations. This will provide
insights and clues for further improvement of climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has the following broader impact: (i)
improvement of the adaptive and spatial-temporally local analysis method may
prove useful in other scientific, engineering, or biomedical field that involves
data analysis; (ii) there is training of future scientists and technology
professionals in both data analysis theory and methods; and (iii) the research
will help to disseminate the knowledge, techniques and tools developed in this
project through publishing in the open literature, and making new software tools
open source for use by a wider community.