* 1139025
* Collaborative Research: Expeditions in Computer Augmented Program Engineering (ExCAPE): Harnessing Synthesis for Software Design
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Hadas Kress Gazit, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2018
* USD 506,930.00

ExCAPE: Expeditions in Computer Augmented Program Engineering Lead
PI/Institution: Rajeev Alur, University of Pennsylvania

Computers have revolutionized our daily lives, and yet the way we program
computers has changed little in the last several decades. Software development
still remains a tedious and error-prone activity. ExCAPE aims to change
programming from a purely manual task to one in which a programmer and an
automated program synthesis tool collaborate to generate software that meets its
specification.

A distinguishing feature of the ExCAPE approach is that the program description
can involve a wide range of artifacts that are best-suited to the particular
development task: incomplete programs; declarative specifications of high-level
requirements; positive and negative examples of desired behaviors; and
optimization criteria for selecting among alternative implementations. This
diversity is aimed at allowing a programmer flexibility to express insights
through a variety of formats, leading to a more intuitive and less error-prone
way of programming.

The synthesis tool uses a range of computational approaches and developer
interaction to compose these different views about the structure and
functionality of the system into a unified, concrete implementation. The
computational techniques include decision procedures for constraint-satisfaction
problems; iterative schemes for abstraction and refinement; and data-driven
learning. The methodology for programmer interaction moves verification from the
back-end of the design cycle to the front-end, with the promise of a more
reliable software product.

To develop the theory and practice of the proposed paradigm, the ExCAPE team
brings together expertise in theoretical foundations (computer-aided
verification, control theory, program analysis), design methodology (human-
computer interaction, model-based design, programming environments), and
applications (concurrent programming, network protocols, robotics, system
architecture). Research will focus on developing new computational engines for
transformation and integration of synthesis artifacts, and effective methods for
programmer interaction and feedback.

While the benefits of the ExCAPE approach will apply broadly to software
development, the ExCAPE team will focus its efforts by initially targeting four
challenge problems: developing efficient concurrent data structures; developing
protocols for on-chip interconnection networks; developing distributed routing
network protocols; and end-user programming for autonomous robots. The ExCAPE
approach will be a radical departure from the way these problems are solved
today. For example, for the challenge problem on concurrent programming, the
planned design tool will provide smart assistance for expert programmers to
produce efficient and correct code, while the proposed tool for the robotics
challenge problem will let end users program robots by demonstrating example
behaviors. As ExCAPE aims to affect industrial practice, design tools for all
four challenge problems will be developed and evaluated in close collaboration
with industrial partners.

The technology developed by ExCAPE also has the potential to revolutionize the
way computing concepts are taught. Building on the core technology used in
program synthesis, the ExCAPE team plans to develop smart tutoring software that
can analyze students? answers for conceptual errors and generate additional
problems tailored to that student.. This tutoring software will be developed for
representative high-school and undergraduate courses and will be made widely
available. This outreach effort is aimed at attracting more students to
computing disciplines by promoting a new and more appealing vision of what it
means to program. ExCAPE will also nurture an inter-disciplinary community of
researchers in computer-augmented programming, via an annual workshop, a
biannual summer school, and a competition for synthesis tools, with associated
challenge problems and benchmarks.

For more information visit http://excape.cis.upenn.edu