* 1139057
* Collaborative Research: EAGER:Studying lignocellulosic fine structure and its dynamics in enzymatic hydrolysis of biomass using molecule-recognizing AFM and computational modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Bingqian Xu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 63,465.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lignocellulosic biomass is a composite structure
with crystalline cellulose, hydrated hemicellulose, and lignin as major
components. It has long been recognized as a potential lowcost and sustainable
source of mixed sugars for production of biofuels and other value-added
chemicals. Plants have evolved superb mechanisms for resisting assault on their
cell wall structural sugars from the microbial and animal kingdoms, collectively
known as biomass recalcitrance. These mechanisms are comprised of factors that
are believed to contribute to the inefficiency of enzymatic hydrolysis of
biomass. The lignocellulosic fine structure, i.e. the way cellulose,
hemicelluloses, and lignin are bonding with each other, and how the
lignocellulosic fine structure evolves during hydrolysis due to the molecular
interactions between biomass and enzymes, is thus crucial for logistic and
specific design of enzymes and processes to overcome the above factors that slow
down the hydrolytic reactions. However, such urgently needed information is
pretty much missing because direct detection of lignocellulose component
conformation and distribution is NOT possible so far. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this EAGER project, Investigators Bingqian Xu from University of Georgia and Wen
Zhou from Michigan Technological University will employ a unique approach which
is to combine the newly developed CBM functionalized AFM (atomic force
microscope) technology with computational modeling to directly detect
lignocellulose component conformation and distribution, thereby overcoming the
long-standing technical &lt;br/&gt;difficulties in realizing the dynamics of
lignocellulosic components (conformation and distribution) during the enzymatic
hydrolysis. An EAGER grant would support this collaborated research to explore
this proposed high-risk, high-reward project by getting the much needed data.
The aim is a tool and methodology for selection and design of better enzymes and
processes to overcome the biomass recalcitrance efficiently.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the proposed research lies in the
ability (1) to study the lignocellulosic fine structure in nanometer scale with
molecular recognition, (2) to construct the 3D structural image of biomass
particle, and (3) to monitor the lignocellulosic fine structure dynamics in
hydrolysis. The combination of experimental and computational modeling methods
will potentially provide a new approach and evidence to tackle the unsolved
lignocelluloses component conformation and distribution, offering molecular
scale understanding of the lignocellulose hydrolysis process which could be
critical in overcoming biomass recalcitrance. In addition, development of the
technology will also add unique capabilities for single molecule studies in
other biosystems to probe the biomolecules and their interactions.