* 1139792
* GOALI: Laser Surface Processing of Ceramic Eutectics for Enhanced Cutting Tool Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/22/2011,03/31/2015
* Elizabeth Dickey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2015
* USD 308,450.00

The research program, which is in collaboration with Kennametal, Inc., Latrobe,
PA, aims to advance the fundamental understanding of nanoscale ceramic
composites for potential use in abrasive and cutting tool materials. Ceramic
eutectic surface layers will be deposited onto commercial cutting tools via
laser solidification, which is a commercially scalable technique. Moreover, the
laser processing allows for high processing velocities that lead to well-
oriented, nanoscale eutectic microstructures, smaller than that achievable by
conventional processes. This resulting nanoscale microstructures are expected to
lead to marked property enhancements (e.g. in hardness, strength and wear). The
research will develop two classes of eutectics: oxides and carbides for the
surface modification of Al2O3- and WC-based cutting tools, respectively. Through
quantitative microstructural and mechanical property characterization, the
dominant deformation mechanisms and microstructural scaling laws for these
classes of ceramic eutectics will be determined.

The research program is anticipated to lead to a new method for enhancing the
mechanical properties and lifetimes of high-performance cutting tools. The
direct interactions with Kennametal Inc. will increase the likelihood that the
methods can be quickly adopted and integrated into a commercial process. In
addition, the research program will train students, both graduate and
undergraduate, in a unique academic/industrial research setting and prepare them
to enter and lead the growing fields of laser processing and tribological
surface coatings.