* 1139192
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: STRUCTURE AND DYNAMICS OF METAL SOAP AGGREGATES AT THE PIGMENT/BINDER INTERFACE. A MULTINUCLEAR SOLID-STATE NMR STUDY
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Cecil Dybowski, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 130,518.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Dr. Silvia Centeno of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York
City and Prof. Cecil Dybowski of the University of Delaware, will study the
mechanism of aggregation of Lead carboxylates (lead soaps) in oil paintings.
Aggregation of Lead carboxylates in oil paintings is known to lead to the
formation of protrusions and paint loss in most cases, and to increased
transparency of the paint films in others, resulting in damage to the integrity
of the artworks. While widely observed, the phenomenon is not well understood.
The collaborating investigators, their students and postdoctoral trainees will
determine the structure, molecular dynamics, and phase behavior of lead
carboxylates using solid state 13C,207Pb magic-angle-spinning (MAS) nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR), 1H-207Pb and 13C- 207Pb dipolar re-coupling
experiments, and deuterium NMR along with other analytical tools. They will
elucidate the mechanism of aggregate formation/migration and based on the
results, recommend procedures to arrest the deterioration process of oil
paintings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solid state NMR experiments have the
potential to transform the field of cultural heritage science since they will
provide molecular information, which is not currently available to the cultural
heritage science community. The experiments are a gateway to the application of
emerging minimally invasive NMR methods like micro-MAS NMR to study cultural
heritage objects. Advancing the state of the art for 207Pb solid-state NMR also
has broader implications for understanding the structure of lead-containing
electronic and optoelectronic materials, high-Tc superconducting materials, and
the speciation and reaction of lead in environmentally contaminated materials.
The project will provide excellent training opportunities to students and
postdoctoral researchers who wish to train in state of the art solid state NMR
methods and cultural heritage science. Results of this study will be widely
disseminated to the public through museum programs and publications.