* 1139689
* Exploring STEM Careers Initiative
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Stanley Maloy, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,141,207.00

This project is creating a replicable, prototype community-based model for
engaging middle and high school students in challenge-based programs such as
robotics competitions (Botball and iARoC), engineering challenges (Kid Wind),
and research events (Sea Perch). The project is serving 110 teachers and 750
students representing 7 school districts and 75 schools. Partners include
organizations that broadly represent the science educational institutions of the
San Diego area. There is a cadre of volunteer STEM professionals who are
mentoring teachers and students. The goals include increasing motivation for
6th-12th grade students; preparation of teachers to use challenge-based
learning; establishment of a virtual network for collaboration; and development
of a sustainable model for all of San Diego County. The project is using
culturally relevant strategies and social learning networks as a communication
tool, with an emphasis on disadvantaged students in San Diego County, especially
the large population of Hispanics. Students are presenting their work in several
local STEM-related community events.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research findings
are contributing to the current literature regarding engagement in challenge-
based programs, especially in comparing how out of school experiences compare
with formal school settings in the areas of career choice, post secondary
choice, and success in STEM disciplines. The research is using a quasi-
experimental design with both quantitative and qualitative data. The products
include online learning modules and a model for a bilingual STEM Career Fair
Night. An attractive feature of the project that could be transformative is a
model organizational structure in which a relatively small organization, San
Diego Science Alliance, provides coordination, communication, and inspiration
that marshal the STEM education efforts of a large number of bigger institutions
across a major urban area. This structure is leveraging and maximizing the local
resources efficiently and effectively. The model is being made available to be
replicated in other large cities with similar resources.