* 1139752
* Conference on Human Computer Interaction in Informal Science Education (HCI+ISE)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Kathleen McLean, Ideum
* Standard Grant
* William Neufeld
* 08/31/2014
* USD 218,680.00

This conference brings together 60 people in May/June 2013 to discuss
opportunities and limitations in the use of the latest in Human Computer
Interactions (HCI) in museum settings, such as experiences using Kinect, Wii,
multi-touch computer-based systems and voice recognition interfaces. Given that
HCI is increasingly being used in museum settings, the conference will examine
some of the exemplar exhibits that now exist and explore some design challenges
regarding the use of HCI in museum settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants
at the conference include an interdisciplinary set of experts (science
exhibition development experts, learning science researchers, ISE evaluators and
multi-media experts) that will take a critical look at the future needs and
appropriate application of HCI in museum environments. The conference will
explore both the advantages and limitations of HCI use in museum environments,
and will concern itself with both the nature of the hardware and the learning
that can occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A final report will be disseminated via a
multi-user blog that will encourage participation/discussion and the conference
leaders will encourage the development of a Community of Practice regarding the
use of HCI in museum settings that builds from the existing Open Exhibits web
site and Open Exhibits membership (http://openexhibits.org/).