* 1139739
* New Approach to Investigate the Seismic Velocity Structure beneath Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Samantha Hansen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 70,408.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Numerous candidate models for the geologic
processes that have shaped the Antarctic continent have been proposed. To
discriminate between them, detailed images of the upper mantle structure are
required; however, the only existing continental-scale images of seismic
structure beneath Antarctica lack sufficient resolution to delineate important,
diagnostic features. Using newly available data from various Antarctic seismic
networks, the PI will employ the adaptively parameterized tomography method to
develop a high-resolution, continental-scale seismic velocity model for all of
Antarctica. The proposed tomography method combines regional seismic travel-time
datasets in the context of a global model to create a composite continental-
scale model of upper mantle structure. The proposed method allows for imaging of
finer structure in areas with better seismic ray coverage while simultaneously
limiting the resolution of features in regions with less coverage. This research
will help advance understanding of important global processes, such as craton
formation, mountain building, continental rifting and associated magmatism.
Additionally, the proposed research will have important impacts on other fields
of Antarctic science. Constraints provided by tomographic results can be used to
develop thermal models of the lithosphere needed to characterize the history and
dynamics of ice sheets. Also, further constraints on lithospheric structure are
required by climate-ice models, which are focused on understanding the cooling
history of the Antarctic continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The PI is a new faculty member at the University of Alabama after
having been funded as a National Science Foundation Postdoctoral Fellow in Polar
Regions Research. The graduate student supported by this project is new to polar
research. Through the UA-Tuscaloosa Magnet School partnership program, the PI
will educate K-12 students about the Antarctic environment and associated career
opportunities through various online and hands-on activities. University of
Alabama dedicates a significant percentage of its enrollment space to
underrepresented groups.