* 1140443
* Integrating Technology-Rich Instruction of Urban Students into the Secondary Education-Mathematics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jodie Styers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 159,901.00

This project team is collaborating with an urban school district to enable
mathematics education majors to gain experiences teaching technology-rich
mathematics lessons to inner-city students in a model classroom at the PI's
institution. Existing mathematics methods courses are being restructured to
emphasize applying the course content within the context of preparing and
teaching lessons to students visiting from the local school district. The
intellectual merit of the project rests on three components: 1) providing
undergraduates early experiences in teaching diverse student populations; 2)
linking mathematics education theory with practice; and 3) promoting effective
use of technology to advance mathematical reasoning and sense making in
students. In addition, the investigating team is examining the impact of the
restructured courses and model technology classroom on: i) the beliefs of the
undergraduate mathematics education students about teaching in an urban setting,
ii) their knowledge of technology and implementation strategies, and iii) their
ability to link educational theories and classroom practices. The publication
and presentation of findings from this work are contributing to the project's
broader impacts by informing other undergraduate education programs and
providing a model for how to provide preservice teachers with early, authentic
experiences teaching with technology. Moreover, the participating students in
the Erie School District are benefitting from engaging mathematics lessons and
opportunities to visit a college campus. Finally, collaborating teachers in the
local school districts are gaining valuable in-service professional development
through their exposure to effective examples of implementations of technology-
enriched mathematics lessons.