* 1140330
* Multi-Level Implementation of Interdisciplinary Inquiry- and Research-Based Labs
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Laura Stultz, Birmingham Southern College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2015
* USD 208,229.00

This project is connecting the biology and chemistry curricula as well as
increasing the number of inquiry-based laboratory modules by incorporating a
common research theme into select courses. The General Chemistry lab is being
revised to introduce all biology and chemistry students to fundamental
scientific concepts using a discovery-based approach to solve real-world
problems such as carbon dioxide release and biofuel combustion. Research
experiences are being introduced into four additional courses - two in biology
and two in chemistry. These linked courses are introducing students to the
purest form of inquiry by having them synthesize anticancer ruthenium complexes
and conduct research on the chemical and biological properties of this new class
of drug. All modules incorporate elements of the gradualism approach in which
students start off with highly structured, well-defined tasks that focus on
building basic skills and then progress to more open-ended projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of this project include improved critical-
thinking and problem-solving skills. The activities are helping students develop
an integrated view of modern science as they tackle a real-world problem - drug
development - from both biological and chemical perspectives. Student
collaborations on research within and across courses is building a stronger
sense of community among biology and chemistry majors.