* 1140797
* Evaluating the Role of Play, Feedback and Narrative in Undergraduate Thermodynamics Education
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2014
* John Pfotenhauer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 10/31/2014
* USD 199,453.00

This project from the University of Wisconsin-Madison is producing a game-based
learning tool to improve the success of students in introductory thermodynamics.
The game improves the ability of students to grasp core concepts in
thermodynamics. The project is also exploring the influence of formative
feedback and demographically targeted narratives on the game-based learning.
Concept inventory measurements gathered pre and post, along with a novel game
assessment tool, characterize the game-induced learning. The innovative game
assessment tool, built around the record of game-play moves, enables a direct
measurement of learning moments and a mechanism to track the progress of players
from novice to expert type behavior. The project empowers the creative energies
of young engineers as they explore energy related issues and develop a strong
foundation in thermodynamics. The game helps students recognize common
relationships between key parameters such as pressure, temperature, and specific
volume, and assists them to accurately identify how those variables interact
within a variety of processes. Students explore these concepts within the
context of energy balance and entropy balance relationships for closed systems
and control volumes by selecting appropriate constraints that correspond to a
specifically addressed narrative.