* 1140033
* EAGER:   Assembly of Centrioles/centrosomes in Vitro
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Ryoko Kuriyama, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2016
* USD 299,987.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The centriole is a highly conserved intracellular
structure composed of microtubule triplets arranged in a 9-fold symmetrical
configuration. It is essential for cilia/flagella formation and the organization
of centrosomes, which play a key role in a number of biological processes,
including chromosome segregation during cell division. To perform proper
functions, cells must produce the precise number of centrioles during the cell
cycle and development. This project is aimed at development of a novel system of
in vitro centriogenesis to facilitate the analysis of centriole formation and
its regulation. Studies on centriole biogenesis in somatic cell lysates has been
hampered by a low copy number of centrioles, which duplicate only once each
relatively longer period of cell cycle time. To overcome this problem, the
project uses DT40 chicken lymphocytes which continue to accumulate centriolar
components, but fail to assemble centrioles by expressing genetically
inactivated Cyclin-dependent kinases. The robust centriole assembly is triggered
by supplementing exogenous Plk4 (Polo-like kinase 4) to cells. Using lysates
prepared from mutant DT40 cells, the project will establish and optimize the in
vitro condition of centriole biogenesis, and further assess the role of Plk4 in
the control of centriole copy numbers. The scientific outcomes of the project
will have great impact by opening a new avenue for the study of
centrioles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The project provides
excellent opportunities for the scientific training of undergraduate students -
future educators, scientists, engineers, and technicians. By participating in
different parts of the project, students will receive intellectual as well as a
wide range of technical trainings, including DNA cloning, protein preparation,
cell culture/analysis, and light/electron microscopy. The PI has been involved
in undergraduate lab education as an instructor of cell biology laboratory
classes as well as a mentor of significant numbers of students performing
research projects in the lab. Particular attention will be paid to women and
underrepresented minorities for future recruitment. The PI will mentor student
training by setting up several basic principles: 1) close mentoring at each
critical stage; 2) selection of appropriate projects for individual students: 3)
providing long-term opportunities of training. Students will be assigned to
present data in formal/information meetings and submit summary
statements/manuscripts to improve communication and writing skills. The
scientific outcomes of the project will have broad impacts in other areas of
cell and developmental biology, as the centriole is involved in many important
biological functions. Information on experimental conditions will be accessible
through open internet sites, such as mtocDB (microtubule-organizing center
databases providing molecular and morphological data of centrioles, and other
microtubule-organizing centers), which will facilitate to address important
unanswered questions, such as morphological diversity of the centriole evolved
among species, by forming variable structures under different assembly
conditions.