* 1140286
* Early Integration of Research Experiences into the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum.
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Jeffrey Hill, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2016
* USD 199,791.00

This project takes a two pronged approach to engage science students early in
their academic career as a means of reducing the problem of low retention of
majors during subsequent years. One effort, Biopods, utilizes electronic media
and classroom discussion to provide an early introduction of students to career
opportunities open to biology majors. Biopods also help students see the merits
of becoming active self-learners and participating in research. The other
effort, AMOEBA (Authentic Mentoring of Engaged Biologists Alliance), engages
biology faculty in establishing research modules to replace the traditional
Introductory Biology 2 experience with laboratory activities based upon ongoing
research activities at the institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: Preliminary trials of the AMOEBA approach (based on stable isotope
exploration of the effects of sugar uptake on the elemental and ecological
stoichiometry of fern gametophytes and biotic soil crust organisms) indicates
that students can: contribute to the research; appreciate the importance of the
interdisciplinary studies they were doing; and are enthusiastic about continuing
these type of courses and continuing on as biology majors. An added intellectual
merit is that the courses are designed to include upper division as well as
lower division students, postdoctoral fellows, faculty and graduate students all
working together on real research problems and pooling their efforts, thus
transforming introductory courses into a collaborative research alliance that
engages students in a biology learning community during an early phase of their
academic careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Successful
implementation of these techniques at a typical state university can provide a
model that can transform approaches at similar institutions that both benefit
the students in the courses and introduce graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and faculty to their potential as advocates and practitioners of
effective and intellectually challenging approaches to undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.