* 1140694
* Collaborative Research: A Systems-Centric Foundation for Electrical and Computer Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Aaron Ohta, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 09/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS:&lt;br/&gt;Northern Arizona
University&lt;br/&gt;University of Vermont &amp; State Agricultural
College&lt;br/&gt;University of South Florida&lt;br/&gt;University of
Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing an educational model that pioneers the integration of
circuits and systems concepts, forming a new set of conceptual cornerstones for
electrical and computer engineering (ECE) students. The goal is to motivate and
enrich the learning experience in a fundamental ECE course, Circuits, by
connecting its topics to relevant and compelling challenges; while
simultaneously introducing students to underlying systems-thinking
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort is designing a systems-centric
educational model for electrical and computing engineering courses in the
context of developing electronic solutions for applied problems. The project
focus is on three broad areas of health, energy, and environment, all of which
are of great importance and provide students with engaging, relevant application
arenas. Prototype learning modules are being developed for use in Circuits
courses to increase student interest and improve their ability to think in terms
of complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
SIGNIFICANCE&lt;br/&gt;The multi-university partnership brings expertise in
multiple disciplines of electrical engineering. The project team has prior
experience in offering this systems-centric approach and producing positive
results in a wireless sensor network design curriculum. This effort allows the
team to extend and further test this promising approach at a lower academic
level in another course area, which can lead to a model that can be scaled. The
five institutions involved in the project are coordinating and implementing the
effort across a diverse set of engineering student populations and locations,
thus offering the potential for broad exposure and impact. The project is
creating a model for how to develop engineering course material that can be
adapted for use by a wide range of universities that are not limited by
geographical constraints.