* 1140363
* TUES: The Development and Assessment of a New Test and Product Engineering Certificate Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Tina Hudson, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 184,615.00

Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology is partnering with local industry in
developing a certificate program in Test and Product Engineering. Test and
product engineers are needed in the semiconductor industry to ensure that small
manufacturing defects do not impact the performance of integrated-circuit chips.
Staggering improvements in the semiconductor industry have resulted in devices
with incredible performance at the cost of increasing test difficulty. The
learning curve for test and product engineers is long and slow, and few
universities provide students with background in this area.

To address this industrial need, this project is developing two Test and Product
Engineering courses with an intense hands-on laboratory component to support a
certificate program in Test and Product Engineering. Strong industrial input is
ensuring that the courses and laboratories are relevant to industry needs.
Educational research expertise is ensuring that the courses and laboratories are
improving students' higher-order thinking skills, creativity and problem-solving
abilities. The project is applying a novel, industry-centered assessment
strategy to determine whether the courses meet their goal of reducing the time
it takes for students to be productive in the integrated-circuit industry.
Materials are being developed to allow other universities to adopt these courses
even if they do not have the expensive lab equipment necessary to perform the
hands-on labs.