* 1140000
* RCN-SEES: Sustainable Manufacturing Advances in Research and Technology (SMART) Coordination Network
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Thomas Edgar, Cache Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 721,800.00

1140000 (Huang). This award is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and
Education for Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aim to address challenges
of creating a sustainable world. U.S. manufacturing, a key component of national
economic development and prosperity, has been greatly challenged by competitive
trends over the past decade, as global manufacturing competition has begun to
shift towards fast implementation, just-in-time model-based manufacturing,
frequent product transitions, and shifting of technical personnel to meet those
changing needs. Further burdens are being placed on all industries owing to
uncertain energy prices and possible greenhouse gas constraints. Revitalization
of U.S. manufacturing is of utmost importance in the national economy. In
academia, engineering sustainability, advanced manufacturing theory, alternative
energy and biofuels have become very active but relatively disconnected research
areas. Research coordination in the academic community and its networking with
industries are insufficient and lack depth. To bridge the gap between the
academic knowledge discovery and industrial technology innovation for
sustainable manufacturing, our multidisciplinary team proposes to create an
interdisciplinary, international research coordination network to promote
Sustainable Manufacturing Advances in Research and Technology (SMART). SMART
reflects the theme of the joint effort among a number of leading academic
laboratories, centers, non-government organizations, and major manufacturing
industries. During this project, the team will (1) conduct comprehensive and in-
depth review of frontier research and technological development for sustainable
manufacturing, (2) define the roadmap towards manufacturing sustainability and
identify the bottlenecks in a number of focused research areas via several
workshops, (3) coordinate research through sharing knowledge, resources,
software, and results, (4) establish partnerships with industrial groups to
expedite technology introduction, and (5) conduct education and outreach to a
wide range of stakeholders. The SMART coordination network (CN) will be further
strengthened through collaborating with eight leading research laboratories in
seven other countries. Sustainable manufacturing research involves a wide
spectrum of areas and disciplines, such as advanced manufacturing,
sustainability assessment and decision making, product and process systems
engineering, energy and environmental engineering, multiscale complex systems
science and engineering, information technology, economics and sociology. The
SMART CN will support a new paradigm for manufacturing sustainability and
aggregate concerted efforts from multiple research groups with complementary
expertise to transform the knowledge base of manufacturing sustainability, and
develop a consensus roadmap for future efforts. It is anticipated that success
in this endeavor will have a significant impact on industrial efforts in
developing sustainable manufacturing technologies. The SMART CN will serve as a
starting point for further increasing the diversity of the next generation of
researchers, especially under-represented groups, and will have a hub-type
website to serve the different communities. The project will also generate a
number of case study educational modules for sustainable engineering education
that should be widely adoptable for undergraduate/graduate education and
professional training in industries.