* 1140781
* Revitalizing the Computer Science Undergraduate Curriculum Inside and Outside of the Classroom Using Mobile Computing Platforms
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Shiva Azadegan, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,971.00

Computer Science educators are constantly reinventing introductory courses to
revitalize the overall curriculum, without the requisite attention to the
fundamental upper-level courses. While the focus on drawing students into
Computer Science is vital to maintain the enrollment needed to supply a
technically-starved workforce, it is vital to use innovative pedagogical
approaches, contextualized to how students learn, throughout the curriculum
ensuring that students attain the technical skills needed to succeed in
industry. To address these challenges, this project has two main thrusts. First,
it designs, pilots and evaluates curriculum materials for three upper-level
Computer Science courses that utilize mobile computing technology to
contextualize, motivate and demonstrate fundamental computing concepts on a
platform students can relate to. The three courses utilize active learning
pedagogical approaches that engage and encourage students to attain core
computing principles while attaining the marketable technical skills associated
with mobile technology. Second, it creates service-learning opportunities, out-
of-classroom events and internship positions in which students can apply the
mobile technology skills in an industry project and showcase their work to the
larger community. The culmination of these efforts creates a synergy between
instruction in and out of the classroom that balances the acquisition of
fundamental computing skills and the attainment of in-demand industry technical
skills.