* 1140711
* Fostering Remembering: Enhancing Student Retention of Prerequisite Knowledge through Preclass Activities and Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Integrated Case Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Ann Taylor, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 01/31/2016
* USD 127,921.00

This project develops and evaluates the effectiveness of two interventions on
strengthening student understanding of prerequisite knowledge required for
learning biochemistry and integrating this understanding into new knowledge
gained. The two interventions are: (1) pre-class activities that review
prerequisite material and (2) process-oriented guided inquiry case studies that
incorporate both new and review materials to strengthen the understanding of
prerequisite knowledge and to integrate new knowledge. Cognitive neuroscience
and science education studies demonstrate that students retain less than half of
the material presented in class. Developments in learning theory show that
regularly recalling previously learned concepts reinforces connections and
conceptual understanding. These two interventions to enhance student learning
and critical thinking are implemented sequentially so that their separate
effects can be determined. Their effects will be evaluated through pre- and
post-testing of prerequisite concepts, conceptual questions embedded on unit
exams, and surveys of students' self-evaluation of understanding. Long term
retention is assessed on comprehensive exams given a year later. This work
impacts educational delivery strategies, including textbook organization and
classroom delivery methods.