* 1140940
* X-Ray Crystallography for Transforming Undergraduate Instruction at PUIs in the Pacific Northwest
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Edward Valente, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This project provides general and organic chemistry students with hands-on
education using single crystal X-ray crystallography (SC-XRD) at Lewis and Clark
College and a consortium of three other campuses - George Fox University,
Willamette University and the University of Portland. Curricular materials using
SC-XRD to analyze samples and determine accurate and precise measurements of the
full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and
angles, are designed, implemented, evaluated and diseminated. SC-XRD is an
emerging topic in the undergraduate chemistry curriculum and this projects helps
to fill a gap in available curricular materials. Faculty members from
participating campuses participate in workshops where they both refine their
skills using the instrumentation and develop the new teaching materials.
Structural information is available to other institutions through online data
sharing. Curricular materials and evaluation outcomes are disseminated through a
sponsored regional meeting, project web site and publications. Evaluation of the
technical component of developed materials is performed by an experienced
crystallographer, while evaluation of the faculty professional development and
the project's impact on student attitudes and learning outcomes, is performed by
a faculty member from the Lewis and Clark Graduate School of Education and
Counseling.