* 1140205
* RCN-SEES: Finding Common Ground: Developing Sustainable Networks of Women Scientists for Addressing Issues of Environmental Hazards
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Jean Stockard, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2016
* USD 438,151.00

Mitigating the impact of natural environmental hazards and climate change is a
major challenge. Reducing &lt;br/&gt;societal vulnerability goes beyond
understanding seismographic and meteorological data and must integrate the
human, economic and social influences on risk assessment, hazard preparedness
and disaster response. To increase the intellectual capacity to anticipate and
mitigate the effects of environmental hazards, this project will develop a
multidisciplinary research network to increase the number of women (an
underrepresented group) in environmental hazards scholarship. This international
effort will couple practitioners in the fields of geosciences, atmospheric
science, economics and other social sciences in the U.S, with those in Latin
America and the Caribbean, two areas that are particularly vulnerable to the
risks posed by natural hazards due to their rapid urbanization, poorly
engineered construction, inadequate infrastructure, poverty and other factors.
Through engaging research workshops and the use of collaborative cybertools, we
will (1) create an international network of women with common research interests
in environmental hazards; (2) use this network to build intellectual leadership
capacity in this area through activities that broaden knowledge of the
scientific and social science research on environmental hazards, and (3) promote
network growth and assess its impact on participants. The network will
facilitate the exchange of research ideas, build strong multi-disciplinary
research teams, create networking relationships and broaden the knowledge base
of participants in both the human and geological sciences (i.e. risk assessment,
management and preparedness and socio-economic and political factors associated
with environmental hazards). Workshops will lay the foundation for the longer-
term cyber enabled network that will facilitate and enhance the research
activities of the participants and sustain cross-disciplinary dialogue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the factors (including the cyber enabled
activities) that are most effective in developing and maintaining distributed,
interdisciplinary, international research networks will inform other scholarly
communities and improve the effectiveness of social networks in technical
fields. Broadening the participation of women in science, technology,
engineering and math is central to increasing national competitiveness and
addressing environmental hazards issues that have significant implications for
our society. The network is designed to increase the numbers, retention and
leadership of women researchers, students, postdocs in the field, to educate
them in multidisciplinary aspects of environmental hazard research and to engage
them in activities that provide outreach to citizens in at-risk communities
where environmental hazards are among the major causes of death and disease,
particularly for women and young children, and women play a key role in
preparing for and mitigating disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
have an enormous impact on a wide range of environmental hazards posed by
meteorological phenomena, such as hurricanes, storms, droughts and floods; and
geophysical activity, such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides,
mudslides, and tsunamis. It will improve our disaster preparedness, enhance
hazard mitigation efforts, and provide for much more effective hazard response.
Engaging a diverse participant pool through well-designed team-building
activities will result in strong collaborative research and an enduring network
of scholars that will make a lasting contribution to the field of hazards and
sustainability science.