* 1140692
* Development, Implementation and Assessment of Novel Inquiry-based Interdisciplinary Materials on Sustainability for the Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Katherine Aubrecht, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2015
* USD 198,604.00

The challenges of sustainability span disciplines, and students prepared to
address those challenges must be able to think critically across traditional
content areas. In this project, faculty from the Chemistry Department and
Sustainability Studies Program at Stony Brook University are collaboratively
developing, implementing, and assessing learning materials for three
undergraduate chemistry courses that focus on sustainability. The developed
materials will address the chemistry of environmental processes, environmental
degradation, energy production and the connections between chemistry-related and
non-chemistry-related aspects of sustainability, such as economics and policy.
Students will conduct meaningful research in the laboratory course by evaluating
the effectiveness of solar-powered algal turf scrubbers to remove excess
nitrogen and phosphorus nutrients from streams and coastal waters, as well as
the suitability of using the resulting algal biomass as fertilizer. These
represent potential abatement strategies for the coastal water quality problem
of fertilizer run-off. Developed materials will employ inquiry based learning
strategies using the POGIL model, and modern technology - simulation model
exercises that guide students in understanding chemistry concepts and their
connections to issues of sustainability will be created. Developed learning
materials will be evaluated and disseminated through publications and
presentations, and will be designed to be suitable for adoption at other
institutions.