* 1140828
* Preparing the Next Generation of STEM Professionals:   Integrating Computational Thinking into an Applied Molecular Forensics Research Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Christopher Kitts, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The investigators are developing an integrated, multidisciplinary undergraduate
molecular forensics curriculum that fosters an experimental mindset, providing a
platform to transform the way students experience the application of technology
in scientific discovery. Combining analytical procedures in microbiology,
biochemistry, and bioinformatics with algorithmic and computational skills in
computer science, the program is engaging students across the College of Science
and Mathematics and the College of Engineering in educational experiences
involving cutting-edge applied research through the lens of an initial focus:
production of a working database of E. coli fingerprints for use in tracking
environmental contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum is being
delivered to over 1,000 students each year in multiple inquiry-based courses.
These courses lay the foundation for a new emphasis in molecular forensics at
Cal Poly, which leads students from the field, where E. coli is collected, to
the laboratory, where the bacterial DNA is amplified and sequenced, to the
computer, where the data are evaluated and archived in a database. Each lab
module engages undergraduates in research with broad applications in the areas
of food and water safety. Molecular forensics modules are integrated into the
core of introductory courses at the Foundation level (freshman/sophomore),
linking microbiology, biochemistry, and bioinformatics. At the Integration level
(junior/senior), focused courses guide students in the construction and use of
databases in molecular forensics. Two bioinformatics courses, one for life
sciences majors and one for computer science majors, are being taught in concert
to provide students with project-based experiences in multidisciplinary team
settings. The student experience culminates at the Application level (senior
project capstone) with teams of students working on research with environmental
and health applications using the forensic database created in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is cultivating an undergraduate
research community while contributing to the field of molecular forensics. As
diseases caused by food-and-water-borne bacterial pathogens continue to be a
major public health issue, the importance of developing efficient methods for
tracking the sources of outbreaks cannot be overemphasized. Throughout the
molecular forensics curriculum, students are contributing to the development of
solutions for rapid identification of contamination sources in recreational and
potable water as well as food supplies. Computer science students are gaining
the real-world experience of working directly with clients in the development of
science-specific software applications.