* 1140760
* Collaborative Research: Teaching Software Modularity through Architectural Review
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jonathan Aldrich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2015
* USD 95,300.00

Drexel University, Carnegie Mellon University and the University of Hawaii are
advancing the education of software engineers through research on teaching
software modularity. This project addresses designing for modularity with an
approach based on design rule theory, design structure matrix modeling, and
architecture review. Activities include development of labs and homework
assignments featuring a series of evolution scenarios for realistic software
applications. A teaching package which includes the activities, instructional
materials, and a tool for detecting modularity problems is being constructed.
The tool is used to identify design problems within student implementations.
Several approaches to performing architecture reviews are being evaluated to
determine which approach best helps students design better modularized
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing for modularity is a fundamental topic
in educating software engineers, yet there has been little rigorous research on
how to teach it. This project leverages research results to facilitate teaching
practice and has the potential to advance our basic understanding of the causes
of design problems that may eventually result in maintenance difficulties.
Project results may fundamentally change the way software design is taught by
introducing rigorous modularity analysis techniques and semi-automatic
architecture review into the classroom, resulting in better trained software
designers who are equipped with the knowledge, skills, and tools to produce
software that incurs much lower maintenance costs.