* 1140326
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Undergraduate Physical Chemistry Education using a Context Rich Pedagogy to Teach Kinetics, Quantum Mechanics, and Spectroscopy
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Mary Crawford, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 12/31/2015
* USD 98,620.00

The collaborative project between Knox College and Grinnell College is
developing adaptable laboratory and curricular materials for an advanced
chemistry course using a context-rich pedagogical approach. The project is (1)
introducing modular spectroscopic instrumentation and computational techniques
into the physical chemistry curriculum, (2) guiding the students in developing
skills that will let them apply their knowledge of physical chemistry concepts
to interdisciplinary applications, (3) assessing the impact of contextualized
laboratory experiments to student comprehension and attitudes, and (4)
disseminating the materials and assessment findings to the community.

The project is building on a prior NSF funded project, the Physical Chemistry
with a Purpose module series (DUE 0340873) by developing complementary
laboratory exercise that introduce students to selected spectroscopic techniques
and computational methods used in modern research. Experiments are being
developed featuring some combination of Raman, UV-Vis, fluorescence, and NMR
spectroscopy, along with computational chemistry and mathematical modeling. The
project is utilizing recent developments in lecture and laboratory pedagogies of
active, contextualized learning to assist students in developing a deeper
appreciation for, and understanding of, physical chemistry and its relationship
to other scientific disciplines. Modular spectrophotometry equipment is adding
capabilities in Raman, surfaced-enhanced Raman, time-resolved fluorescence, and
chemiluminescence to the Physical Chemistry Laboratories. The Gaussian suite of
programs is being used for molecular modeling and Mathematica is being used for
the mathematical modeling.

Easily adaptable materials, relying on relatively low cost instrumentation, are
being developed and made available to the community at large through both common
dissemination pathways and via multiple digital repositories. The materials are
being tested utilizing the diverse student populations at the collaborating
schools and in both semester and trimester settings. Guided by the intended
student learning outcomes for each module, the assessment and evaluation
activity is using both empirical and qualitative approaches and is being
consistently administered at both intervention sites. These data are being
compared to similar data collected prior to the implementation of the
intervention in order to establish how well the project is meeting its goals for
improving student learning outcomes.