* 1140034
* From the Classical to the Quantum Particle in a Box: A Sophomore-Level Applications of Modern Physics Course and Laboratory for Engineers and Scientists
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Marie Lopez del Puerto, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2016
* USD 117,465.00

The transition from lower-level to upper-level physics courses is difficult for
many physics and engineering students: the course material becomes more
abstract, and the mathematics more sophisticated. Yet, the United States needs
to increase the number of students who earn physical science and engineering
degrees to meet the demand of industry and maintain the country's leadership in
technology innovation. At the same time, our curricula needs to be modernized in
order to expose physics and engineering students to current theories and
applications, state-of-the-art experimental apparatus, and current computational
modeling techniques. This project is developing a sophomore-level "Applications
of Modern Physics" course and laboratory for both physics and electrical
engineering students that bridges the lower-level and upper-level curriculum and
gives students the analytical, modeling, and experimental skills they need,
while also addressing weaknesses in mathematical skills. Materials science and
nano-science in particular provide an excellent context in which to address
these issues. The course being developed starts from the atom and quantum
mechanics, builds up to nano-scale systems, and finally addresses solids and
devices. Applications, such as lasers, quantum dots, diodes, and
superconductors, are interwoven throughout the course. The accompanying
laboratory is closely tied to the class and illustrates complex concepts such as
quantized energy levels and probabilities within both classical and quantum
physics. The laboratory materials serve to guide students in writing their own
simulations and in performing state-of-the-art experiments that motivate and
incorporate the theory addressed in the course. The laboratory program
highlights the interplay between modeling and experiment that is central to the
advancement of scientific knowledge. The fully developed course directly
addresses the needs and misconceptions of students, and it increases students'
computational modeling skills and understanding of the physical principles that
govern semiconductor and nano-scale devices. It thus serves as an
interdisciplinary model for bridging the gap between the lower-level and the
upper-level curriculum in physics and engineering. Results from this curricular
development are being submitted to journals and digital archives of the physics
and engineering education communities, and further dissemination is to occur at
regional and national meetings of the AAPT and ASEE.