* 1140485
* Collaborative Research: Cheminformatics OLCC
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Robert Belford, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 154,996.00

The collaborative project between the University of Arkansas Little Rock and
Indiana University is using Web 2.0 and social networking methods to create an
OnLine Chemistry Course (OLCC) in the area of cheminformatics. By leveraging
distributed expertise, the project is enabling institutions to educate
undergraduate chemists in a skill set that is rapidly increasing in importance
to society. In addition to filling a subject gap within the curriculum, the
project team is providing an exemplar for a teaching method that can be extended
to other areas of undergraduate science education.

The artfully constructed and implemented OLCC is based on prior experience with
less demanding offerings. It enables institutions of higher education to teach a
class in the emerging area of effective use of computational and informatics
techniques as part of the scientific discovery process. Beyond providing state-
of-the-art undergraduate educational opportunities at the PIs' institutions, the
project is making the cheminformatics materials available to institutions that
wish to participate in the hybrid course wherein a facilitator at each
participating institution is responsible for the local students grades and
assessment. An additional intellectual merit of this sharing of experience is
the latent faculty development that occurs as the non-expert facilitators gain
experience in the content delivered by the distant experts. Simultaneously, the
community is developing experience in and appreciation of new digital learning
modalities that are increasingly comfortable to the new generation of 'free-
agent learners'. The OLCC is leading to the development of modules and digital
Teaching and Learning Objects that are coded with meta data, retrievable via
national and international archival mechanisms, and which can be repurposed and
distributed into other curricular environments. The use of experts distributed
beyond one campus or one country is educating current students by a new model
that makes traditional boundaries of historical interest only. The on-line
component of the hybrid course, with its many-lecturer-to-many-student
components, coupled with nurtured student-to-student interactions will aid in
the building of a diversified community. The OLCC design is developing modern
instructional opportunities that extend beyond the traditional classroom and
that industrial learners, non-traditional learners, and distance-learners can
all utilize in ways that meet their unique needs.