* 1140953
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Novel thermal interface material with Cu nanowire array
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2012
* USD 75,000.00

Collaborative Proposals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Numbers: #1140953 /
#1140121&lt;br/&gt;P.I.'s: Costas Grigoropoulos / Renkun
Chen&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-Berkeley / University of
California-San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal interface materials play a
critical role in thermal management of electronic devices. Current materials,
such as greases and solders would be insufficient for cooling the devices with
increasingly higher power dissipation level. The objective of this research is
to develop a high performance thermal interface material based on copper
nanowire array. The new material will have one order of magnitude lower thermal
contact resistance compared to the existing ones. To achieve this goal,
vertically aligned, dense arrays of single crystalline copper nanowires with
well-controlled diameters, spacing and packing density will be synthesized by
electroplating through porous anodic alumina membranes. Fundamental studies on
mechanical, thermal and electrical properties of individual nanowires will be
carried out by using micro-fabricated devices. Interfacial and bulk thermal
resistances of copper nanowire arrays will be characterized using a sensitive
transient thermo-reflectance technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Copper nanowires simultaneously possess two important features that make
them a unique candidate for high performance thermal interface materials: high
thermal conductivity and high mechanical compliance. Because of the high thermal
conductivity and the high packing density of approximately 50%, copper nanowire
array has a lower thermal contact resistance compared to the state of the art
thermal interface materials. Moreover, the large aspect ratio of the nanowires
(&gt; 200:1) makes them highly compliant when subjected to thermal stress, hence
the high thermal performance can be retained after thermal cycling. The proposed
topics of investigation will advance the understanding of mechanical and
electro-thermal properties of copper nanowires pertaining to thermal packaging
applications, both individually and collectively as an array, and will lead to
the development of a new class of thermal interface materials with superior
thermal and mechanical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Thermal interface material is one of the key thermal packaging components that
are highly demanded by microelectronic industry pursuing increasingly higher
clock speed. The proposed copper nanowires based interfaces could become a
disruptive enabling technology for developing electronic devices with higher
performance, hence can potentially make a tremendous societal impact.
Educational and outreach activities will be tightly integrated into the program.
By developing new curriculum and recruiting undergraduate students into the
research, the program will educate next generation thermal engineers who will be
motivated by fascinating nanosciences and the grand technological challenges
faced by our society. The proposed outreach programs will leverage the efforts
of both the Berkeley and UCSD campuses for promoting diversities, and will
benefit K-12 and under-represented students.