* 1140939
* Transforming Experience of Computer Science Software Development through Multiplayer Online Game Classroom Collaboration in Industrial Format
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Ilmi Yoon, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2016
* USD 149,947.00

This innovative software development course is developing and testing a novel
approach to computer science instruction at San Francisco State University and
California State University Los Angeles. In classrooms emulating typical
industry work environments, students are collectively creating and building a
Multiplayer Online Game using a variety of complex software components. In the
process, students are developing: (1) effective communication, presentation,
collaboration and trouble-shooting skills; (2) heightened motivation to master
core computer science content; (3) a robust end product; and (4) practical
insights to prepare them for successful careers in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scalable game programming course includes a
suite of instructional materials with accompanying documentation, all of which
are being made freely available to the educational community. Materials can be
flexibly adopted by computer science instructors including those who do not have
sufficient background to develop multiplayer online game programming or senior-
level software design courses on their own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
a collaboration of two campuses in the California State University System--one
of the nation's largest and most ethnically diverse systems of higher education
--and is being disseminated regionally and nationally. The innovative course
design appeals to students who have not traditionally been attracted to STEM
education, including many from minorities underrepresented in the sciences that
enroll in large numbers at the two pilot campuses. The project reaches out to
the public by making the student-produced games freely available, thereby
playfully exposing non-scientists to essential computer science concepts and
potentially inspiring young people to consider careers in software development.