* 1140467
* Integration of a Remote Water Sustainability Lab to Enhance Undergraduate Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Vinod Lohani, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 249,999.00

This project is investigating how remote access to real-time environmental data
impacts students' motivation and cognition about environmental awareness. This
project, which is a partnership between Virginia Tech (VT) and Virginia Western
Community College (VWCC), investigates student motivation using the expectancy-
value theory of motivation. It primarily investigates the impact of the lab on
students' problem solving skills using the phenomenology approach. The research
results guide the development and implementation of sustainability learning
modules into undergraduate curricula. The project uses a remote lab, called
LabVIEW Enabled Watershed Assessment System (LEWAS), that has the capability to
sense, store, and transmit real-time weather data, as well as water quality and
quantity data from the Stroubles Creek that flows through the Virginia Tech
campus. The project is developing and implementing LEWAS-based learning modules
for a freshman engineering course at both VT and VWCC and a senior level
hydrology course. Project activities include unique curriculum development,
implementation, and assessment activities at three academic levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between a 4-year and a 2-year
institution introduces students at various academic levels to critical issues
involved in finding solutions to one of the top two Grand Challenges (i.e.,
provide access to clean water) of the National Academy of Engineering. The
hands-on water sustainability experiences have the potential to attract students
into the engineering profession from a broad section of society.