* 1140887
* Organic Chemistry and Native Plants of the Sonoran Desert: A New Model for the Undergraduate Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Timothy Minger, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 05/31/2016
* USD 199,563.00

Mesa Community College is developing an organic chemistry laboratory curriculum
that uses the natural products found in local native plants as a starting point
for guided student inquiry. Objectives of the project include: to identify and
isolate materials from native plants; provide training for students on NMR,
HPLC, and other key organic laboratory instrumentation; introduce students to a
variety of applications of the compounds found in plants, e.g., medicinal,
agricultural and other contexts; and encourage student participation in
independent study outside the laboratory classes. Students are designing and
implementing laboratory activities to extract, purify, and derivatize organic
molecules from plants, and are using instrumentation to perform analytical
procedures on these compounds. The students are benefiting from hands-on
experience with applying actual research methods to contemporary and relevant
scientific topics. The project is being evaluated by using formative and
summative assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project is
advancing both STEM education, by the development of new activities and the
pedagogical theme that incorporates local, usable native plants, and chemical
knowledge, obtained from the research as students or faculty produce publishable
data in the course of the new activities. This project is transforming a
laboratory curriculum into guided inquiry exercises by using a broad thematic
premise that intrigues and engages students. The focus on local plants provides
an interdisciplinary experience, and the possible activities and extensions are
numerous. It offers an accessible theme and a simple, flexible approach that is
easily modified based on local conditions or student and instructor interests.
Local plant materials are readily available: they can be collected by students,
if not endangered or protected species; they can be cultivated in campus
greenhouses, if necessary; or they can be purchased, often at very low cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. In the later stages of the project and
beyond, the results of the project will be shared with other institutions
through publications, presentations, and web-based dissemination techniques. The
project is encouraging a shift in the undergraduate chemistry laboratory
experience. The content and pedagogy of organic chemistry laboratories have
remained relatively static for years, with increasing recent interest in an
inquiry-based approach. The project is adding momentum to that recognized trend
based on its scope and distinctive premise. The project also is contributing to
the engagement of Hispanic and Native American students in the chemistry
curriculum because of its use of native plants that are historically and
culturally important to these populations.