* 1140509
* The Integration of Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry into a Two-year Chemistry Curriculum and Independent Research Experiences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Jennifer Batten, Grand Rapids Community College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 166,214.00

The goals of this project include increased student knowledge of gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) by adding hands-on laboratory
experiences to chemistry courses and independent study projects at Grand Rapids
Community College, development of GC-MS expertise for community college and high
school faculty, and instrumentation experiences for high school students.
Developed materials reflect workforce needs, delivered using a constructivist
approach. The intellectual merit is the development of broadly applicable
processes for integrating GC-MS into community college laboratory course
curricula to enhance learning and interest. Professional development and summer
camp opportunities enhance high school faculty and students' understanding of
GC-MS while demonstrating practical connections between science and technology,
and serve as a model for high school-community college partnerships. Broader
impacts include better prepared students through engaging hands-on science
education, enhanced educational infrastructure, and a close partnership with
local high schools.

The independent evaluation encompasses formative assessment of instructor
content knowledge and engagement, coupled with assessment of student learning
gains and attitudes toward science through review of course work, interviews and
focus groups.