* 1140855
* TUES: Infusing Pedagogical Content Knowledge into a Physics Course for Future Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,993.00

This project is reforming a conceptual physics course for large numbers of
future elementary teachers. Pedagogical content knowledge is woven into the
fabric of the course so that future elementary teachers recognize the
interdependence of learning physics concepts and the use of reform-based
pedagogy in their future roles in the classroom. While promoting active learning
of both the science concepts and pedagogy, the effort goes well beyond modeling
inquiry-based teaching of science. More importantly, this course provides
opportunities for future teachers to develop and build upon their own
metacognitive skills and perspectives as they reflect on their own learning of
physical phenomena, understand how children talk and learn about physical
phenomena, and become more aware of how the research literature describes ways
in which children think about physical phenomena. It also facilitates the
application of a developing understanding of integrated content and pedagogy as
these future instructors seek to develop age-appropriate lesson plans for
teaching physical science concepts within an elementary science classroom.
Further, these future teachers are able to demonstrate positive improvements on
surveys that measure their understandings of science and the framework of their
own beliefs about learning science. As a result of this course, statistically
significant increases are anticipated in the number of future elementary
teachers concentrating in science at Kansas State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together a team of
experienced discipline-based STEM education researchers with teacher educators
as they develop strategies that integrate the learning of science and pedagogy
in a large enrollment course. The resulting instructional approach (being
developed and tested) moves toward a fully developed course model for
consideration and dissemination within other large enrollment pre-service
teacher science classes in the U.S. The institutionalization of this project
ensures that it will continue to produce a cadre of capable elementary teachers
who choose to concentrate in science.