* 1140251
* Building Analytical Competence for Geoscience Students through use of Spectroscopic Tools
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Eileen McGowan, Holyoke Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The project, a collaborative effort among Smith College, Holyoke Community
College and Mount Holyoke College, is building analytical competence in
undergraduate geoscience students through use of Raman and FTIR spectrometers.
Benchtop and portable spectrometers are being shared among the three colleges
and others in the region, and are being used to develop, implement and assess
innovative instructional modules through which students acquire mastery via
hands-on, investigative learning. By analyzing unknown minerals and other
materials, synthesizing data and predictions, and evaluating experimental
results, students are learning not only geological content, but also how to use
chemical analyses to solve relevant problems. The spectroscopic knowledge and
analytical competencies that are targeted in the curriculum development are in
increasing demand by the nation's geoscience workforce. The project is providing
a direct benefit in broadening participation in the geosciences through its
engagement with two women's colleges and a community college that serves a
diverse population of non-traditional and first-generation college students.
Project personnel are also disseminating their approach and curriculum modules
beyond the region through a web portal, video postings, and hands-on workshops
at national conferences.