* 1140234
* Collaborative Research: The Relationships between Sheared Convective Clouds and Tropical Cyclone Evolution
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Chris Rozoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2015
* USD 163,486.00

Despite improving observational and computational resources, the forecasting of
tropical cyclone (TC) structural and intensity evolution is still a significant
challenge. The limits of predictability relate to the nonlinear interactions
between a TC's multi-scale dynamics and its environment. Recent research
underscores how TC evolution is influenced strongly by the details of latent
heating. As such, properly accounting for convective processes in TCs is a key
step towards a more complete physical understanding of TCs and improved
prediction. Yet, potentially essential aspects of convective-scale dynamics
remain unresolved. The detailed structure of kinematic and thermodynamic
properties found within TCs can provide a broad spectrum of distinct local
environments resulting in a variety of convective and mesoscale cloud
morphologies. Each convective mode may have unique impacts on TC evolution.

Intellectual merit: To advance the understanding of convective-scale processes
in TCs, this multi-framework study will investigate the interactions of vertical
and horizontal wind shear with both isolated convective clouds and more
organized rainbands. Through this research effort, the following questions will
be examined:

1. How do strong horizontal wind shear and background absolute vertical
vorticity impact isolated convective clouds and rainbands? 2. What are the
primary interactions that occur between horizontal and vertical shears and
convection? 3. How does the response of convection to three-dimensional shear
vary given the variations of ambient thermodynamic conditions within TCs? 4.
What are the implications of the various convective modes resulting from
kinematic and thermodynamic variability on overall TC dynamics?

The multiple frameworks for this study will include an idealized cloud model,
high-resolution flight-level Doppler radar and in situ observations of TCs, and
two full-physics TC simulations. Sensitivity experiments with a cloud model will
be used to understand how three-dimensional wind shear and thermodynamic
variability within TCs govern isolated convective clouds and convective systems.
The impacts of sheared convection on the mean flow will also be documented in
the cloud model. The observational analyses and TC simulations will provide
realistic settings to evaluate the idealized cloud modeling results and to
deduce feedbacks and relationships between the various sheared convective modes,
rainbands, and TC dynamics. Vorticity, potential vorticity, and thermodynamic
budgets and general statistical analysis of cloud, precipitation, and cold pool
properties will be the primary tools of analysis for elucidating open questions
related to sheared TC convection.

Broader impacts: The research will shed new light into basic internal dynamical
processes related to TC intensity and structure change and it will have more
general theoretical impacts outside of TC research. The resulting peer-reviewed
publications will provide both applied and theoretical contexts in which both
researchers and forecasters can interpret convective scale processes in TCs.
Improvement in forecasting TCs and convective-scale processes in TCs will in
turn be beneficial to society. The research team will work with the Center for
Hurricane Intensification and Landfall Investigation and talented and motivated
undergraduate/graduate students who will contribute to significant aspects of
the research and subsequent, peer-reviewed publications. A webpage containing
animations of key experimental results will supplement research articles and
will also aid in college classroom instruction and other outreach efforts such
as scientific high school workshops.