* 1140406
* Collaborative Research: Physics of Medicine
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Mary Lowe, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 04/30/2016
* USD 88,847.00

Rockhurst University (RU) and Loyola University Maryland (Loyola) are
collaborating to create three multi-week upper-division active learning physics
modules in fiber optics and light delivery, nuclear physics and nuclear
medicine, and pressure in the human body that relate physics principles to
medicine. The modules can enhance student learning through their implementation
in a Physics of Medicine (POM) Program currently in place at RU and in
development at Loyola. The target audience is students with one year of physics
and a minimum of Calculus 1. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goals
of the three year project are the following: (1) Increase student learning in
physics content areas that are chosen because there is either a lack of suitable
material on the topic or because students exhibit alternate conceptions on the
physics; (2) Enhance students' attitudes and beliefs about physics and learning
physics and encourage increased enrollment in upper-division physics courses,
especially by women; and (3) Increase student understanding of the scientific
process through an engaged learning process - asking questions, analyzing data,
drawing conclusions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: The project
contributes to STEM education through its creation of new learning materials
guided by research on teaching and learning in POM and designed to deal with
areas in which students need to strengthen their physics understanding. The
transformative nature of the project is inherent in the design of the POM
Program with active learning and curricula related to students' interests in
medicine. This approach enables students to make interdisciplinary connections,
enhance conceptual understanding, and analyze quantitatively. Data from the
project are contributing to the STEM body of knowledge on the performance of
students (content/attitude) in upper division physics courses that apply physics
principles to the medical field. This project broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups by increasing the number of minors and potential majors
in physics, and by increasing the underrepresented female student population in
physics. Project modules are designed to be transferable to other universities
with complete instructor manuals for easy implementation in different programs.
Materials are being disseminated on the web and ComPADRE and through
publications and presentations. By implementing well-designed, relevant, and
interesting physics courses, the POM program can be sustainable. As a benefit to
society, this project can lead to a better prepared generation of healthcare
professionals and well-educated scientists.