* 1140614
* Cooperative Learning for Computer Organization and Assembly Language: Curriculum Development and Instructor Training Materials
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Leland Beck, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2018
* USD 199,747.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop more effective methods for
teaching topics in computer organization and assembly language programming. A
set of cooperative learning activities are being created along with a
comprehensive set of instructor support materials, including training videos, to
help faculty members learn to use cooperative learning techniques effectively in
the classroom. This project builds on previous work on the use of cooperative
learning in computer science classes, recognizing the need for fully developed,
refined, and tested activities. To increase the number of faculty using
cooperative learning techniques, training videos are being created to illustrate
the interactions between instructors and their students working on cooperative
learning activities. Along with the videos, instructor materials help faculty
members learn skills such as observing group processing and selecting (on the
spot) the things to bring out during group debriefing. The skills taught in
these videos are applicable to any course that utilizes cooperative learning.
Because students frequently have difficulty learning computer organization and
assembly language, the development and use of more effective ways to teach these
topics is expected to lead to improved retention and success in the computer
science major.

The project and its materials are undergoing testing and evaluation during
development as well as when used outside of the home institution. A variety of
faculty workshops help faculty gain facility in using the materials and
cooperative learning techniques in their classrooms. Since computer organization
and assembly language programming courses are commonly used for transfer credit,
some workshops target faculty at community colleges. This work aims to develop
and increase computer science faculty awareness and use of cooperative learning
activities in the computer science curriculum at a variety of institutions.