* 1140001
* Collaborative Research: ARI-MA Development of Improved CMT and CZT Nuclear Detectors for Homeland Security Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2013
* USD 120,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop high-resolution Cadmium Manganese
Telluride (CMT) and Cadmium Zinc Telluride (CZT) materials for nuclear and
radiological detection applications in homeland security. These materials have
emerged as promising advanced detectors for X-ray and gamma-ray spectroscopy and
imaging without cryogenic cooling. Advances in research have led to the
development of CZT for commercial devices, but there is still the presence of
defects such as Tellurium (Te) inclusions that limit the performance of large-
volume CZT and CMT detectors that are needed for nuclear and radiological
detection applications. The results of this project will provide benefit to
society, with high impact on the science and technology of semiconductor nuclear
detectors for room-temperature applications in homeland security (maritime and
port security, border security, transportation security, nonproliferation and
domestic nuclear security). The outcomes also include new capabilities that are
very important to the success of emerging detector technologies and analysis
tools needed to support next-generation nuclear materials management and
safeguards. This project advances discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training, and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will use
theory-based design, knowledge-based processing and fabrication, and novel
experimental techniques to develop improved cadmium manganese telluride (CMT)
and cadmium zinc telluride (CZT) materials for high-resolution nuclear detection
applications. The project will enhance the science and expand the overall
knowledge in this area by using a combination of theory, modeling and
experiments to complete the following tasks: 1) optimization of the Bridgman
methods and Traveling Heater Method (THM) for growth of improved CMT and CZT
crystals; 2) a novel post-growth annealing and doping process for removing
performance-limiting defects caused by tellurium inclusions and associated
impurities in CMT and CZT detector materials; and 3) improved surface
passivation and detector fabrication techniques to produce better detectors.
These methods employ state-of-the-art instrumentations that incorporate
3D-infrared transmission spectroscopy and advanced measurement tools to probe
and collect data during the post-growth annealing process. The development of
in-situ tools to monitor crystal annealing adds a new experimental dimension
that will lead to any improved understanding of the migration of tellurium
inclusions and novel methods to minimize their impact on electron trapping. The
end result will be CMT and CZT detectors with better resolution, improved
detection efficiency and better directional sensitivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from the modeling aspects of this project
will provide an understanding of fundamental phenomena associated with Bridgman
and THM growth of ternary II-VI compounds and suggestions regarding post-growth
treatments to improve the microstructural properties of these crystals. The
anticipated impact of in-situ probing and data collection techniques will
include new insights into the science and dynamical properties of post-growth
annealing, uniform doping of detector materials, migration of Te secondary
phases and impurities, and methods to process detector surfaces. This project
advances discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and
learning. It is multidisciplinary with investigators from the following
collaborating entities: Alabama A&amp;M University, University of Minnesota ?
Twin Cities, Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), FLIR Radiation Inc, and the
Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research and Educational Access in Science and
Engineering (INCREASE). The workforce development component of this project will
provide opportunities for women and under-represented minorities to build
careers and earn graduate degrees in areas critical to the development of
cutting-edge nuclear and radiological detection technology.