* 1140469
* Novel Research - Teaching Integration Strategies for Undergraduate Student Participation and Success in STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Cristian Botez, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 04/30/2015
* USD 199,482.00

This project launches a novel research-teaching integration program where
undergraduate fellow-faculty mentor teams conduct basic research at a level
suitable for publication in peer-reviewed journals and use the results to
develop new lectures and/or laboratory modules. The modules are then presented
by the undergraduate fellows in undergraduate courses taught at the University
of Texas at El Paso and at the El Paso Community College (EPCC), as appropriate.
Students enrolled in the courses evaluate how effectively their undergraduate
peers design and deliver the modules, while their learning outcomes are
evaluated by traditional means such as tests and/or lab reports. Evaluation
results are analyzed and used to improve the program. Integrating mentored
research, guided curriculum design, and peer-led teaching and learning is
expected to have a synergistic effect, the impact of which extends beyond the
training of sponsored students, scientific discoveries, and new teaching
strategies. The project is expected to provide research data on how effectively
STEM undergraduate learning, retention, graduation rates and career preparation
are enhanced through training and skills improvement of undergraduate fellows.
The new modules, along with research and evaluation results, are being
disseminated locally and nationally at symposia and conferences.