* 1140176
* Abundance and Group Reactivity of Intermediate Volatility Organic Compounds (IVOCs) in Urban Air Measured by TD-PTR-MS
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* B. Thomas Jobson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 513,494.00

The primary objective of this proposal is to develop a method to quantify the
abundance of intermediate volatility organic compounds (IVOCs) in urban air.
These compounds contain 12 to 18 carbon atoms, are emitted in diesel engine
exhaust, and are thought to be a significant source of reactive organic
compounds that contribute to the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA).
The abundance and atmospheric chemistry of IVOCs is very poorly understood. This
proposal will establish a novel method for quantifying IVOCs in air by using
thermal desorption sampling coupled to proton transfer reaction mass
spectrometry (TD-PTR-MS). With this approach the total abundance of IVOC alkanes
will be measured. The approach will allow a more comprehensive quantification of
the IVOC carbon pool by lumping IVOC species into functional groups (i.e.,
alkanes, cyclic alkanes) or by their molecular weight (i.e. monocyclic
aromatics, naphthalenes). The method will be used in a four week field sampling
campaign to compare IVOC abundance to volatile organic compound (VOC) abundance
measured by PTR-MS and gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) to test the
proposition that IVOC photooxidation is a major source of urban SOA. Laboratory
experiments using a photoreaction reaction chamber will be used to
photochemically age diesel fuel and diesel engine exhaust to establish IVOC
group reactivity with hydroxyl radical. These experiments will aid the
interpretation of field data and enhance the currently sparse knowledge of IVOC
lifetimes required for chemical transport modeling. Establishing a measurement
method to quantity the abundance of IVOCs in air addresses a critical gap in
knowledge of urban air photochemistry and SOA formation.

The research will support and train two graduate students and one undergraduate
student in analysis and interpretation of organic trace gas. Results and
instrumentation used will be incorporated into undergraduate classes and a
senior level air quality laboratory class. Research results will be disseminated
through conferences and peer reviewed journals. The results will enhance our
understanding of the nature and origin of organic compounds in the atmosphere.
The public benefit will be a more quantitative understanding of the levels and
impacts of diesel engine exhaust in urban air.