* 1140116
* EAGER: Search for a Paleotsunami Record in the Wetlands of Southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2013
* Brady Rhodes, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 11/30/2013
* USD 57,703.00

In 2004, a magnitude 9.3 earthquake off Sumatra triggered a tsunami that
devastated an unaware and unprepared country, resulting in more than 150,000
Indonesian deaths. Seven years later, an only slightly smaller magnitude 9.0
earthquake off the densely populated East coast of Japan triggered a tsunami of
similar size, but with a much lower death toll. Japan has a rich record, both
geological and historical, of past tsunamis. This record has raised awareness in
the population of Japan and fostered arguably the most stringent building codes
and best coastal engineering in the world--both contributing to the reduced loss
of life in Japan. In Southern California, historical written records extend back
only 150-200 years, with no confirmed physical evidence for past tsunamis in the
geological record. Yet Southern California has a densely populated coastal zone,
and is home to three large ports, including the Port of Los Angeles and Long
Beach Harbor and ten power plants, including the San Onofre nuclear power plant.
Even a modestly sized tsunami would have an enormous impact of the economy of
Southern California.&lt;br/&gt; In the past ten years, mapping and seismic
reflection profiling of off-shore Southern California has revealed a dense
network of potentialy seismogenic faults and large submarine landslides.
Modeling of these hypothetical seismic and landslide sources suggests that they
could generate a tsunami with local wave heights of up to 20m or more. However,
without a geologic record of tsunamis, these studies can only be regarded as
speculative. Coastal wetlands of Southern California, formed during the Holocene
sea-level rise, provide an ideal, predominantly muddy sedimentary environment to
capture a sandy tsunami deposit. This project is a systematic search of these
wetland sediments for tsunami deposit candidates.&lt;br/&gt; Finding a record of
tsunamis in Southern California will verify and validate much of the research of
the last ten years on modeling local tsunamis from submarine landslides and
offshore earthquakes. The scale and frequency of inundation along the coast has
a direct impact on emergency management policy and development, especially in
densely populated, economically important Southern California. Modeling can only
provide an estimated scale of inundation, but a geologic record of tsunamis
represents a transformative scientific discovery that would help verify the
occurrence, scale, and frequency of inundation--critical information for
planning tsunami hazard mitigation. Data from this project provides a robust
record of the Holocene history of the California wetlands, including
environmental changes through time, and places constraints on Holocene sea-level
change. This project also adds to paleoclimate data for the region.&lt;br/&gt;
Many of the wetlands in the area are ecological preserves with active on-site
laboratories and/or popular visitors centers. Several of the organizations
overseeing these areas have requested that the results from this project be
integrated with their on-site displays. Tsunami information derived from the
project will reach a broad cross-section of the Southern California community.
This information will also be also shared with local governments and media to
ensure the public is apprised of the implications of these
results.&lt;br/&gt;The project also has a strong educational component, training
three undergraduate research assistants, who will be included in all aspects of
the project, including fieldwork, laboratory analyses, interpretation, and the
presentation of the results both orally at conferences and through co-authorship
of scholarly papers.