* 1140425
* Developing Innovative Thinking Among Undergraduates Enrolled in Large Lecture Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Glenda Scales, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 127,149.00

Development of innovative thinking skill among engineering undergraduates is of
critical importance in designing new products/systems and creating new services,
and thus is vital to the national economy. This project examines whether
effective use of instructional technology, specifically slate-enabled
technology, has an impact on the innovative thinking skills of engineering
undergraduates enrolled in large lecture classes, and develops and implements a
pedagogical model based on the findings. The methodology used is a quasi-
experimental mixed method approach utilizing a control and treatment group. Data
are being collected through surveys (i.e., quantitative assessment) and
interviews, focus groups, and direct observation (i.e., qualitative assessment).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances understanding of how students learn
to be innovative through determination of measurable and identifiable learning
outcomes. In addition, information about how best to teach innovative thinking
skills among undergraduates in an active and engaging educational environment
using slate-enabled instructional technology provides a useful educational
model. The model considers faculty motivation for employing active and engaging
learning strategies that utilize slate-enabled instructional technology in
developing innovative thinking, the infrastructure (e.g., wireless capabilities,
student requirements, technology support) that is necessary to facilitate such a
model, and how to assess the extent to which the employment of the model has
been effective. The project has the potential to produce information that will
lead to transformative change in undergraduate STEM education.