* 1140718
* Synergy of Educational Tools for Teaching Electromagnetic Fields and Waves: Lab Experiments, Educational Java Applets, Numerical Modeling, Textbook with Power Point Presentations
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Athos Petrou, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,973.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a one-
semester Electromagnetic Fields and Waves (EFW) course for junior-level
engineering undergraduate students and is establishing a new undergraduate
laboratory for teaching EFW. The project is creating a novel teaching approach
that employs interactive pedagogies, exposing students to an educational
sequence of experimentation - theory - experimentation - applications.
Undergraduate students are using experiments, educational Java applets, and
numerical solver software to help them learn the theoretical principles of EFW.
Through the utilization of engaging teaching practices, students are also
learning to utilize a scientific approach and further develop their critical
reasoning and creative thinking skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding
of electricity and magnetism requires a certain level of mathematical knowledge;
therefore, concepts such as vector algebra and vector calculus are gradually
introduced - as needed - in sync with the teaching material that is covered in
the course. The teaching approach involves the following: 1) a non-traditional
synergistic style of teaching and use of an interactive Blackboard online system
(UBlearns); 2) an introduction to electricity and magnetism that is provided
through a student's exploration of corresponding experiments; and 3) a unified
description of the entire electromagnetic spectrum, which is used to provide an
appreciation for interdisciplinary applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is attempting to positively impact the recruitment of high achieving
K-12 students to STEM education, the training of college professors, and the
involvement of women and underrepresented minority undergraduate/graduate
students in the development of a new EFW laboratory. The results are being
disseminated through participation in ASEE conferences and workshops, while the
developed teaching materials and lab manuals are being distributed to
college/university professors. A newly developed course website offers the
results of the project activities along with the teaching materials and lab
manuals. The teaching strategies are embedded in a new textbook/lab manual
publication to further enhance STEM education. The team is additionally working
with local chapters of the Association of Black Engineers and Applied
Scientists, the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers, and the Women in
Science and Engineering to recruit engineering students from underrepresented
groups.