* 1140385
* Integrating Shared Access Remote Robotic Observatories into Introductory Astronomy Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Gerald Ruch, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 04/30/2016
* USD 166,907.00

Intellectual Merit: Observational astronomy exercises are essential in the
undergraduate introductory astronomy laboratories. But, to engage in real
observational astronomy, students need access to computerized telescopes
equipped with electronic detectors (CCD cameras, etc.). Additionally, students
and instructors need access to the processing tools and technical expertise
required to perform the data analysis. If a significant fraction of institutions
are to implement observational labs, there must be a way to share access to
existing resources. The growing number of available Internet accessible robotic
observatories are the answer.

The project is to develop flexible inquiry-based laboratory curricula and easy-
to-use data processing tools that allow any institution, regardless of available
local equipment and on-site expertise, to easily integrate real observational
astronomy exercises into their introductory astronomy courses. A consortium of
six institutions within the Minneapolis-St. Paul area is developing, testing,
and implementing a set of observational labs, associated data processing tools,
and supporting materials for use on the University of St. Thomas (UST) Physics
Department robotic observatory. Following testing at the UST Observatory, the
consortium is purchasing observing time from Global-Rent-A-Scope, a commercial
enterprise that sells observing time on telescopes at dark sites, and modifying
and testing the materials for use on their systems.

Broader Impacts: Nearly every undergraduate institution offers an introductory
astronomy course for nontechnical majors. These courses involve an enormous
number of students who have little additional contact with scientific thought in
their college careers. This project directly addresses the need for access to
high quality observational equipment by institutions lacking the resources to
purchase and maintain their own. This project impacts students, staff, and
faculty at institutions of all levels. The consortium was selected specifically
to represent a full spectrum of institutions that could benefit from this work.
They include two community colleges (North Hennepin and Normandale), a state
university (Metro State), a liberal arts university (The University of St.
Thomas), an R1 institution (The University of Minnesota), and a high school
(Cretin-Derham Hall) that have participated in developing a pilot of this
project.