* 1140207
* RCN-SEES: Sustainability of Marine Renewable Resources in Subarctic Systems Under Incumbent Environmental Variability and Human Exploitation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* John Anderies, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 749,823.00

These network activities focus on basic socio-ecological principles applied to
the study of the sustainability of renewable resources in large marine
ecosystems under incumbent climate variability and human exploitation. Through
this network a gap is bridged among ecologists, mathematicians, social
scientists and resource managers to provide a sound science support system for
conservation. Case studies are selected from subarctic marine systems (Northeast
Pacific and Northeast and Northwest Atlantic), which are susceptible to climate
variability, are highly productive but also intensely exploited, and are under-
represented in socio-ecological literature. The scientific activities are
centered on three ecological themes, namely, sequential 1) species, 2) spatial,
and 3) demographic depletions. Collectively, these three themes address how
current policy decisions may cause negative and unforeseen socio-ecological
effects as they reverberate through the system. The research activities are
integrated by developing a conceptual socioecological framework to address the
implications for sustainability of current and alternative policy practices
(Theme 4). By hosting two international workshops and two annual network
meetings, the work takes positive steps to integrate across these research
themes, and to transfer approach to other aquatic and terrestrial ecological
systems. On the educational side (Theme 5), a three-prong approach is
established. First, to provide transdisciplinary training opportunities to
participating scientists, graduate students and post-docs through research-
exchanges at participating institutions. Second, to organize a summer course
that intersects the disciplines involved in our network (ecology, social science
and sustainability), and where graduate students and post-docs who benefited
from the research exchange program will take an active teaching role. The
curriculum will include an intensive two-week summer session followed by a
project development at the home institution. The project outcomes will be
presented to network and invited scientists and managers during network
workshops, and authors will be invited to publish their work in a workshop
proceeding special volume. Third, during one of the two workshops, the syllabus
and teaching material for the summer course will be developed , and critically
evaluate the role of science and education in support of a sustainable
management of large marine ecosystems. While the proposal is motivated by
applied topics, it is led through the study of basic ecological and evolutionary
principles. The ultimate intent is to provide a science and educational support
system to integrate eco-evolutionary and social science principles in
conservation strategies. Existing governmental agencies are not providing this
system, yet will require it in the future. In addressing the network objectives,
advantage is taken of ecosystems for which there is a large volume of under-
utilized data that well exceeds that of other terrestrial and aquatic parallels.
This proposal also has an ambitious educational focus with immediate and long-
term impacts. On the short-term, it provides invaluable training and teaching
opportunities to students and post-docs through a system of short-stays in
national and international partner institutions and attendance at the short
summer course. On a longer term, it provides the guidelines for a new curriculum
development in coupled human-resource systems and invaluable opportunities for
long-lasting and beneficial research connections. Finally, through a system of
travel awards for research exchanges and RCN workshop/meeting attendance,
enables involvement of a diverse group of participants, including minorities,
students at various stages of their career, and scientists
from&lt;br/&gt;academia, education and management institutions.