* 1140042
* EAGER: Cell to cell communication in marine phytoplankton: population density dependent control of cellular processes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2013
* Maria Vernet, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2013
* USD 286,108.00

Recent discoveries have shown that cell-cell communication extends from the
intra-species to the inter-kingdom level and play pivotal roles in population-
wide biological events such as changes in morphology, metabolic state and
population structure. Quorum sensing (QS) is a communication process that allows
single cells to cooperatively function as a decentralized network. Studies in
prokaryotes and, more recently, fungi have demonstrated that QS regulates the
timing of key biological processes such as colony formation, sporulation,
morphological changes, pathogenicity and sexual reproduction. In the marine
environment, QS has been demonstrated in bacteria however, this level of mutual
cooperation has not been considered for phytoplankton populations. In view of
the emerging literature on the critical role of cell-cell communication, it is
timely to reconsider how we regard marine
phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus far marine phytoplankton cell-cell
interaction studies have primarily focused on chemical signals for competition
against other species (e.g. allelopathy), predation deterrence and warning
systems for environmental stress. There are several lines of circumstantial
evidence to support QS in phytoplankton such as the timing of cell division,
density dependent allelopathy and programmed cell death. However, to our
knowledge there has been no direct experimentation to determine if phytoplankton
can function in a cooperative consortium. Do they have a quorum sensing- type of
communication to regulate intra-species processes as well as modulates inter-
species interactions? Are recurrent phytoplankton communities established
because these species are able to communicate with each member serving a
specific role to maintain the population? These are difficult questions to
address but have far reaching implications in our understanding of phytoplankton
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test whether phytoplankton have
a QS system by examining the process of autoinduction (a basic tenant for QS)
for specific biological events. The PIs will test this by examining two specific
areas using phytoplankton ecological and physiological measurements coupled with
state of the art bio-informatic and genomic tools:&lt;br/&gt;I. Perform an
extensive search for candidate phytoplankton QS-related genes in existing
genomic and gene expression databases, based on homology with QS-related genes
from other organisms. The PIs will conduct a detailed analysis to definitively
map homologs of these QS regulatory pathways in their entirety as well as the
few known biosynthetic pathways of QS compounds and
transcriptional/translational regulators onto phytoplankton genomes. The results
will be included as part of a comparative genomics study on cell-to-cell
communication in phytoplankton, and the possible role of any candidate genes in
QS will be tested by the experiments detailed below (2).&lt;br/&gt;II. Establish
autoinduction of cellular processes in a diatom species using an experimental
approach. The PIs will focus on the autoinduction of growth, cell morphology,
allelopathy and biofilm formation using axenic cultures using two model diatom
species, Phaeodactylum tricornutum Bohlin and Thalassiosira
pseudonana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The establishment of a QS-
like communication system will bring in a new perspective to our views on
phytoplankton ecology beyond our current paradigm of bottom-up and top-down
controls or competitive interactions. Results from this study will also
influence our views on the factors controlling phytoplankton population
diversity, as we will now have to consider the role of inter-species
communication. Funding through an EAGER proposal will provide support for
exploratory, high-risk research to obtain a minimum set of data as proof of
concept of QS in phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PIs
will establish a collaboration with a local high school. They seek to remedy the
mismatch in the way biology is taught and practiced by teaching high-school
students to examine biological phenomena from a systems perspective. This will
better prepare them for potential science careers in the information era while
fostering their curiosity about their local marine ecosystem.