* 1140763
* Implementation of a Multidimensional Assessment Tool to Explore the Impacts of Pedagogy on Undergraduate Student Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Yukiko Maeda, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Assessment/Research (91) &lt;br/&gt;Engineering - Materials Science (57)
&lt;br/&gt;Building upon recommendations from national initiatives, this project
is testing the proposition that carefully mediated feedback from students to
instructors on the effectiveness of engineering course design (instructional
practices and curricular materials) can lead to substantial improvements in both
instructional practice and student performance. It is examining thoroughly the
pedagogical practices of 32 engineering graduate student instructors and faculty
with various levels of pedagogical knowledge and teaching experience. This
examination is being done through the Global Real-time Assessment Tool for
Teaching Enhancement (G- RATE). G-RATE is a multidimensional feedback tool that
provides pedagogical feedback to instructors about teaching at various points
throughout the semester, frames this feedback within the How People Learn (HPL)
framework, and engages instructors in self-assessment to identify areas of
pedagogical strength and weakness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the course of
this project, 2,500 undergraduate engineering students are providing
quantitative and qualitative feedback to their instructors about their learning
experiences throughout the semester, using the G-RATE tool. Two research
questions being addressed. (1) Does feedback through G-RATE improve the
development of instructor pedagogical expertise? (2) What is the relationship
between this feedback and undergraduate student outcomes (e.g., grades) within
observed environments? Quantitative data are being collected from students'
class deliverables (e.g., lab reports, exam scores, quizzes) as well as
components of the G-RATE. Qualitative data are being collected using interviews
with engineering instructors and their students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designed
outcomes of this project are (1) enhanced instructor pedagogical expertise via
the implementation of evidence-based teaching assessments in first-year
engineering and materials science and engineering courses; (2) improved
undergraduate student outcomes from more effective teaching and curriculum
choices (utilizing a mixed-methods approach by integrating both qualitative and
quantitative data); and (3) a community support network of engineering
instructors engaged in open dialogues about teaching and curricular design for
undergraduate engineering courses.