* 1140610
* Science Literacy and Undergraduate Success: Incorporating Scale as a Theme in Introductory Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Peter Geissinger, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 04/30/2015
* USD 196,380.00

This project is focusing on scale literacy, one of four common themes previously
identified by the American Association for the Advancement of Science for
scientific literacy. The primary objective is increasing the scale literacy of
general chemistry students and is establishing the correlation of their success
in chemistry with their level of scale literacy. To achieve the objective the
project is correlating scale literacy with conceptual understanding of specific
chemistry content, is creating and deploying integrated scale-themed instruction
in a variety of contexts (lecture, laboratory, supplemental instruction), and is
determining how incorporation of concepts of scale in foundation courses leads
to success in other courses. The intellectual merit of this project is the
determination of the correlation between increases in scale literacy with
conceptual understanding, both in the short and long terms, when explicitly
included in the general chemistry curriculum. Based on preliminary findings that
scale literacy is a better predictor for success in an introductory chemistry
course, this project is also establishing how integrating scale-themed
instruction leads to improved performance both overall, and within specific
content areas. The broader impacts of this project include a general increase in
students' scientific literacy even within large enrollment introductory
chemistry courses. More directly, the project is distributing novel, scale-
themed instructional materials for General Chemistry as well as faculty
professional development activities to allow students across institutions to
benefit. Further, since scale is not unique to chemistry, students in other
college science courses are benefiting as the outcomes of this research are
adopted and implemented across disciplines.