* 1140198
* RAPID: Mississippi Flood of 2011 - Investigation of Initial Impact on the Landscape
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Gary Parker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2013
* USD 59,238.00

RAPID: Mississippi Flood of 2011 - Investigation of Initial Impact on the
Landscape&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1140198&lt;br/&gt;Praveen Kumar, Gary Parker, Jim Best,
Marcelo Garcia, Bruce Rhoads, Michelle Wander, Jeff Nittrouer, Robert Darmody,
Arthur Schmidt, Murugesu Sivapalan, Jonathan Greenberg (Univ. of California,
Davis), Robert Holmes
(USGS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed Rapid Response Research grant is to undertake field campaign, in-situ
sampling, and Lidar survey of selected regions of the Lower Mississippi River
and surrounding landscape impacted by the 2011 extreme flood. PIs interest is to
understand how deliberate but uncontrolled levee breach at Birds Point, and
engineered diversions at Morganza and Bonnet Carr√© spillways impact both the
streams and the surrounding landscapes. In the proposed effort they plan to (1)
characterize flood deposits by sampling sediment depth, depositional area, and
sediment grain size distribution and stratigraphy; (2) investigate soil
morphology and their properties such as soil organic carbon, pH, cation exchange
capacity, texture, and bulk density; (3) characterize response of landscape form
and structure at all three offtake sites by characterizing the bathymetry, flow,
and sediment transport; and (4) evaluate landscape impact through Lidar survey
near and downstream of the Mississippi and Ohio River Confluence including large
sections of the Birds Point New Madrid (BPNM) floodway. The data collected will
allow them to assess if large episodic events, such as the present Mississippi
flood, shape the long-term form and function of rivers and the surrounding
floodplains, and the timescale of the impact on the flow and transport dynamics.
Studies using this data will assist in future planning of water and sediment
diversions in the lower Mississippi River basin.