* 1140784
* Collaborative Proposal: Assessing, Investigating and Fostering Transformative Experiences in Undergraduate Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Brian Frank, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2016
* USD 100,435.00

Intellectual Merit: Recent national documents and studies of post-secondary
education call attention to the importance of developing a scientifically
literate citizenry and the current shortcomings in our efforts to address this
need. Research in physics education has focused most closely on the knowledge
students develop within courses, and to a more limited extent, whether students
transfer knowledge from one course to the next. The extent to which students'
physics learning influences their experience outside of school is dramatically
under-researched. Such moments - experiences in which students actively use
science concepts to see and experience their everyday world in meaningful, new
ways - has been termed by educational psychologist Pugh to be 'transformative
experiences.'

The goal of this project is to develop assessment tools to identify in what ways
physics courses engender transformative experiences (TE), and, through the
iterative development of these assessment tools, examine the nature of
transformative experiences and the classroom practices that foster them. Such
work lays the groundwork for further transforming undergraduate education in the
sciences by: (1) connecting physics education research with the body of research
on transformative experience, providing a language for what has previously been
an under-developed goal of physics instruction and an under-researched aspect of
physics education; (2) developing assessment tools to allow instructors and
researchers to quickly examine the prevalence of transformative experiences in
physics classrooms; (3) investigating the nature of transformative experience,
by providing case studies of students' experiences; and (4) examining courses
rich in transformative experiences to understand the instructional practices
that foster TE.

Broader Impacts: The project is: (1) providing the physics education research
community with a means of evaluating and fostering transformative experiences in
undergraduate physics through the development and dissemination of a survey; (2)
establishing collaborations between researchers in physics education and
educational psychology from three separate campuses, building stronger links
between discipline-based physics education research (which typically situates
itself in the undergraduate classroom), and the broader education research
community (where research primarily centers on K-12 classrooms); (3) addressing
the needs of pre-service teachers, who are the primary student population of the
courses being studied and the student-researchers employed on the project; and
(4) serving a population traditionally underrepresented in the sciences -
elementary education majors, 90% of whom are women.