* 1140410
* Game-Themed CS1/2: Empowering the Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Michael Panitz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 229,986.00

This project develops materials, training, and support structures for faculty to
use in integrating game-themed content into their introductory computer
programming courses with minimal impact on their existing curriculum. Through
tutorials and workshops, faculty members are empowered to take advantage of
game-themed Computer Science education to attract, engage, and retain students
in introductory programming courses. A programming language-independent game-
themed library is being defined based on previous platform-specific results. The
library is then implemented based on Java and C#. A number of engaging
demonstration examples, assignments, and tutorials are being designed and then
implemented in Java and C#. Assessment of the effectiveness of using the new
assignments and tutorials provides formative input in refining these materials.
Each of the four teaching modules being developed abstracts and hides the
details of computer graphics and games so that neither faculty nor students need
any previous background in these areas. Additionally, the modules are self-
contained and limited in scope so that faculty can pick and choose a subset to
integrate into existing classes. The work is both student- and faculty-centric
because it is designed to address the needs of both. Faculty at Cascadia
Community College and North Seattle Community College, along with faculty at
Willamette University, Evergreen State University, Johns Hopkins University, and
the University of Washington Bothell are involved in testing the ease of use and
efficacy of the materials.