* 1140789
* Investigating Instructional Influences on the Productivity of Clicker Discussions
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Jennifer Knight, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/2015
* USD 196,672.00

Intellectual merit: This project integrates research and education by
characterizing student discussions and testing how changes in pedagogy impact
productivity of these discussions. Faculty teaching different sections of
Introductory Biology at the University of Colorado are prompting their students
to discuss reasoning, providing models of productive discussion, training
discussion facilitators, or holding individuals and groups accountable for their
discussions. The responses by faculty and multiple small groups of students are
audiotaped wirelessly and transcripts scored to assess the quality and
effectiveness of discussions under these different settings. The results are
helping determine which learning techniques have resulted in more productive
discussions. Outcomes of this project include the refinement of coding tools
applicable to clicker discussions, a database of hundreds of coded student
transcripts, and a vetted and disseminated "Guide to Productive Clicker
Discussions." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project provides
needed information to develop a platform for a better instructor-student
learning partnership in introductory biology, and possibly other courses. The
dissemination of the "Guide to Productive Clicker Discussion" and other
deliverables also will allow additional individuals and institutions to benefit
from the project. Moreover, students less likely to pursue science as a career
(e.g., those from underrepresented groups), benefit from more widespread
implementation of a discussion-oriented style using clicker questions because
this style engenders a culture in the classroom of interacting productively
through sharing ideas and justifications and promoting the establishment of
inclusive peer groups.