* 1140309
* SEEing Science in Appalachia: Serving, Exploring, and Engaging in an Honors Interdisciplinary Science Course at Eastern Kentucky University
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Martin Brock, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 05/31/2015
* USD 199,989.00

The objective of "SEEing Science in Appalachia: Serving, Exploring, and Engaging
in an Honors Interdisciplinary Science Course" is to develop a novel,
interdisciplinary, laboratory science course to deliver more successful,
innovative, and meaningful STEM instruction to highly motivated and academically
talented college students from an under-served region of the country. Faculty
from the relevant departments at Eastern Kentucky University (EKU) are to create
the course. Honors instructors from across the university are introduced to
relevant place-based pedagogy. The benefits of this unique pedagogy are also
extended to middle school students from the 22-county Appalachian service region
around EKU. Students are involved in a "service science" project employing both
sample collection in the field and analysis in the laboratory. These projects
offer on-going environmental monitoring relevant to issues of particular concern
in Kentucky and the Appalachian region by focusing on issues of water quality
and watershed management and bee and pollinator health and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is in
the creation, piloting, and dissemination of a model for relevant, place-based,
general education STEM instruction throughout Kentucky, the region, and the
nation and to introduce relevant and innovative scientific research and
instruction into the Eastern Kentucky University Honors Program. The project
actively engages students in collecting, recording, analyzing and publishing
scientific data about projects with a focus on the 22-county largely Appalachian
region that EKU serves and in which many of EKU's students reside. The project
is directed by expert and experienced PIs. Sustainability and
institutionalization are inherent in the selection of studies and the project
design. A comprehensive evaluation plan is designed to substantiate the
development of the project and to assess the immediate outcomes and the longer-
term impacts of the program on various stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the program are several. Faculty and honors students at
Eastern Kentucky University are directly impacted by research undertaken and
innovative pedagogies used in class. A more comprehensive and accurate
understanding of science among future Kentucky teachers and community leaders is
a result. Successful role models of high achieving college students (60 per
year) and relevant science experience for middle school students (180 per year)
from an underrepresented, impoverished area are provided. Ongoing monitoring of
data collection at notable sites of environmental study and concern in the
Appalachian region occurs. A model for the reform of general education honors
science instruction ready for national dissemination is anticipated.