* 1140772
* TUES: A Laboratory-based Undergraduate Course in Hybrid and Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alireza Khaligh, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,061.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION

This project is developing a course and a series of 10 laboratory modules that
help familiarize students with the technology associated with hybrid electric
vehicles (HEVs) and plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs). The course builds on prior
efforts at the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) involving team
competitions and summer REU program experiences in the design, building and
testing of hybrid vehicles and addresses an important need to enhance the
teaching of alternative energy technologies. The project is employing a strategy
of first implementing the new course at IIT and then in another institution that
does not have a strength in the HEV/PEV area. This laudable strategy is
providing an important opportunity to understand how the material transfers to
another educational environment.

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE

The course and coupled laboratory modules span the range of technologies
required for hybrid vehicle design, development and implementation/function,
which have the potential to be shared in full, or in part, with other HEV/PHEV
programs across the country. The project is also promoting the involvement of
local high schools and community colleges - through outreach efforts that
specifically target diverse populations. The involvement of industrial partners
is both maximizing the intellectual resources available to students and
enhancing their ability to see a direct impact of the hybrid technologies in an
industrial setting.