* 1140182
* RCN-SEES: The Global Research Network on Women and Sustainability: Mentoring underrepresented women and women from developing countries in research on environmental sustainability
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Lyn Branch, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2017
* USD 749,697.00

This award is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aim to address challenges of creating a
sustainable world.

Attention is increasingly focused on global climate change and its impact on
vulnerable populations of women and children in the form of food insecurity, the
uncertainty of drought and other catastrophic international environmental
events. This RCN-SEES project will broaden participation of underrepresented
groups by building a global network of women scholars from different ethnic and
racial groups engaged in climate change research. Through international
workshops and the Global Women Scholars peer to peer mentoring program, we will
develop scholarly collaborations on population vulnerability, food security, and
sustainability strategies. These research teams will act as both peer support
for women scientists around the world and as a mentoring network to encourage
more women and girls into the science, technology, engineering and mathematical
(STEM) disciplines. The effectiveness of these methods in educating and engaging
women as climate change scientists at a global scale will be assessed enabling
the project to make significant advances in our understanding of how to promote
the inclusion of women in climate change and sustainability research.

We cannot solve global problems using half of the global capacity. Broadening
the participation of women and members of underrepresented minorities is central
to increasing U.S. competitiveness and addressing global climate change issues
that have significant implications for our society. Mentoring, social networks,
and peer support are important in any field but more critically needed to
encourage women into the sciences. Women are under-represented in the STEM
disciplines and research suggests that by providing social networks and peer
support, we can increase the number of women participating as professionals in
the science fields. This project focuses on creating a new generation of women
scholars and promoting multidisciplinary and multi-cultural research that
combines ecological, agricultural, social, and behavioral sciences related to
women and sustainability.