* 1140030
* The Arizona Radio Observatory: Surveying the ISM through Millimeter and Sub-millimeter Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,615,918.00

This award under the University Radio Observatories (URO) program supports
scientific research, technical developments, operations, student training and
public outreach at the Arizona Radio Observatory (ARO). The ARO operates the 10
m Sub-millimeter Telescope (SMT) on Mt. Graham and the 12 m millimeter-wave
antenna at Kitt Peak. The ARO facility offers wide frequency coverage from 65 to
720 GHz utilizing state-of-the-art ALMA-type heterodyne sideband-separating
(SBS) receivers. This provides the high sensitivity and stability needed for
spectroscopy with broad intermediate frequency (IF) bandwidths (16 GHz) to do
large Galactic and extragalactic surveys in the spatial and frequency domains
supported by this instrumentation. Further, the ARO capabilities allow for a
wide range of observations requiring maximum sensitivity, such as Very Long
Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). The single-dish programs serve as both ALMA
preparatory and ALMA complementary science investigations. The ARO complements
spectroscopic studies across the ALMA frequency range and provides a venue for
path-finding observations for the ALMA array. The investigators plan to develop
and construct receivers and a new digital spectrometer will be fabricated for
maximum utilization of the receivers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The support from
the URO program permits that 50% of the time on both ARO telescopes will be
available to outside observers. The ARO supports users with trained telescope
operators, on-site visitor facilities, and remote observing capabilities. The
telescopes are closely connected to laboratory spectroscopy facilities, which
allows the measurement and astronomical verification of crucial molecular
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research by the investigators addresses the
processes whereby stars and planetary systems are created from interstellar
material and the feedback effects on the dynamical and chemical state of the
interstellar medium (ISM). Studies include: &lt;br/&gt;(a) an extensive survey
of starless cores and Class 0 protostars (b) large scale mapping in CO and other
molecules to probe star formation in Bok globules and giant molecular clouds,
(c) a broad molecular line survey of the circumstellar shell of NML Cygnus to
document the dynamical and chemical properties of massive supergiant stars; (d)
exploration of the morphology and chemical composition of planetary nebulae to
better understand their connection to the diffuse ISM and the formation of dense
clouds; (e) molecular line studies of refractory gas-phase molecules to
elucidate dust grain composition; and (f) documentation of the properties of
sub-mm galaxies through surveys of transitions of species such as H2O and CI
that offer great diagnostic power. In addition, ARO will continue to play a key
role in the international millimeter/sub-millimeter VLBI studies of the environs
of black holes (e.g. Sgr A*). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the broader impacts of
the ARO program are undergraduate and graduate student training opportunities in
multi -disciplinary science involving observations, instrumentation development
and laboratory research. This program will strengthen student engagement and
STEM education and to diversify the population of students and researchers in
STEM fields.