* 1140805
* Development and Porting of iCons III: Student-Designed Labs in Renewable Energy
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Elsbeth Walker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 03/31/2016
* USD 249,936.00

There are daunting technological challenges in bringing the potential of
renewable energy such as solar energy and biofuels to fruition, requiring
collaboration among leaders in science, engineering, and social science. Despite
this need for multidisciplinary integration, university science education
remains firmly rooted in separate silos. The University of Massachusetts Amherst
(UMass) is tackling this issue through the Integrated Concentration in Science
(iCons) program, a new national model of integrative education that sets
multidisciplinary student teams to work on current societal problems such as
renewable energy. Holyoke Community College (HCC) has likewise developed its own
integrative 2-year clean energy program. Jointly they develop a renewable energy
laboratory course. The course trains students to design and carry out unique
experiments on subjects such as algae biofuels, plastic solar cells, and new
energy-efficient building materials. This new UMass/HCC partnership produces
students with leadership and laboratory experience in clean energy problems,
able to cross disciplinary boundaries in search of useful solutions. The
resulting laboratory modules will be disseminated nationally and globally for
broadest impact. The partnership produces new pathways for HCC students to
transfer to 4-year programs. And most important, the UMass/iCons and HCC
programs produce the next generation of leaders in science with the attitudes,
knowledge, and skills needed to solve the inherently multidisciplinary
technology problems facing our nation.