* 1140069
* ARI-MA: Electron Tracking for Advanced Gamma-Ray Imaging Applications in Homeland Security
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Kai Vetter, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 379,379.00

The goal of this project is to enhance the recently demonstrated concept of
electron-tracking based Compton imaging of gamma radiation. This concept
promises to increase the detection, localization, and characterization
capabilities for nuclear security but also in other areas such as biomedical
imaging or astrophysics. Our approach is based on high-resolution Si-based
charge-coupled device (CCD) sensors which provides sufficient resolution to
determine the initial direction of the electron that was scattered by means of
the Compton scattering process. This enables the reconstruction of incident
gamma rays on event-by-event basis without using a sensitivity-limiting
collimator. The combination of Si and a pixel size of 10 um enables both
sufficient position resolution to determine the incident direction and
efficiency to induce the Compton scattering process. This project specifically
aims at systematically evaluate and enhance the current implementation in terms
of hardware and software. Preliminary algorithms to track the electron and to
perform image reconstruction have been developed which can be improved by taking
into account more details of the features that can be observed and by
correlating the electron and gamma-ray information. The slow frame rate of the
CCD approach is currently limiting the event-to-event reconstruction. We will
implement the strip readout of the CCD to enable the event-to-event
reconstruction of the electron track and the associated gamma ray and
demonstrate electron-tracking-based Compton imaging in real time.

The goal of this project is the demonstration of a new concept in radiation
detection that enables potentially significant increased capabilities in the
detection, localization, and characterization of nuclear materials. Recent and
ongoing developments of very-high-resolution Si sensors can be used to measure
details of interaction processes that can be used to gain more information to
reconstruct gamma radiation. Applications can be envisioned in homeland
security, nuclear non-proliferation and international safeguards, biomedical
imaging as well as astrophysics and nuclear physics. The project will provide
the excellent training of young scientists.