* 1140299
* Mobile Math Apps
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Douglas Ensley, Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/2015
* USD 174,226.00

This project is creating mobile, smart phone applications ("apps") with the goal
of increasing student performance on standard precalculus problems, measured in
both achievement level and time on task. Content modules are being developed,
each corresponding to a specific, traditional precalculus topic and including
visualizations that illuminate concepts and encourage practice. The project's
intellectual merit rests in two areas. First, the "apps" take advantage of the
general portability of smart phones and their unique user interfaces, while
addressing the challenges of screen size and processor speed. Each module also
comes with practice problems for students to demonstrate mastery of skills.
Second, usage data from phones are used to study patterns and modes of use of
the apps by students. Learning measures include the number and level of practice
problems completed successfully, as well as the increase in time-on-task within
the smart phone environment. These data are then being correlated with
performance in the classroom using standard assessment tools. The broader
impacts of the project are felt through its targeting of improved student
success rate in precalculus, a traditional bottleneck for students pursuing
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines.
The output and outcomes of the project are also informing future work by a
growing community of developers for other courses, even those outside of
mathematics. Through its nurturing of this community the project is positioned
to transform the fast developing area of mobile technology in undergraduate
education.