* 1140889
* TUES: Classroon Research to Invigorate Undergraduate STEM Education (CRIUSE)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Stephen Nold, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 05/31/2015
* USD 176,818.00

The project is transforming biology undergraduate education at the University of
Wisconsin-Stout to include potentially publishable original research as an
integral part of introductory laboratory courses for all students taking such
courses, both science majors and those majoring in other disciplines. The
intellectual merit lies in their choice of a local problem as the basis for the
research. Both the intellectual merit and broader impacts are enhanced by the
documentation of student cognitive, personal, and professional development in
classrooms featuring a research approach compared to these outcomes in students
who are involved in apprenticeship style research activities. The initial
research problems being introduced are investigation of the high phosphorus
content of a nearby lake affected by agricultural runoff and the effects of
implementation of remediation efforts. It is estimated that over 1000 students
will be exposed to classroom research approaches during the course of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.