* 1140211
* Collaborative Research: Numerical Investigation of CME-CME Interaction and Associated Effects from the Low Corona to 1 AU
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2014
* Charles Farrugia, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 11/30/2014
* USD 58,834.00

This team of investigators will use three-dimensional magnetohyrodynamic
simulations to study the impact of prior solar eruptions and plasma interaction
processes on the ultimate properties of coronal mass ejections (CMEs) reaching
Earth's orbit. The team will assess how earlier CMEs precondition the
heliosphere and solar wind, as well as how prior CME interactions deflect,
rotate, compress, and accelerate subsequent CMEs. The team will identify the
causes of enhanced geo-effectiveness in complex CME events at Earth and the
extent to which these causes can be forecasted from remote-sensing
observations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The team will conduct self-consistent
simulations of selected CME events using existing and improved models of CME
evolution, the interplanetary magnetic field, and the solar wind, and they will
then compare their model output to spacecraft observations. The investigators
argue that these direct comparisons will result in better constraints on their
numerical models, as well as in new tools to better understand these complex
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team is a collaborative effort among the
University of Hawaii (the lead institution), the University of New Hampshire,
and the Naval Research Laboratory. The team members will broadly disseminate
their research results to the space weather community by organizing and
participating in workshops and conferences, as well as through their journal
publications and the enhancement of existing community models at the Community
Coordinated Modeling Center at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The
invesitgators at the University of Hawaii and the University of New Hampshire
will integrate local undergraduates in this research. The investigators pledge
to recruit under-represented minorities into this effort wherever possible. The
lead investigator also plans to take advantage of the Hawaii Center for
Advancing Systemic Heliophysics Education for engaging in public outreach, while
exploiting the colorful graphics and movies derived from these research
simulations.