* 1140702
* Integrated Science and Mathematics Education:  A Model Course for Pre-Service Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Henry Shipman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 198,996.00

Interdisciplinary (99): &lt;br/&gt;This project is creating a new first-year
multidisciplinary course in science, mathematics, technology, and communication
for pre-service high school teachers at the University of Delaware. This is a
University of Delaware signature course - a problem-based learning experience
with a communication-intensive focus for secondary science and mathematics
education students. The three principal activities are: &lt;br/&gt;* Design,
pilot, formatively assess, and then revise a seven credit, one semester, first
year course combining elements of mathematics, science, technology, and
communication &lt;br/&gt;* Create innovative problem-based and peer-led learning
exercises as the foundation of the new curriculum &lt;br/&gt;* Disseminate the
results of these efforts through the University of Delaware's Institute for
Transforming Undergraduate Education and other routes &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
new course is to be taught by a multidisciplinary team of instructors in the
University's new Integrated Science and Engineering Laboratory. This new
building provides a home for interdisciplinary activities that integrate
scientific research and education. This resource provides a supportive
environment in which to transform the traditional discipline-centric foci of
introductory science and mathematics courses to an integrative, problem-based
experience emphasizing critical thinking, teamwork, research, and communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is significant because it
will align pre-service teacher's learning of introductory science and
mathematics with their future teaching of science and mathematics in high
school. Students will be prepared to be successful throughout their
undergraduate science studies after a rigorous first experience that stresses
scientific method, critical thinking, technology, and strong communication
skills. A unique feature of this proposed project is the project team. It
combines the efforts of research scientists and mathematicians with mathematics
and science educators, together with a specialist in writing, teamwork, and
communication. The product of this work will fill a gap in the literature of
problem-based instruction for pre-service teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Pre-service secondary mathematics and
science education students beginning their studies with this course will take
their experience, both content and methods, into the public schools and
influence generations of students. This influence may encourage the interest of
future cohorts of diverse students in STEM disciplines. This model course
represents a reverse engineering of typical science and mathematics education.
It focuses on the question of what future science and mathematics teachers need
to know, rather than selecting their courses from existing menus of departmental
offerings. As the project matures, the project plans to disseminate this model,
train faculty in this approach, and scale up to engage a wider audience of first
semester college students.