* 1140542
* Predictors of Dissemination Success of STEM Learning Innovations: An Empirical Investigation
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Chetan Sankar, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

NSF and other federal agencies have supported numerous projects to improve STEM
education for more than two decades. However, the success of efforts to
disseminate the advances developed in these projects (i.e. the extent they are
being used by other STEM faculty members in their classrooms and laboratories)
has not been carefully researched. Thus, an evidence-based, comprehensive
listing of the factors that lead to dissemination success does not exist.
Without such a listing, educators and researchers are hampered in understanding
how to best design pedagogical innovations for maximum effectiveness. This
research aims to fill this void by empirically determining which factors are the
most important in success of efforts to disseminate STEM learning innovations. A
pilot study conducted at the 2011 TUES PI conference identified several
important factors and this knowledge has been used to begin making
recommendations to developers, implementers, administrators, and funders.
However, the pilot study was limited in scope. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
is being guided by the following research questions, with an emphasis on the
first two:&lt;br/&gt;1. How do the factors described in the published literature
on the diffusion (or propagation) of innovation affect the success of
dissemination of STEM education improvements?&lt;br/&gt;2. How do the predictors
of dissemination success in the STEM areas vary by the type of innovation?
(Possible types of innovation are instructional materials, instructional
strategies, developing faculty expertise, and curriculum development.)
&lt;br/&gt;3. Do the predictors of dissemination success for a given type of
STEM education improvement differ by academic discipline (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics)?&lt;br/&gt;4. Do the predictors of dissemination
success for a given type of STEM education improvement differ by the target
stakeholder group involved? Possible stakeholders include faculty members,
material developers, students, publishers, and grant providers.&lt;br/&gt;5. How
does the level of awareness of the stakeholder affect the intention to
adopt?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to rigorously examine these research
questions, a research model based on the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), a
widely-used, theoretical paradigm in the discipline of information systems, was
developed. The variables in this model are being tested using a mixed methods
approach utilizing three complementary methodologies: (1) Content analysis of
published results is being used to study current published work in order to
identify possible additional factors, (2) Delphi methods are being employed to
rate the perceived importance of the factors known (or suspected) to influence
diffusion, and to identify additional factors, and (3) a survey methodology is
being developed and administered that includes a detailed measurement study to
develop psychometrically sound measures for each of the independent factors and
the two outcome factors. The survey questionnaire is designed for distribution
to a sample of stakeholders in the selected STEM disciplines. It is planned to
use a synthesis of the survey results to refine the research model.