* 1140018
* ARI; Experimental and Computational Assessment of Unique Trace Elements and Isotope Ratios in Plutonium from Depleted Uranium Irradiated in Fast Reactor Blankets
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* David Boyle, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 378,464.00

1140018 (Chirayath). This project will use computational and experimental
methods to determine whether it is possible to reliably predict and measure a
unique intrinsic physical signature in weapons-grade plutonium (Pu) produced by
certain reactor types. The particular reactors of interest are (a) fast breeder
reactors (FBR) of the type under development in India and China, which employ
depleted uranium in their core blankets and (b) CANDU-type reactors fueled by
natural uranium. Both of these reactor types in India will likely be operating
in non-safeguarded circumstances in the future. When the developmental FBRs in
India and China (and perhaps elsewhere) begin operating in the near future, it
would be useful for the DNDO?s global nuclear detection architecture to
understand the details of a potentially unique ?fingerprint? associated with Pu
produced from depleted uranium in the FBR blankets. It would also be helpful to
have a similar understanding of potentially unique identifying characteristics
of Pu generated in CANDU power reactors when the fuel is ejected with lower than
standard burn-up. Detailed understanding of these unique characteristics, such
as the Pu isotope content, signatures of uranium, fission product, and trace
elemental residues after chemical processing of Pu separation would aid nuclear
forensics activities aimed at source attribution in the case of interdicted
smuggled plutonium (pre-detonation material) as well as to some extent for post-
detonation analyses. The main thrust areas of the project are: [1] Computational
modeling of FBR and CANDU reactors to generate isotopic signatures through
nuclide inventory estimation in used fuel, [2] Neutron irradiation of uranium
dioxide (UO2) fuel pellets in fast spectrum (to simulate FBR)&lt;br/&gt;and
thermal spectrum (to simulate CANDU) at ORNL-high flux isotope reactor (HFIR)
for experimental validation of computed results of thrust area 1, and [3]
Experimental investigations of irradiated UO2 pellets through chemical
separations of plutonium from fission products and uranium and its
characterization using destructive and non-destructive analyses. Features of the
project include: (1) fingerprinting weapon-grade plutonium produced in fast
reactor blankets and thermal reactor low-burned fuel, (2) experimental
validation of weapon-grade Pu fingerprint originating from unique nuclear fuel
cycles, (3) development of a national nuclear forensics capability for targeting
weapon-grade plutonium produced from low burned fuel assemblies in foreign
nuclear fuel cycles, (4) plutonium separation from fission products and uranium
using PUREX and its characterization by destructive and non-destructive analyses
will be highly valuable to teach and demonstrate to graduate and undergraduate
students, (5) mentor, educate and support postdoctoral researcher, graduate and
undergraduate students, (6) publications through student presentations in
technical conferences and scholarly&lt;br/&gt;publications.