* 1140387
* RAPID: Preliminary Scientific and Sociological Assessment of the Southeastern U.S. Tornado Outbreak of 27 April 2011
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Kevin Knupp, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 03/31/2013
* USD 149,961.00

A widespread outbreak of exceptionally damaging severe thunderstorms, many of
which bore unusually intense and long-track tornadoes, swept across the
southeastern U.S. on 27 April 2011. The death toll for this regional disaster
stands at well over 300, with a majority of these fatalities occurring across
Alabama. The primary objectives of this study are (i) to provide timely
assessment of those meteorological factors (synoptic to mesoscale) and external
influences (e.g., atmospheric thermal boundaries and gravity-wave forcing,
influences of local topography and surface roughness etc.) impacting
tornadogenesis, modulation of tornado intensity, and resultant variations in
damage and loss of life; (ii) to conduct a preliminary analysis of the
variability in structure of storms producing significant tornadoes over a
relatively compressed span of time; (iii) to further evaluate and quantify
damage characteristics of select tornadoes at high spatial resolution via aerial
and ground-based surveys; and (iv) to assess the public's response to issued
tornado warnings and perceived tornado threat. Related goals are to better
understand why fatality counts were so high, and to explore ways to mitigate
loss of life in future severe weather events in this region. This latter effort
will be coordinated with a recently completed NOAA/National Weather Service
Assessment of this historic outbreak. Research quality dual-polarimetric and
dual-Doppler radar analyses will be developed with attention to more timely and
reliable identification of signatures linked to severe storm behavior using
modernized observing technologies. A workshop bringing together a variety of
research and operational meteorologists and emergency managers familiar with
this historic outbreak will be conducted in Huntsville, and a related article
will be prepared for submission to the Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort centers upon
identification of those mechanisms responsible for sharp spatial and temporal
variations in observed storm characteristics and the remarkable intensity of
tornado damage that occurred on 27 April 2011, with particular attention to any
aspects that may be unique to the atmospheric environment or underlying
topography typical of the southeastern U.S. Broader impacts will accrue through
development of a comprehensive dataset will provide new and supporting
information on real-time diagnosis of radar signatures of tornadoes, student
education, and via outreach to a variety of meteorological experts and first
responders responsible for safeguarding the public.