* 1140911
* Toads, Roads, and Nodes: Collaborative Course-Based Research on the Landscape Ecology of Amphibian Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Stephanie Hampton, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/2014
* USD 128,008.00

This project links networks of undergraduate ecology courses to carry out a
collaborative, hands-on research project focusing on a large-scale analysis of
habitat requirements for amphibians. For many students, this project is their
first experience working with large data sets, and the project's methods are
designed to sharpen the highly transferable skills (i.e., data integration and
analysis) necessary for doing science in the digital age. Students in each
course match United States Geographical Service data on amphibian populations
from their own region with habitat data from Google Earth. Their data are
submitted to a shared database that is analyzed to determine amphibian-habitat
associations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project provides
useful information on the effects of land use on amphibian populations in the
U.S. It also augments an important public database by adding habitat and
landscape data for each amphibian survey location. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
From an educational perspective, this project provides an authentic research
experience for up to 400 students from a diverse group of schools including two-
year colleges, public research universities, and historically minority-serving
universities. Assessment of the project focuses on the effects of a
collaborative research experience on students' interest in science, student
attitudes about science, and student retention in science
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.