* 1140120
* Integration and Assessment of an Inquiry-Based Laboratory Within Three Different Educational Settings
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Thomas Wolkow, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2015
* USD 207,494.00

This project is implementing an inquiry-based biology laboratory module and
determining whether it is effective and transferable across diverse educational
environments. The module is composed of a series of experiments and exercises
that navigate students through a UV-mutagenesis screen in search of an
understanding for how cells monitor their genomic integrity. The module is being
implemented within three different educational environments: 1) an introductory-
level biology course at a public, primarily undergraduate university (PUI) with
less selective admission criteria, 2) the equivalent (i.e. transferable)
introductory-level biology course at a community college, and 3) the curriculum
of a mathematics and science secondary teacher training program. Assessments
that measure learning gains, student perception and course completion rates are
being conducted in all three settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
enhancing the research and education infrastructure of a public PUI, a community
college, and a mathematics and science secondary teacher training program
through the acquisition of equipment and the development of new skills.
Scientist-teacher partnerships are developing, and these partnerships allow
community college faculty and prospective secondary mathematics and science
teachers to engage in scientific inquiry. The PUI faculty are developing a
better understanding for the needs of community college transfer students and
building relationships with the future local high school mathematics and science
teachers. All course materials and findings are accessible and freely available
via a website and the BEN portal, while research findings are being presented at
national conferences and published in science education and research
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education