* 1140592
* Collaborative Research: Project UPLIFT (Universal Portability of Learning Increased by Fun Teaching)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* John Weber, Georgia Perimeter College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2016
* USD 42,707.00

Project UPLIFT: Universal Portability of Learning Increased by Fun Teaching will
offer college statistics teachers engaging classroom mini-lessons and resources
consisting of fun items, spanning all main topics of introductory statistics,
from the extensive, widely-visited CAUSEweb.org digital library. The fun items
encompass many modalities, including cartoons, jokes, quotes, songs, poems,
wordplay, and videos. UPLIFT will transform the undergraduate statistics
classroom by putting fun items into well-indexed and annotated classroom-ready
form with mini lesson plans for their use without requiring special talent -
thus removing perceived barriers to use. UPLIFT materials will be assessed
rigorously for their impact on student learning and student anxiety and
attitudes towards the often-dreaded realm of introductory statistics. This will
be done using a novel randomized controlled experiment and supporting interviews
and observations of students.

UPLIFT will disseminate methods and results through virtual and paper
publications, conference presentations, and both general and customized
webinars. UPLIFT's impact will be broad -- the fun-based items are being
tailored for, and tested in, diverse populations of students representative of
the 800,000 students taking introductory statistics each year in the United
States. Project UPLIFT collaborating institutions are Ohio State University,
University of Texas at El Paso, and Georgia Perimeter College.