* 1140126
* A Hybrid Course Model of Peer-Led Learning for the Social Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Maureen Erber, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 196,685.00

This project is advancing undergraduate STEM education through the expansion of
the well-established Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) model, which has proven to be
successful in the natural sciences, into courses in the social sciences. The
work is being conducted at Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU), a Hispanic
Serving Institution (HSI) with a highly diverse student body, in which 56% of
the students are minorities and roughly 60% of incoming freshmen are first-
generation college students. NEIU is a commuter school with a sizeable number of
non-traditional students who work full- or part-time, and have difficulty
getting to campus outside of regular class periods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
psychology department is one of the largest departments on campus and is
challenged to meet the needs of the numerous students and the diverse body of
majors and minors in the department. Within the psychology courses and major,
some of the most acute challenges include retaining minority students, creating
common learning spaces and communities, and making course support accessible to
all students. This project is evolving a modified PLTL model that relies on
online technology to address the departmental challenges. Further, this project
is allowing the faculty to determine whether the modified PLTL model is
successful in expanding access for the many non-traditional students that
comprise the NEIU student body. The project builds upon an existing Peer Mentor
program in the STEM fields and now piloted in psychology. Ultimately, the work
will add in-person and online PLTL-style workshops to three entry-level
psychology courses and inject the careful use of technology to augment access,
communication, and learning groups. In addition to enhancing access, the project
team expects the small-group, peer led interactions - both in-person and online
- to improve student retention via the development of collaborative learning
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project proposal objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;
- design, implement and disseminate a modified PLTL model that is tailored for
psychology courses and may be easily adapted for other social
sciences;&lt;br/&gt; - design Peer led workshops that can be delivered online in
order to increase access for non-traditional students;&lt;br/&gt; - investigate
and evaluate the success of online Peer led interactions and small group
activities; and&lt;br/&gt; - evaluate the program's effectiveness for improving
student performance, retention and increasing participation of non-traditional
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has potential interest for social
science departments that would like to draw upon the success of the PLTL model
and for institutions serving non-traditional students.