* 1140567
* Collaborative Research: Developing Course Modules to Teach Service-Oriented Programming through Exemplification and Visualization
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Chunmei Liu, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2016
* USD 56,732.00

Service oriented programming (SOP) is a programming technique to build software
applications using services provided on the web as the building blocks. With
cloud computing and mobile devices becoming ubiquitous, SOP is becoming even
more crucial, but has not made significant inroads into the U.S. undergraduate
computing curricula. This project represents a well-conceived effort to address
this shortcoming by developing coursework in SOP to ensure that U.S. students
are prepared in this crucial technology, thus competitive in the global software
development marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
conducted at three diverse participating institutions: Howard University in
Washington, DC, the State University of New York at Oswego, and the Rochester
Institute of Technology in Rochester, NY. Three reusable curricular modules in
SOP are being designed for different undergraduate computing courses - a first
year introductory programming course, a sophomore course, and a senior-level
course. These curricular materials are being constructed on a carefully crafted
platform that provides examples and visualization to help achieve effective
learning. A modular approach is being used to ensure that the developed
curricular materials will be useful for a variety of undergraduate institutions
across the United States. Project results are being broadly disseminated through
various channels, including regional and national workshops, institutional
websites and the National STEM Distributed Learning Resource Center.