* 1140394
* US and China Workshop Series to Build a Collaborative Frame-work for Developing Shared Software Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Philip Papadopoulos, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 443,233.00

Software is critical for all branches of science and engineering and is a key
component of the emerging global cyberinfrastructure. In parallel, science and
engineering are becoming more collaborative, where multi-investigator teams with
a diversity of expertise are required to efficiently attack increasingly complex
fundamental questions and processes, on a global scale; including societal
issues such as health, energy, weather, disaster mitigation (earthquake, flood),
and the environment. Solving problems on a global scale requires both that
scientists work together and that their software and related cyberinfrastructure
interoperate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF recognizes the importance of the
development of software and software institutes and has established a
solicitation to provide opportunities for the U.S. research communities to their
development. The National Natural Science Foundation of China similarly
recognizes the significance of software development for science and engineering
studies, and has supported research in this area, but there has been little
communication between software research communities in the United States and
China. This award will support a series of two workshops and intervening
interactions by funding a group of approximately 15 U.S. researchers to interact
with a similar number of researchers in the People?s Republic of China supported
by the National Natural Science Foundation China, to explore three areas of
software development: trusted software, extreme scale software, and
architectures and processes for emerging infrastructure, in order to expand
collaboration between the U.S. and China software researchers in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first workshop will be held in Beijing in Fall
2011; a second workshop will be held in San Diego in Spring 2012. Between the
workshops small groups of participants and graduate students will meet to
develop ideas from the first workshop, to be presented at the second workshop,
and to be pursued after the end of this funded activity. The success of this
activity will be measured in the research collaborations that persist beyond the
framework of this activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
activity is to determine through practice if this process can accelerate the
formation of substantive, bi-lateral, peer-reviewed research programs. The
broader impact will be to open the door, widely, to U.S.-China collaborations in
some critical areas of software. The transformative impact will be a model of
how other international research collaborations in cyberinfrastructure can be
carried out to break down significant barriers between researchers in the
world?s two largest economies.