* 1140073
* ARI-MA: Recasting Nuclear Forensics Discovery as a Digital Library Search Problem
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Ray Larson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 298,505.00

1140073 (Gey). Nuclear forensics is the science of identification of source and
characteristics of smuggled nuclear materials possibly seized by authorities
(APS/AAAS Joint Working Group: Nuclear Forensics: Role, State of the Art,
Program Needs,2008). Nuclear material identification is of utmost importance to
international threat reduction and this project targets making a significant
step in this effort. The nuclear materials identification process will be cast
as a search problem against a digital library of standard nuclear materials
samples and their digital signatures. This should prove useful to supply a
conceptual, algorithmic approach to nuclear material identification and
origination. Among the elements of the problem and questions to be resolved are:
Can the identification of nuclear samples which represent the nodes in a nuclear
decay chain be approached as a weighted, labeled directed graph matching
problem? Can the standard XML representations of chemical materials and
compounds be extended to represent the nuclear isotope decay chain process? From
existing representations, nuclear decay theory can be used to extrapolate
downstream (times after analysis) or upstream (time prior to sample analysis, up
to time zero). Can a simulation approach be used to develop a pseudo-digital
library derived from the differential equations of nuclear decay to test
algorithmic research without having to operate under the veil of secrecy? This
project seeks to answer these questions, develop a digital library of nuclear
signatures, and field educational outreach to encourage more search specialists
to dedicate research attention to the problems. Cooperation has been obtained
from projects at Los Alamos National Laboratory (nuclear materials samples
library) and Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (nuclear ontology). The results of the
project are targeted to include open-source code for nuclear forensics search to
be made available to DNDO agencies and national laboratory groups, and to
streamline the process of nuclear materials identification. This project is
believed to be the first computer science algorithmic approach to the nuclear
forensics search problem as a special directed graph matching problem. The
success of this project would encourage other computer scientists to work on
nuclear forensics search. Success in nuclear forensics search is a critical
component to fighting terrorist activity and preventing disastrous individual
terrorist nuclear attacks.