* 1140404
* Expression of Microbial Nitrification in the Stable Isotopic Systematics of Oceanic Nitrite and Nitrate
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Karen Casciotti, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2015
* USD 508,605.00

Closing the marine budgets of nitrate and nitrous oxide are central goals for
researchers interested in nutrient-driven changes in primary productivity and
climate change. With the implementation of new methods for oxygen isotopic
analysis of seawater nitrate, it will be possible to construct a budget for
nitrate based on its oxygen isotopic distribution that is complementary to
nitrogen isotope budgets. Before we can effectively use oxygen isotopes in
nitrate to inform the current understanding of the marine nitrogen cycle, we
must first understand how different processes that produce (nitrification) and
consume (assimilation, denitrification) nitrate affect its oxygen isotopic
signature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution will provide a quantitative assessment of the oxygen
isotopic systematics of nitrification in the field and thus fill a key gap in
our understanding of 18O variations in nitrate, nitrite, and nitrous oxide. The
primary goal is to develop a quantitative prediction of the oxygen isotopic
signatures of nitrite and nitrate produced during nitrification in the sea. The
researchers hypothesize that oxygen isotopic fractionation during nitrification
is the primary factor setting the 18O values of newly produced nitrate and
nitrite. Secondly, they hypothesize that oxygen atom exchange is low where
ammonia oxidation and nitrite oxidation are tightly coupled, but may increase in
regions with nitrite accumulation, such as in the primary and secondary nitrite
maxima. They will test these hypotheses with a series of targeted laboratory and
field experiments, as well as with measurements of nitrite and nitrate isotopic
distributions extending through the euphotic zone, primary nitrite maximum, and
secondary nitrite maximum of the Eastern Tropical South Pacific. The results of
these experiments are expected to provide fundamental information required for
the interpretation of 18O isotopic signatures in nitrite, nitrate, and N2O in
the context of underlying microbial processes. A better understanding of these
features and the processes involved is important for quantifying new production,
controls on the N budget, and N2O production in the ocean -- which should lead
to a better understanding of the direct and indirect interactions among the
nitrogen cycle, marine chemistry, and climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The results of this research should be of interest to a broad research
community interested in oceanic nitrogen cycling, N2O production, and climate
change, as well as nitrifier physiology and biochemistry. Student training in
biogeochemistry will be an important component of the activity. A female
graduate student will participate throughout this project, and will learn to
integrate training in culture manipulation, laboratory and field-going research,
as well as isotopic and data acquisition and analysis. There will also be
opportunities for undergraduate students, including ones from under-represented
minority groups, to become involved.