* 1140640
* San Diego Biodiversity Project: Integrating Authentic Research and Collaboration into the Biology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Madeline Butler, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* julio soto
* 06/30/2015
* USD 160,000.00

This project integrates original research directly into undergraduate courses at
both the lower and upper division level. Students in a variety of biology
laboratory courses are using DNA sequencing and bioinformatics techniques to
create a biodiversity inventory of the Scripps Coastal Reserve, a wildlife
refuge adjacent to the university campus. Students learn to compose and answer
compelling and timely questions about how to identify, understand, and conserve
biodiversity. For example, students in one course collect intertidal
invertebrates as part of a study of anthropogenic impacts on species diversity,
while students in another course sequence genes from these organisms, and
students in a third course use the generated sequence data to design and test
hypotheses about evolutionary processes. The objectives are to 1) engage
students in the process of original research, 2) connect different courses by
developing modules in which students use the same data in different ways, and 3)
facilitate collaborations among courses with a web site that gives an overview
of the issues, highlights student projects, and serves as an accessible
repository for the data. The ultimate aim is to help students create their own
connections between disparate topics and discover the interdisciplinary basis of
original research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The data the
students generate will contribute to a local biodiversity database, linked to an
international database and will be available through the San Diego Biodiversity
Project website. In the pilot students were excited about sequencing genes of
local species not yet included in any sequence database. In addition to the
intellectual impact on students, the project is adding important information
concerning a highly diverse, but sparsely documented, ecosystem situated
adjacent to a highly developed urban area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT:
Over 2000 students per year are directly benefiting from this project.
Approximately 700 students in the core laboratory course are learning molecular
biology techniques by sequencing specific genes (molecular markers) from local
terrestrial and marine species found at the Scripps Coastal Reserve. Around 1500
students in satellite courses are collecting organisms or using student-
generated data to learn about ecological and evolutionary processes. The
infrastructure is designed to serve as a resource for future students wishing to
advance this effort throughout the region. The curriculum being developed at
UCSD can be easily exported to universities nationwide for use by those
interested in creating or adding to biodiversity databases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.