* 1140706
* Transforming Modeling Instruction: Developing Curriculum Materials for Faculty Adoption
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Laird Kramer, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 226,335.00

This project is developing a comprehensive set of learning materials to
implement Modeling Instruction in introductory university mechanics in order to
enable faculty at other universities to adopt Modeling Instruction. Modeling
Instruction for Universities (MI-U) has transformed Florida International
University's (FIU's) introductory physics sequence over the past 8 years, as
evidenced by significantly improved conceptual understanding, a reduction of the
DFW rate in introductory physics, and an increase in favorable attitudes as
measured by the CLASS. MI-U is also one of several coordinated efforts that has
contributed to a large increase in the number of intended and declared physics
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MI-U is distinct from other course transformations
in introductory physics because the content of the course is organized around
the fundamental models in physics and implements an explicit Nature of Science
theme. MI-U engages students as scientists by replicating the model-building and
model-based reasoning experiences of practicing scientists. MI-U incorporates
Modeling Discourse Management (MDM), which is a set of tools for structuring
student-centered discourse that is essential for promoting student-centered
instruction. Further, MI-U has evidence to support the claim that the MI-U
learning environment is inclusively supportive of students from historically
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials developed include: in-
class labs and worksheets to enable model development, homework and assessment
activities, and instructor implementation materials (including a comprehensive
teaching guide and video training library). The project is augmenting the
existing collection of student activities and teacher notes and transforming the
materials into a collection suitable for dissemination to adopting faculty.
There is also a video library of student learning episodes so that faculty may
easily envision and model the pedagogical approach. The project is developing
the complete curriculum for the first semester of introductory physics, provided
online in an editable format. Local dissemination is supported, in part, through
the HHMI FIU Faculty Scholars project. National dissemination is through
partnerships with established physics reform networks including PhysTEC and the
AAPT/APS/AIP New Faculty Workshops, as well as through conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit is to create
dissemination-ready learning materials that enable faculty to adopt and
implement Modeling Instruction that has been shown to establish an inclusive
learning environment. Students in MI-U courses have shown improved content
knowledge, better attitudes toward learning science, and improved success rates.
These materials draw on the broad knowledge base of research on teaching and
learning and many years of implementation experience by the project team. The
project is also continuing to advance the knowledge base in physics education
research through peer-reviewed research publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broad impacts of this project are to
establish, for wide adoption, Modeling Instruction learning materials which have
been shown to be effective at creating supportive, inclusive learning
environments with historically underrepresented student groups. In partnership
with the Director of Education and Diversity at the American Physical Society,
the course materials are being distributed to faculty at AAPT-APS-AIP-sponsored
New Faculty Workshops. These workshops have a demonstrated record of success of
faculty implementing reformed teaching practices, and thus the MI-U curriculum
materials can reach a broad base of new faculty impacting large numbers of
students.