* 1140196
* RCN-SEES: Climate, Energy, Environment, and Engagement in Semi-Arid Regions (CE3SAR)
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Luis Cifuentes, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 06/30/2019
* USD 738,678.00

This award is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aim to address the challenges of
creating a sustainable world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Coordination
Network (RCN) CE3SAR (Climate, Energy, Environment, and Engagement in Semiarid
Regions) is a comprehensive partnership of researchers at South Texas regional
institutions and major research universities elsewhere advancing knowledge of
science, engineering and education for sustainability (SEES). The network will
develop and test an innovative model for conducting interdisciplinary, region-
specific, sustainability research closely tied to the needs and interests of
highly-engaged local stakeholders. RCN CE3SAR will aggregate regional research
capacities specific to sustainability in semiarid climates contiguous to the
Gulf of Mexico while leveraging research expertise infused from outside the
region. Geographic information science (GIS) will play a key role in the process
of integrating layers of scientific data, producing scientific insight and
presenting new ideas, new research directions and new scientific knowledge to
regional stakeholders as well as the scientific community. The network will
align regional capacities that heretofore were largely disconnected and bring
focus and synergy to a range of research that will profoundly impact the region
and its socioeconomic future. The network will engage and educate regional
communities, government and private-sector stakeholders throughout the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;South Texas comprises 28 counties, eight of which
border Mexico and eight the Gulf of Mexico, where coastal marine and estuarine
environments quickly become semiarid regions historically susceptible to
drought. Climate change and its ripple effects, from rising seas to parched
riverbeds, will profoundly affect South Texas socioeconomic structures,
geographic distribution patterns and educational and cultural institutions.
While much sustainability science focuses on global scales, local communities
and institutions in South Texas and elsewhere face crucial decisions over the
next 20 years driven by sustainability issues related to water, energy and use
of space. Scientific knowledge must be available at relevant scales for those
decisions to be informed by sustainability research; moreover, the science must
be understood and accepted by the community, which plays a vital role in
implementing the research results into its decision making and infrastructure.
Experience has shown that importing researchers from outside the region with
little or no connection to the community results in low acceptance of research
results by local decision-makers and by the community at large; moreover, South
Texas has been historically isolated and its residents suspicious of
'outsiders'. In order for sustainability research to have a salutary and
substantive local impact, it must be advanced by regional researchers who also
draw on national and international expertise.