* 1140134
* Improving Students' Professional Communication Skills By Employing an Integrated System of Learning Tools and Methods
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* David Dzombak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 199,995.00

This project focuses on creating and deploying an integrated system of
components to facilitate the learning of communication skills within engineering
courses. The design of the components is guided by the need to provide every
student in an engineering program the opportunity to learn technical and
professional communication skills while requiring minimal changes in existing
curricula and instructional resource allocations. The project's working
hypothesis is that this approach - combined with thorough evaluation efforts
that measure the effectiveness of the learning system, and the dissemination of
project efforts online and in workshops - will lead to the development of a
research-informed instructional framework and ultimately lead to a significant
improvement in the communications skills of engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Communication skills are critical to engineers' professional success.
Nevertheless many engineering programs are faced with various challenges that
cause them to struggle to prepare their students to meet the communication
expectations of the workplace. One challange is that communication courses are
typically taught to small cohorts, providing a small number of students with the
individualized instruction that they need. This approach is also problematic
because it requires the employment of numerous instructors to address the
communication needs of whole engineering programs. The number of engineering
courses that students are required to take presents another challenge to
programs. It leaves little curricular space to add the multiple communication
courses that students need to gain the skills that are critical to their
professional success, which range from writing in different genres to oral
presentations and visual communication. One approach is to embed communication
pedagogy and writing instructors in existing engineering courses. But, this is a
costly approach to maintain and does not provide instructors the time they need
to teach component skills. Thus, the challenge of finding more efficient ways to
teach engineering students the full range of effective communication skills that
they need to achieve professional success still exists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the challenge by developing and
evaluating a system of distributed communication learning components that are
designed by the Carnegie Mellon engineering community and a writing instructor
in engineering courses. The system integrates human instruction with online
tutorials and references as supplemental learning components. The instruction
evolves from initial reliance on writing tasks where interaction between
instructors and students is important, to a gradual reduction of contact between
instructors and students. In the early (novice) stages, students work with a
writing instructor who guides them through the acquisition, practice, and
application of component skills using online tutorials and references, which is
the focus of the first phase of this project. As students become mature
communicators, they increasingly participate in peer-review activities where
they become engaged in giving and receiving critiques with their peers - a
common practice in the workplace, which would be the focus of this project in
future phases.