* 1140428
* Pathways over Time: A Research Project for the Introductory Biology Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Laura Hake, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2015
* USD 175,050.00

This project is developing a multi-section introductory laboratory class that
incorporates an authentic research project with a focus on comparative genomics.
The course, BI204 - Investigations in Molecular Cell Biology, is teaching
students the core concepts and competencies of scientific literacy, as
articulated in the recent NSF/AAAS sponsored report, Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action. The research project involves
groups of students studying the functional conservation of a metabolic pathway
involved in methionine synthesis using complementation in the budding yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae to test the functional conservation of the genes in
evolutionarily divergent species. During the course of the project, students are
using the primary scientific literature, databases, and online bioinformatics
tools, while becoming familiar with the basic techniques used in molecular cell
biology and microbial genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of curriculuar
materials are being developed during the project and made available to the
community over the Internet. Materials include a student handbook and an
instructor's handbook. The student handbook is being updated on an annual basis,
and previous versions archived to the eScholarship@BC repository for digital
preservation. The instructor's handbook is expected to be important in
sustaining the project at Boston College and in transferring the project to
other institutions. The project also includes the design and implementation of a
data-sharing site that students use to post and discuss their experimental
results throughout the semester. The data-sharing site is being designed using a
platform that utilizes open source code, so that the design can be shared with
other educators. This project also includes a graduate teaching assistant
training program that stresses active learning, attention to diversity, and the
importance of assessment in instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education