* 1140629
* Developing an Innovative Randomization-based Introductory Statistics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Allan Rossman, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2013
* USD 181,478.00

The algebra-based introductory statistics course has seen tremendous growth in
enrollments over the last two decades using a consensus curriculum and
sequencing of topics. However, research has also shown students typically leave
these courses with a shallow understanding of key inferential ideas. Recently,
many statistics educators have proposed moving from this traditional curriculum
to one centered on computer-intensive, randomization-based inference methods.
Two advantages of this approach are: (1) randomization methods enable students
to focus on the core logic of inference, and (2) efficiency in presentation
allows students to gain experience in computer-intensive and multivariable
methods that are being increasingly used by applied researchers. This project is
providing instructors with a fully integrated set of curriculum materials with
which to teach a substantially different curriculum that introduces statistical
inference from the start. The materials are undergoing class-testing at numerous
institutions and being disseminated through publication as a textbook,
workshops, and presentations. The accompanying evaluation component is providing
information about potential gains in student understanding of core concepts of
inference and documentation of how students develop skills of inferential
reasoning. These curricular materials and assessment findings have the potential
for effecting a substantial change in the content and focus of introductory
statistics courses across the country.