* 1140512
* The Design of Course Materials and Visualization Systems for Modern Cryptography
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Ching-Kuang Shene, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,964.00

The objective of this project is to design a set of comprehensive, flexible and
modularized course materials and pedagogical tools for basic modern cryptography
to be used in a dedicated course or courses that include a cryptography
component. This work can be used in a breadth-first approach and permits
instructors to teach selected topics in-depth. Students get familiar with state-
of-the-art cryptography, acquire basic knowledge and skills, and are well-
prepared to approach cryptographic applications with confidence. Major
activities include (1) developing a web-based tutorial on cryptography, (2)
implementing software tools and user guides for the software tools that support
the proposed course materials, and (3) designing an environment for students to
perform semester-long programming projects and to visualize important elements
in cryptography. The course materials and software tools are available on the
web.

This project has two major components. The first one is a well-balanced approach
with an intuitive and comprehensive web-based tutorial, a programming
environment and a visualization system. Instructors may teach cryptography with
a breadth-first approach and discuss selected topics in-depth, and students have
a programming environment and use the visualization system to learn the inner
workings of each algorithm. The second one is an extendable system that uses a
layered approach and plug-ins. The system can serve as a
programming/demonstration platform and as a debugging tool for instructors and
students to implement their own demonstrations and visualizations. The project
has a broad impact on teaching, learning and practicing cryptographic topics,
and has the potential to transform the traditional dry and formal methodology
into an interactive, hands-on, and visualization-based approach.