* 1140941
* Development of the Laboratory-Based Course to Deliver Sustainability in Built Environment using Building Information Modeling
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Joseph Kim, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,482.00

This project at California State University-Long Beach (CSULB) is developing a
hands-on laboratory- and project-based virtual course on sustainability of the
built environment using Building Information Modeling (BIM) technology. Demand
for specialists who can integrate BIM and Green Design is increasing because
sustainability is becoming a driving force in industrial practice. Using BIM to
analyze building performance enables students to go beyond conventional 2D and
3D models used for purely visualization purposes. The outcomes of this project
include ten core modules and five advanced modules, including solar radiation
analysis, day-lighting analysis, shading analysis, ventilation and air flow
analysis and quantification and analysis of greenhouse gas emissions due to the
building materials and energy use of the buildings. Through these modules, the
students develop a strong foundation for understanding global environmental
problems such as climate change and ozone depletion, being familiar with the
concept of building assessment, gaining a clear understanding about sustainable
development and sustainable construction, and understanding the relationships
between sustainability and building materials, building forms, and building
systems. The modules cover seven credit categories of the United States Green
Building Council's rating system, Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED), including sustainable sites, energy and atmosphere, water efficiency,
materials and resources, indoor environmental quality, and innovation in
designs, and regional priority. The project has the following educational
components: 1) Sustainability in Built Environment; 2) Changes of Teaching
Method in Engineering Education using BIM, and 3) Sustainability in Construction
Education. One component of the project introduces K-12 students to green
buildings and BIM technology through outreach programs available at CSULB
campus, which is designated as a Hispanic Serving Institution.