* 1140628
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Innovation Capabilities of Undergraduate Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Carolyn Seepersad, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 04/30/2014
* USD 100,000.00

This collaborative project between the University of Texas at Austin (a PhD
granting university) and the University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth (an MS
granting institution) is investigating the impact of undergraduate engineering
curricula on the innovation capabilities of undergraduate engineering students.
The mechanical engineering departments at both universities are studying
innovation capability of students and looking for correlations between their
curricula and changes in innovation ability. The goal of the research is to
determine to what extent the undergraduate engineering curriculum improves
graduate innovation capability. The project is establishing instruments for
measuring the innovation capability of students that consist of concept
generation exercises where students solve open-ended design problems and a
survey to investigate student creative self-efficacy. These instruments contain
metrics for assessing the level of originality and technical feasibility of
student designs and are being used to determine the effect the complete
undergraduate curriculum and the effect of individual courses (design-oriented
courses, for example) on student innovation capabilities. This is being
accomplished by assessing student innovation capabilities at the entry and exit
points of the curriculum and at the beginning and end of selected courses. The
research is also correlating innovation capability with student technical
performance as measured using the student's grade-point ratio. Because the work
is being carried out using very distinct student populations, the work will have
a national impact. Major contributions of the project include an instrument for
assessing innovation capabilities and a better understanding of the relationship
between engineering curricula and the development of innovative engineers.