* 1140526
* An Integrated Series of Student-driven, Research-based Undergraduate Laboratory Courses Linking Chemical Biology, Biochemistry, and Neurobiology
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Geoffrey Hoops, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 04/30/2016
* USD 199,942.00

Curricular changes link three distinct scientific disciplines (chemical biology,
biochemistry, and neurobiology) through the introduction of a series of three
thematically-connected, research-based laboratories. In these discipline
courses, students synthesize novel biological imaging agents (chemical biology),
using these same imaging agents to catalogue the substrate specificity of ester
hydrolases from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) (biochemistry), and combine the
products to screen for new components of neural signaling in Caenorhabditis
elegans (neurobiology). The introduction of open-ended, hypothesis-driven
research design into three biomolecular science laboratories increases student
exposure to the practice of scientific research. Students practice the skills
necessary to be working scientists, including formulating hypotheses, designing
experimental plans, solving problems, and communicating results both orally and
in writing. In addition, students organize a symposium at a regional
undergraduate research conference. Students in these courses are challenged to
integrate multiple scientific disciplines and a diverse set of laboratory skills
within the context of larger scientific investigations (TB infection and
neuronal communication). Student participation in projects allows them to
contribute new knowledge and research tools to the understanding of the
biochemistry of TB infection and neuronal communication. Overall, the three
linked courses introduce students to interdisciplinary science, allowing
students to participate in current areas of research.