* 1140748
* CULMINATE: CUstomized Laboratory using MIcrocontroller for New Automotive Technology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* M. Affan Badar, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 195,434.00

This project is a transformative effort that will leverage the combined
resources of the automotive engineering technology (AET), computer engineering
technology (CET), and mechanical engineering technology (MET) programs at
Indiana State University (ISU) toward enhancing teaching effectiveness and
student employability. Project tasks include: 1) creating application-specific
classroom hardware and lab modules; 2) enhancing hands-on learning in the three
engineering technology programs; 3) improving teaching effectiveness and
collaboration among faculty members; 4) enhancing curriculum to better respond
to workforce requirement in industry; and 5) increasing diversity. Using a
customized educational microcontroller board and an inclusive suite of co-
developed teaching materials and lab projects, students will engage
microcontroller-based, automobile-related measurement and control education
using hands-on laboratories. CET students will gain practical experience in
microcontroller applications solving real-world problems; AET students will
learn basic automotive microcontroller management control and sensor
functionality using specially designed laboratory equipment; MET students will
have new lab experiments to help visualize abstract statics and dynamics
concepts.

The project's interdisciplinary approach will not only better prepare students
for the knowledge and skills needed for future employment, but also provide
significant experience for them to work in teams, a valuable experience for
today's industry needs. The project can also serve as a model for
interdisciplinary curriculum/laboratory development nationwide.