* 1140398
* An Informed Approach to Improving Quantitative Literacy and Mitigating Math Anxiety in Undergraduates through Introductory Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Katherine Follette, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,535.00

Intellectual Merit: The project is developing a two-fold approach to the
improvement of quantitative literacy in undergraduate students by (1) studying
how students' quantitative literacy can be assessed and improved through the
introductory sciences, and (2) educating other university faculty about the need
to improve quantitative literacy while training them to address the problem in
their own classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While numeracy is essential to
understanding science, there are no data on whether introductory science can be
used to improve students' numerical ability during a one-semester course.
Beginning with the general-education introductory astronomy course, in
partnership with Pima Community College, this project is investigating how
introductory science classes for non-majors can be used to improve students'
comfort and ability with numbers and mathematical reasoning skills. Such skills
include graph reading, proportionality, percentages, probability and number
sense. This research is important in understanding where basic quantitative
literacy among college students is insufficient, and whether literacy can be
improved and skills established through science courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is taking advantage of
extensive teaching experience - in formal and informal settings, from junior
high to adult learners, and in a variety of scientific disciplines - and
educational research to develop a workshop for instructors of introductory
science courses. This workshop provides the methods, curricular materials, and
educational tools faculty need to help improve quantitative literacy in their
classrooms. By increasing awareness regarding the life consequences of
quantitative illiteracy and by providing tested curricular materials and
practical ideas designed to help develop quantitative skills, the project is
encouraging an emphasis on numeracy in the science classroom that serves
students well by itself and also helps them learn the science.