* 1140522
* Developing Pedagogies of Engagement in Foundation Chemistry Courses: Enhancing Minority Retention in STEM Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Leonard Mueller, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 06/30/2015
* USD 199,350.00

The Chemistry Department is encouraging more engagement of students with course
content by incorporating, in a systematic and multi-course fashion, the use of
novel case studies in General Chemistry discussion sections and in Organic
Chemistry Laboratory sections. The project is implementing problem-based case
studies that focus on the interdisciplinary aspect of chemistry in these
foundational courses taken by large numbers of first- and second-year students.
This allows the students to make connections between traditional content and
topics of civic relevance that are well-matched to current students interests.
The project is focusing on connections to environmental science, biomedical
science, and engineering and is establishing how this approach leads to
increased retention of students in their pursuit of STEM
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The introduction of case study discussions is
changing the learning environment for the targeted chemistry courses; students
are engaged in a more active and collaborative learning experience from that
which existed prior to the start of this project. In addition, the inclusion of
case studies is furthering students' development of higher order critical
thinking skills. The project is developing Teaching Assistant expertise to lead
open-ended case study discussions and is assessing the impact of this
educational experience on TA performance and expected future
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is demonstrating how existing courses can
be tweaked such that even large enrollment foundational chemistry courses can
engage all students in an active and collaborative environment known to develop
desired student skills. Simultaneously, the project, by connecting students to
real world issues of current civic relevance, is increasing the success rate of
students by directly confronting a commonly perceived deficiency in current
course offerings.