* 1140970
* The Impact of Blade Motion on the Flux to a Blade Surface
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Heidi Nepf, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 373,200.00

Aquatic vegetation in fresh- and salt-water systems provides ecosystem services
valued at over one trillion dollars per year. Seagrass and freshwater
macrophytes enhance water quality by filtering nutrients from the water,
reducing re-suspension, and producing oxygen in stagnant regions. Unlike
terrestrial plants, which acquire nutrients through their roots, aquatic plants
acquire essential nutrients through their leaves and blades from the surrounding
water. The nutrient uptake controls the growth and health of the vegetation, as
well as its potential impact on water quality. The proposed research will
examine how the hydrodynamic conditions and the motion of individual blades
impacts the rate of nutrient flux to the plant, with the goal of providing
better predictions of the potential maximum uptake rate.

The project will examine the interaction of individual blades with uni-
directional current and progressive waves to understand how blade motion
influences flux to the blade surface. The model blades will be constructed from
low-density polyethylene (LDPE), which preferentially absorb the organic
compounds present in our flume water (e.g. chloroform). Because of its high
partitioning coefficient, for an initial period of exposure, the LDPE blade
takes in chemicals as fast as it can be delivered to the surface, mimicking
mass-transport limiting uptake. This project will extend existing models for
flux at solid boundaries to conditions relevant to macrophytes, specifically
introducing the impact of blade motion and conditions with waves. It will
contribute a basic understanding of mass exchange at flexible boundaries that is
relevant to chemical and biological engineering.