* 1140995
* TUES:  Motivating Students in an Introductory Continuous-Time Signals and Systems Course Using a Novel Signals Exploration Platform
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Mario Simoni, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 198,047.00

Project Description&lt;br/&gt;This project is researching the hypothesis that
motivation and learning in an introductory continuous time signals and systems
(CTSS) course will improve if the theoretical presentation of material is
augmented with weekly, sensory-based, application-oriented experiences.
Laboratory exercises are being developed that are based on a hardware platform
designed for measuring and processing realistic continuous-time signals.
Summative assessments including surveys, focus groups, and specific rubrics
applied to final exams are being used to measure changes in motivation and
learning, in conjunction with baseline data that has been collected over a
three-year period. The project incorporates learning theory in the development
of materials to support student learning of the difficult engineering content
that is associated with signals and systems related courses. Open-source modules
are being produced that have a high potential for broad adoption. The effort
also involves a comprehensive evaluation plan that is producing the data needed
to convince others that they should consider adopting the
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance&lt;br/&gt;The
process that is being utilized in creating signals and systems content is
informing the development of other introductory engineering course modules. A
workshop is being developed and will be held at national conferences in which
the participants will get to perform some of the laboratory exercises and keep
the platform that they use. Furthermore, dissemination of the assessment results
and materials is also being distributed through national conferences and journal
publications. The outreach activities of the project have further potential to
positively impact K-12 students and interest them in pursuing careers in
engineering. In addition to the focus on CTSS courses, the platform is being
utilized in a K-12 outreach program called Explore Engineering (at Rose-Hulman).
The materials developed for the program introduce middle/high-school students to
the concept of frequencies in relation to music, sounds, and electrocardiograph
(ECG) signals. These materials are available to the public and the experiences
are informing the development of further outreach activities and collaborations.