* 1140308
* Collaborative Research: Active-Learning Laboratory Experiments for Teaching IT Security
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Xinli Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 136,559.00

In order to enhance the security component in undergraduate IT education, this
project develops a suite of hands-on IT security labs through comprehensive
studies on the principles, knowledge, recent research results, advanced
technologies and tools in the fields of computer and network security. The
topics of these experiments include vulnerability assessment, network access
protection, firewall, intrusion detection and prevention systems, security audit
and monitoring, cryptographic systems, certificate service and public-key
infrastructure, virtual private networks, password management and system
hardening. With a layered and modular design, the experiments can be tailored
with minimal modification by instructors for use in different courses and
various environments. New technologies and products can be added and obsolete
tools can be removed in a "plug-and-play" manner without affecting the teaching
objective of an experiment. A cloud-based test-bed is developed in an existing
virtual laboratory environment and the labs are tested in this test-bed.
External consultants from industry help evaluate the contents and format of
these experiments. Through these hands-on activities, students are provided with
an active-learning environment by exposing them to real-world problems in the
field of IT security and the opportunity to learn from experiences with advanced
technologies and well developed tools. The research results are being widely
disseminated through a designated web portal, workshops, seminars and
publications to help instructors from other universities and colleges prepare
and deliver IT security courses more effectively and efficiently.