* 1140191
* Collaborative Research: Transforming the Understanding, Assessment and Prediction of Teamwork Effectiveness in Software Engineering Education using Machine Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Shihong Huang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2015
* USD 33,650.00

In response to demands of the software engineering industry, this project is
developing powerful machine learning-based methods to understand, assess and
predict student learning of software engineering teamwork across globally-
distributed teams. The project includes the following activities. Objective and
quantitative teamwork data are being collected on student activities in ongoing,
jointly-taught undergraduate computer science classes at three geographically-
distant institutions (San Francisco State, Florida Atlantic, and Fulda
Universities). Novel machine learning tools are being applied to these data to
discover models, rules and metrics that define student success in acquiring
teamwork skills and that facilitate early intervention for teams at risk by
identifying predictors of teamwork outcomes. With input from external
evaluators, the methods and tools developed in this project are being refined
and disseminated to educators for early adoption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project advances the field of software engineering with new tools for assessing
student software engineering teamwork skills. This project is the first to apply
novel machine learning techniques to assess and predict student learning of
these skills. In the era of global collaboration, the project is also assessing
the impact of developing teamwork skills within globally-distributed teams. The
participating US universities serve highly-diverse student populations; thus the
project is preparing large numbers of students underrepresented in STEM fields
to enter the software engineering profession and to successfully meet the
challenges of communicating effectively in globally-distributed teams. As a
result, the project is contributing both to diversifying and to maintaining the
competitiveness of the US software engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
training workshop for software engineering educators from across the California
State University system and from a San Francisco community college is part of
the project.