* 1140077
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  RCN-SEES for Urban Sustainability: Research Coordination and Synthesis for a Transformative Future
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Steward Pickett, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 173,088.00

This award is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aim to address the challenges of
creating a sustainable world. Understanding urban sustainability and improving
the ability of policy makers to achieve sustainable management are pressing
needs of the 21st century. Learning how to enable sustainable transitions for
cities requires an understanding of the myriad transitions urban systems will
face. To meet these challenges, this project will establish an interdisciplinary
Urban Sustainability Research Coordination Network (RCN) that will integrate and
synthesize urban research while incubating solutions-oriented products. This
unique network will use a comparative approach across a diversity of cities that
are in various degrees of transition to: 1) understand the social, economic, and
environmental triggers that have led contemporary cities to crisis and
transition; 2) use complex adaptive systems approaches to understand how
contemporary cities react to transition triggers, and; 3) use the energy-water
resource nexus as a lens to understand how contemporary cities may best
transition to more sustainable futures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Urban
Sustainability RCN will begin with a broadly interdisciplinary core group of
academics, students, postdocs, policy-makers, city planners, managers, and other
action-focused urban players representing 14 cities in various stages of
transition. Network expansion will be international, inclusive, nimble, and
flexible as network objectives become more focused on incubating solutions-
oriented projects. The network will use a wide array of collaborative tools to
nurture synthesis activities, information sharing, and product dissemination
during face-to-face activities, virtual interactions, and educational
activities. Training new professionals and improve the ability of existing
professionals to achieve urban sustainability objectives is an additional,
educational goal of this network. The network also will develop new tools and
motivations for the exchange of practical information among sustainability
scientists, officers, and practitioners. The Urban Sustainability RCN will
incubate activities and generate products about the most effective approaches
and media for communication with practitioners.