* 1140584
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Literacy and Reasoning Assessment (QLRA)
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Semra Kilic-Bahi, Colby-Sawyer College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 01/31/2015
* USD 28,094.00

The Quantitative Literacy Reasoning Assessment (QLRA) project is developing a
non-proprietary QLR instrument, piloting it at several participating
institutions across the country to begin the creation of a database of QLR
abilities, and establishing an online resource portal for QLR assessment.
Quantitative Literacy/Reasoning is a relatively new and growing field, with many
institutions replacing traditional math requirements with various introductory
QLR-requirements such as Liberal Arts Mathematics and Finite Math. The current
developmental/introductory math program in this country is undergoing a profound
paradigm shift, as focus moves from traditional algebra based curricula to the
development of the quantitative skills and habits of mind required for decision
making in our personal, civic and workplace lives. Underrepresented groups in
STEM (minorities and women) are often disproportionately overrepresented in
these traditional developmental courses. The mathematics point-of-entry for
these underrepresented groups is a crucial time to nurture interest and
engagement with mathematics that could lead to further STEM involvement. The
QLRA project provides the needed assessment for curriculum innovation and
coherence of these point-of-entry courses. Dissemination via the online portal
allows institutions to easily adapt the non-proprietary instrument to their own
needs. The QLRA Project provides the necessary assessment infrastructure and a
collaborative platform as QLR requirements evolve around the nation.