* 1140008
* Going Further: An Integrative Approach to a more Research-oriented, Exploratory Junior-level Lab
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Dale Moore, Mercer University
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 06/30/2015
* USD 174,547.00

The project in the Department of Chemistry is developing a junior-level, studio-
style laboratory to replace traditional labs associated with Physical Chemistry
I and II, Instrumental Analysis, and Inorganic Chemistry. The collaborative, in-
depth experience being provided by this guided inquiry approach is bridging the
gap, in a deliberate continuous chain-of-engagement method, for students as they
transition from a multi-week synthesis project at the end of their sophomore
year to the year-long original research project conducted in their fourth and
final year of study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is increasing student
learning opportunities by adding isothermal titration calorimetry and zeta-
potential measurements to both the Chemistry and Biochemstry curricula. The
instruments being purchased through this grant and the experimental measurements
they allow, are providing students with cutting edge experiences in
nanotechnology and in biochemistry, and are equipping students with advanced
technological understanding and enhanced scientific skills. The project is a
part of a deliberate and systematic plan that is preparing students to perform
research independently. The three semester long projects being added to the
studio lab are: (1) examining the formation reaction dynamics, stability and
properties of colloidal zinc sulfide and suspended polypyrrole; (2) using
vibrational spectroscopy, particularly Raman, to analyze the different
parameters related to the synthesis and characterization of nanoparticles; and
(3) an examination of the kinetics, thermodynamics, and non-covalent
interactions for an enzyme-substrate pair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studio
laboratory approach is addressing a need for enhanced mentor-mentee relationship
and is bolstering team working skills by enabling peer interactions in a more-
open lab environment. The project is an intentional effort in sustaining and
growing curricular choices that have proven effective in not only recruiting and
retaining minority and/or women students, but also in encouraging students to
consider further education and, ultimately, working in the STEM disciplines. The
project is providing valuable insight into the conversion of advanced labs into
studio-labs that will aid those in the broader community as they seek to
implement similar conversions.