* 1140396
* EAGER: Development of a Novel Genetic Screen for Plant Mutants in Medicago-Sinorhizobium Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Sharon Long, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 12/31/2013
* USD 299,991.00

Nitrogen is a critical element on which all life depends. However, only certain
microbial species are capable of converting ("fixing") elemental nitrogen into a
biologically useable form; multicellular organisms can only utilize nitrogen
that is already fixed. Legumes are able to obtain nitrogen by forming an
intimate symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-fixing bacteria called rhizobia.
Because of this unique ability to acquire nitrogen symbiotically, legumes play a
critical role in agriculture and in natural
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between legumes and rhizobia
is by far the best characterized model for studying symbiosis. It is also a
highly complex system: the bacteria enter the host, differentiate inside the
host cell, fix nitrogen, and exchange the reduced nitrogen for photosynthate
provided by the host. The host provides a specialized host root organ, the
nodule, in which physiological conditions are accurately controlled. Nodule
formation, development, and function depend on a suite of cellular programs
which are triggered by highly specific molecular dialogs between the two
partners. Recent years have seen major advances in our understanding of the
initial recognition between legumes and rhizobia. On the other hand, the genetic
components and biochemical mechanisms further downstream remains to be
elucidated. This EaGER project will address this need and develop a novel
genetic screen to identify legume genes required for host-bacterial signaling
during the intermediate and late stages of symbiotic nitrogen fixation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project may provide
technical approaches for researchers in all legume symbiosis systems.
Contributing to the field of host-microbe interactions, this body of information
will be published and materials will be made available to interested groups from
the scientific community. The project will provide research training for
postdoctoral researchers and undergraduate students. In addition, the project
will provide research opportunities to undergraduates and local high school
students.