* 1140864
* SecKnitKit (Security Knitting Kit): Integrating Security into Traditional Computer Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Ambareen Siraj, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2014
* USD 199,872.00

The objective of this project is to improve the security literacy of
undergraduate Computer Science (CS) students by exposing them to computer
security concepts and issues in their regular course of study in CS. Faculty
whose primary teaching/research focus is not security are provided support for
integrating security topics into their traditional upper division CS courses and
for delivering learning material through the use of a multi-faceted
instructional support system: Security Knitting Kit (SecKnitKit). The goals of
this project are to improve security awareness, knowledge and interest of
undergraduate CS students; to improve security awareness and teaching expertise
for non-security faculty; and to promote the use of security integration
strategy and materials for traditional CS courses in other institutions.
Development and deployment of SecKnitKit assists non-security faculty to
seamlessly and effectively weave security topics into CS courses like software
engineering, operating systems, networks, and database management system. The
project offer professional development opportunities for twelve non-security
faculty to use SecKnitKit for their CS courses at their institutions. The
proposed project is based on recommendations from experts in the security
education field and draws from CS pedagogy that includes the teaching
experiences of the project team, and feedback and participation from project
participants. Once institutionalized at TTU and other regional institutions, the
proposed research can lead to follow-up collaborative research and adoption of
the multi-faceted instructional support system at other higher education
institutions.