* 1140159
* RCN-SEES:  The Marcellus Shale Research Network
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Richard Hooper, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2015
* USD 750,000.00

This proposal is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aim to address the challenge of creating
a sustainable world. This proposal is to develop a sustainable RCN to organize
and generate knowledge from water chemistry and flow data collected in
Pennsylvania in the area of extraction of natural gas from the Marcellus shale.
We will focus on the research hypothesis: Sustainable development of the
Marcellus Shale will be enabled by creation of a database of geochemistry and
hydrology developed by watershed groups, government agencies, industry
stakeholders, and universities working together to document natural variability
and potential environmental impacts. The proposal focuses on Pennsylvania, the
site of the largest new shale gas play in the United States. The network will be
led by two research universities, Penn State and Pitt, and a private liberal
arts college, Dickinson, in collaboration with the Consortium of Universities
for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sciences, Inc. (CUAHSI). The specific goals of
the collaboration will be to i) identify the groups in Pennsylvania that are
collecting water quality and quantity data in the region of natural gas
extraction from Marcellus shale; ii) create and grow a sustainable network among
these groups by conducting three annual meetings to discuss and organize this
data; iii) facilitate the network by working with CUAHSI to organize the water
data into a database that can be used to assess background and impacts across
the gas extraction region; iv) train two graduate students in the development
and use of a database to determine possible impacts of shale gas extraction, v)
facilitate community groups to organize, collect, and interpret water data; vi)
evaluate hydrogeochemical data using GIS that incorporates population and
economic data in order to evaluate the potential for public health risk factors.
A key aspect of the project is the involvement of a rural sociologist, Kathryn
Brasier, who is investigating social impacts of Marcellus Shale development.
This endeavor will also be aided by two members of Dickinson?s ALLARM, the
Alliance for Aquatic Resource Monitoring, a nationally recognized technical and
programmatic support center that has worked for 25 years to facilitate community
organizations interested in watershed issues in PA. The RCN-SEES will work
closely with a successful Research Experience for Teachers program that targets
diverse high schools in Pittsburgh. The proposed effort will demonstrate that
fundamental knowledge of natural and perturbed systems can be gleaned from
sampling that includes citizen scientists. The focus will be Pennsylvania waters
that may be impacted by exploitation of the Marcellus shale. At present there
are over 3,200 wells drilled in the Marcellus but up to 100,000 could be drilled
in the future. The rapid expansion of drilling has outpaced the state?s ability
to document the pre-drilling surface water quality and will hamper its ability
to maintain monitoring into the future ? largely because of the distributed and
mobile nature of drilling and the fact that PA has more miles of stream per unit
land area than any other state in the U.S. Many groups have started to monitor
rivers and groundwaters in the Marcellus region. However, data collection is not
coordinated and no one has collated data to document natural background levels
or possible contaminants across broad regions. This RCN proposal will fund the
establishment of such a database of flow and chemistry for PA using data
collected from sources ranging from volunteers to agency-funded real-time data
collection. To utilize this large range of data from various sources will
require that we include key metadata and provide quality assurance/quality
control. The RCN workshops and database will engage researchers, agencies,
industry stakeholders, and community organizers to answer a challenging
scientific question: can societally-relevant knowledge be generated from data
collected by diverse groups of scientists and concerned citizens? We hypothesize
that the answer is ?yes?.