* 1140336
* A New Curriculum to Teach Computer Science Principles to Students in Digital Media Arts
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2015
* Perry Cook, California Institute of the Arts
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2015
* USD 111,881.00

The New Curriculum to Teach Computer Science Principles to Students in Digital
Media Arts at California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) is developing a
replicable model for teaching computer science to undergraduate students in arts
schools, art departments, and arts programs. A two-semester course sequence,
Applied Introduction to Programming and Algorithms, has been designed and is
being offered as part of the core Media Arts curriculum. Using powerful, real-
time, open source programming languages, ChucK and Processing, Bachelor of Fine
Arts (BFA) students with little or no computer science background are acquiring
foundational programming skills that are immediately applied to their digital
arts practice. Students generate code for real-time music compositions and live
image synthesis/processing, creating technology-driven art while simultaneously
gaining proficiencies in core computer science concepts and Digital Signal
Processing (DSP). The project's approach is to teach computer science in a non-
traditional computer science context. By providing skills and tools in
programming, networking, and basic robotic control through a course designed
specifically for artists as a means of furthering their creative work, a model
is created for providing computer science curricula specifically, and STEM
curricula more generally, to students from a diverse background and degree
trajectory. All course material, code examples, syllabus and assignments are
being made publicly available online.