* 1140462
* Project Teach Evolution
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Johannes Schul, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* julio soto
* 06/30/2015
* USD 181,728.00

In this project faculty members from the Biology and Education Departments and
their graduate students at the University of Missouri have collaborated to
develop a course, "Teach Evolution," offered to future middle- and high-school
teachers in the state. Of particular interest are those who teach in rural or
small-town districts, where they are often the only science teacher or biology
teacher in the district, and where inadequate preparation and outside pressure
combine to discourage them from tackling this fundamental scientific concept.
The teachers are being surveyed to assess their needs, both content knowledge
and pedagogy, so that the course addresses those needs as directly as possible.
Using the accepted educational practice of "backwards design," the team
specifies the learning goals as drawn from the results of the survey, measures
are developed to assess whether the goals are being met, and the structure of
the course is then developed to include activities that will develop the desired
learning outcomes. Students in the course include pre-service biology education
students, graduate students returning to the University to earn alternative
teacher certification, and in-service teachers seeking to strengthen their
content knowledge. The diversity of experience generates a rich conversation
among them. Included in the course are aspects of the social and philosophical
impact of evolution and discussion of the challenges those bring to the teaching
of the subject. Once trained, the new teachers become part of a virtual
community, the MoEvolves Network, in which they can share on line their
challenges, successes, and teaching tips with others facing similar
circumstances. Because of the influence of effective secondary school teachers
on the mind-sets of their students, the Teach Evolution course and its support
network will have a disproportionate influence on science literacy in exurban
Missouri.