* 1140343
* Doctoral Colloquium at iConference 2012
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Hamid Ekbia, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 21,884.00

This is funding to support travel for a diverse group of US PhD students and
distinguished faculty mentors to participate in an international doctoral
consortium on research on information science that will be co-located with the
2012 iConference in Toronto, Canada. The iConference is a leading forum that
brings together faculty, students, research staff, and industry researchers who
share an interest in supporting and augmenting human engagement with information
and technology. The main goal of this Doctoral Colloquium is to help train the
next generation of information science researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2012 iConference Doctoral Consortium will provide a group of approximately 20
PhD students studying all aspects of information science (IS) with an
environment in which they can share and discuss their goals, methods and results
at an early stage of their research. It will take place on February 10, 2012,
the final day of the iConference. By participating in the doctoral consortium,
students will gain feedback on their work from other students and six prominent
faculty members, allowing them to enhance their own research proposal. Students
will also develop a better understanding of the different research communities
engaged in the study of information science, and learn how to position their own
work within the IS community. In addition, the consortium will provide students
with opportunities to make new professional connections beyond their own
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be recruited for the doctoral
consortium through advertisement on the conference website, postings to relevant
mailing lists and direct solicitation to faculty working in the area of
information science and related fields. Particular attention will be placed on
identifying participants from under-represented groups. To apply for the
consortium, students will submit a 1000 word paper outlining their research
goals and work to date, a list of key questions they would like to discuss with
other doctoral consortium attendees, and the names of people they consider
prominent in their areas of research. Applications will be screened by the
consortium chairs for fit to the IS topic area, the state of development of the
student's research, and the quality of the research project. Priority will be
given to students who have proposed their dissertation topic but not yet
attended any doctoral consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
iConference doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next
generation of researchers in information science and related areas, allowing
them to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. Participation
is encouraged from a broad range of relevant disciplines and approaches, thereby
broadening attendees' perspectives on their topics of study and promoting
advancement of the field. The organizers will try explicitly to identify and
include the broadest possible group of highly qualified participants. As a
consequence of these steps, the student and faculty participants will constitute
a diverse group across a variety of dimensions, which will help broaden the
students' horizons to the future benefit of the field.