* 1140269
* RAPID: Connecting the historic 2011 Mississippi River flood to marsh sedimentation on the Delta
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Karen McKee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2012
* USD 49,982.00

The project aims to determine the impact of a geologically significant flood
event on coastal sedimentation patterns and rates. Determining transport
pathways will enable researchers from University of Pennsylvania, University of
Mississippi, and the U.S. Geological Survey to connect the dots between river
dynamics, coastal dynamics, and marsh maintenance. Two contrasting river plumes
will be studied?-that of the Mississippi River itself, which is expected to
disperse sediment into the Gulf and not contribute greatly to wetland
development because of its narrow, focused jet, and that of the Atchafalaya
River, which is expected to spread diffusely across the landscape and be more
prone to deposit sediment to nourish wetlands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will make use of satellite data, physical sampling, and numerical
modeling. Measurement approaches are (1) analysis of satellite data on sea
surface temperature, color, and height; (2) collection of sediment samples at
the outlet of the Mississippi River using a boat survey with acoustic dopplar,
surface sediment samples, and bed grab samples, and (3) measurement of marshland
sediment accretion rates once the floodwaters begin to subside. New theory
recently developed by two of the PIs for estimating mixing rates and
sedimentation patterns in coastal Louisiana resulting from the flood will be
captured in a model. The results of the model will be compared with measured
plume dynamics off the Mississippi River, and sampled marsh sediments from the
shelf bottom and marsh surfaces along the Mississippi and Atchafalaya Rivers, to
enhance understanding of how the Mississippi Delta functions as a sediment
dispersal system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is consensus that protecting and
expanding coastal marshes is vital for coastal Louisiana but much less agreement
on how to do it. Scientific understanding of marsh building needs to be
bolstered before it can inform this debate. This project seizes a unique
opportunity to examine constrasting modes of sediment dynamics in two plumes
from the historic 2011 Mississippi floods, and aims to enhance the scientific
basis for delta restoration that will become increasingly important in the years
to come.