* 1140440
* Building an Understanding of Astronomical Sizes and Scales with WorldWide Telescope
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Katharyn Nottis, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,961.00

Intellectual merit: The project is creating, testing, and distributing new
curricular materials to integrate the WorldWide Telescope (WWT) astronomy
visualization environment into the hands-on laboratory programs in undergraduate
general education astronomy courses. The new material is designed to address and
alter student misconceptions regarding size, scale, and structure in the
universe. The four lab-based activities, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i) Parallax
Measurements and the Distances to Nearby Stars, &lt;br/&gt;ii) Spectroscopic
Parallax and the Distance to Star Clusters, &lt;br/&gt;iii) Globular Clusters
and the Size of the Milky Way Galaxy, and &lt;br/&gt;iv) The Hubble Law and
Measures of Large-Scale Structure, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;allow students to
investigate the essential ways astronomers measure distance in our universe in
an interactive 3-D visualization environment with real astronomical data. This
multi-perspective visualization of inherently 3-D astronomical structures
produces a much more intuitive view than can static 2-D diagrams in traditional
curricular materials, and it has the potential to transform student
understanding of size, scale, and structure in the universe. Students can
compare their own conceptions of size, scale, and structure with evidence-based
maps, and develop a more accurate mental model for their celestial surroundings.
&lt;br/&gt;These new curricular materials are being tested through application
in general education astronomy courses first at Bucknell University and
subsequently at partner institutions. Gains in student understanding are being
measured using research-validated concept inventories and other qualitative
assessments. Once the curricular materials have been shown to be effective in
reducing student misconceptions, they are to be widely available, along with
associated documentation, to the Astronomy 101 teaching community. WWT is freely
available and runs on virtually any PC, so instructors at a wide range of
institutions can make use of the developed curricular materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The concepts of size, scale, and
structure extend beyond topical boundaries in STEM disciplines. From the
smallest scales of nuclear and atomic physics, to the hidden geometry of Earth's
crustal plates and faults, to the gargantuan scale of our universe, students are
challenged to visualize and comprehend unseen and inaccessible geometries.
Though the curricular materials deal specifically with these issues in an
astronomical context, they provide opportunities for students of all disciplines
to visualize unseen entities and build a coherent understanding of an
inaccessible structure based on scientific interpretation of observational data.
Three dimensional visualization and spatial reasoning skills have been shown to
be critical for success not only in STEM careers, but also in careers not
directly involving science and technology. For undergraduate students not
majoring in a STEM discipline, a general education astronomy class may provide
their only college experience in 3-D spatial visualization. The curricular
activities in this project provide those students with the opportunity to
explore 3-D astronomical structures in an interactive and student-driven
intuitive environment. Practice in manipulating 3-D objects substantially
increases spatial reasoning skills and improves a student's ability to create
accurate mental maps of complex 3-D objects. This project brings powerful
spatial visualization software to the undergraduate general education classroom,
and helps non-science students develop spatial reasoning skills while forming a
more accurate map of their natural surroundings.