* 1140174
* RCN-SEES: Network for Utilization of Social Science Research on Sustainability and Energy (NUSSRoSE)
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Elke Weber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 10/31/2014
* USD 318,003.00

Climate change offers a unique challenge for human problem solving. Whereas
evolution has equipped us to address immediate threats to life or limb, climate
change is a slow-moving threat, largely understood through the eyes of climate
scientists, who admit uncertainty in how quickly or slowly change will take
place. It is not surprising that polling shows that even the US public persuaded
by the science does not give this issue priority. Nevertheless, significant
action is required now to contain a threat that may not fully manifest itself
for decades.

An increasingly rich body of work in a range of behavioral sciences - including
cognitive and social psychology, anthropology, behavioral economics and
sociology - is examining human cognition and motivation and gaining insights
about decision processes. This research may hold the key to building
constituencies for addressing climate change and for motivating behavioral
change. However, its results are largely confined to academic literature, and
locked, for the most part, in stylized language that is not always accessible to
the many non-governmental organizations, businesses and others who would benefit
from its insights. Our Research Coordination Network (RCN) is designed to make
the insights gained from this work more accessible to practitioners. Work now
underway and anticipated will provide insights into alternative ways to address
climate challenge and its unique demand for upfront investments to deliver
benefits that are by necessity uncertain and far into the future, accruing to
future generations and to geographically distant regions.

The network will act as a market maker, using physical and virtual meetings and
a software platform to create a forum for the integration and sharing of theory,
results, and experience (a) across disciplinary lines, to stimulate robust
cross-fertilization, additional research, cross-training of postdoctoral fellows
and junior faculty members, and (b) between the academic supply side and the
practitioner demand side building better two-way communication between these two
communities. Our RCN will help build a multi- or trans-disciplinary sub-
specialty that will raise the status, profile and reach of individual efforts as
well as create awareness for the need of institutional support to maintain and
use research output of this sort, attracting more creative minds into the
effort, including young researchers. Equally important, the RCN will find
systematic ways for dissemination and to connect research to application. It
will do so in part by integrating into this platform approach the knowledge and
needs of the non-governmental world and of government policy-makers.