* 1140571
* Reactivity of Biogenic Volatile Organic Compound Emissions and Their Attribution to Identified Chemical Species
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Alex Guenther, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2017
* USD 599,573.00

This project will investigate the missing reactivity that has been reported in a
number of recent studies of biogenic volatile organic compound (BVOC) emissions
in the forest atmosphere. It centers on the application of a new approach for
the direct determination of the ozone reactivity of BVOC emissions from
vegetation. Air drawn from enclosures containing vegetation will be mixed with
ozone-enriched air and then passed through a flow tube where the loss of ozone
will be measured directly with a differential ozone monitor. Ozone reactivity
will be determined for BVOC emissions from a range of vegetation types in the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) greenhouse, at a local tree
nursery in Boulder, CO, at the University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS),
and at the Bio-hydro-atmosphere interactions of Energy, Aerosols, Carbon, H2O,
Organics &amp; Nitrogen (BEACHEON) Manitou Forest research site. These
vegetation types include the dominant species in U.S. forests. Ozone and OH
reactivity experiments conducted in parallel will shed light on how the missing
reactivity of these oxidants varies with species, with environmental condition,
and relative to each other, thereby providing insight regarding the identities
of unknown compounds. The applicability of BVOC + O3 rate constants for
estimating the corresponding rates of ozone removal will be evaluated based on
kinetic laboratory experiments. Results of the project will help improve
photochemical models of radical chemistry in the forest atmosphere. The project
will also support continued operation of CU's capillary diffusions system for
generating sesquiterpene standards that are used by the PIs' groups as well as
other research groups in the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development
and evaluation of this new measurement approach has potentially wide-ranging
applications for both reevaluating results from past experiments and planning
and characterizing BVOC reactivity during future campaigns. This project will
contribute to the education of undergraduate students and a postdoctoral
researcher. Students from minorities will be recruited from the SOARS and SMART
programs to help with the summer field work. The broader public will benefit
from presentation of this work to 8th graders at INSTAAR's Annual Open House,
through a booth planned at the 2012 Boulder Creek Festival, through a dedicated
web portal, and through interactions with the City of Denver "The Mile High
Million" program. A better understanding of BVOC chemistry will lead to more
effective air pollution mitigation strategies resulting in improved air quality
and health.