* 1140256
* Integrating Design Heuristics into Engineering Education as a Pedagogy for Ideation
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Shanna Daly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 05/31/2016
* USD 199,778.00

The project is investigating the impact of a systematic formal approach (Design
Heuristics) for idea generation in design efforts in engineering education
through a laboratory study, as well as in the context of existing engineering
design courses. In one focus the team is characterizing the understanding
engineering students have about concept generation, specifically how they
approach it, what their goals are when they ideate, and what they believe makes
it successful. In a second focus, they are assessing the solution creativity and
quality and the solution set diversity of first-year engineering students when
using Design Heuristics as compared to existing ideation methods (SCAMPER and
Morphological Analysis) and students' own approaches. In the third focus, they
are investigating the effects of Design Heuristics instruction on student
ideation outcomes and conceptions of the ideation process over time using
introductory engineering and senior capstone design courses that include a
design project component. Finally, they are making the Design Heuristics
approach and pedagogy available to engineering students and instructors through
a guidebook for teaching idea generation with Design Heuristics and through a
faculty workshop. The investigators are collecting data on the comparative
effectiveness of the approaches and an external evaluator is reviewing the
student selection and assignment, the appropriateness of the protocols, the
fidelity of the interventions, and the coding, analysis, and interpretation of
the data. Broader impacts include a strong dissemination plan with a faculty
development workshop to inform others of the approach.