* 1140106
* RCN - SEES Global Long-term Human Ecodynamics Research Coordination Network: Assessing Sustainability on the Millennial Scale
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2011,05/31/2017
* Margaret Nelson, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2017
* USD 498,885.00

This Research Coordination Network grant brings together and international,
multi-disciplinary team of scientists and educators to better mobilize cases of
long term human ecodynamics on the century to millennial scale to aid national
and global efforts to develop effective future sustainable development and to
create resources for Education for Sustainable Development (ESD). This RCN
project will develop a collaborative research network that will identify
conditions that allow people to develop sustainable relationships with the
environment over the millennial scale or have led to unsustainable outcomes.
This proposal draws upon widespread recognition that inter-generational
sustainability education efforts and formulation of long-term environmental
policy for adaptive management are ill served by short observational spans,
restricted case pools, and disciplinary stove-piping. This RCN will promote
development of a transdisciplinary millennial scale perspective for a genuinely
sustainable future through three interlinked working teams; 1) building capacity
in long-term sustainability investigations through systematic inter-regional
comparison of cases representing long-term human ecodynamics ?experiments? of
coupled natural and human systems impacted by climate change, multi-generational
human impact, and inter-regional connection; 2) building cyberinfrastructure
support through common data management, digital dissemination and visualization
tools that both aid sustainability researchers and connect with sustainability
educators; 3) Enhancing local and national initiatives in sustainability
education and community involvement in global change science by innovative
application of digital technology and creating direct links with education
professionals and involving active local community participation in
sustainability science &amp; education.