* 1140037
* Collaborative Research: ARI-MA: Nuclear Data Measurements Using Gamma Rays and Radiation Detector Development
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Calvin Howell, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 308,954.00

The main goal of this award is to make NRF cross-section measurements on
actinides and other materials of interest to the Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office (DNDO). This work will be carried out using the High Intensity Gamma-ray
Source (HIGS) at the Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory (TUNL). Among the
data needed for developing and operating gamma-ray beam inspection systems are
nuclear resonance fluorescence (NRF) data for isotope identification and
photoneutron reaction data for identifying fissile materials. In addition, these
data are important for applications in nuclear forensic techniques applied to
analyzing pre-detonation and post-detonation materials. The research will be
carried out by a collaboration of research groups from two institutions: Duke
University and North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NC A&amp;T). Other
collaborators include physicists from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
Los Alamos National Laboratory and Pacific Northwestern National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research will contribute to the mission
of the DNDO in four categories: (1) science relevant to developing technologies
for non-intrusive inspection of cargo to reduce risk of radiological threats,
(2) science important for developing capabilities for performing nuclear
forensic on pre-detonation and post-detonation materials, (3) science and
engineering of novel radiation detector technologies, and (4) the scientific
workforce needed to develop new technologies important to the mission of DNDO
and to carry out the duties of the Department of Homeland Security. The project
will provide research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at
several universities including Duke University, NC A&amp;T State University, NC
State University and Florida A&amp;M University. The research will be conducted
in the educationally rich environment at TUNL which currently has about 45 PhD
degree graduate students. Because research groups at TUNL are typically small,
the students have the benefit of routinely working closely with faculty and
postdocs in an apprenticeship style. The involvement of the research group from
NC A&amp;T and with students at Florida A&amp;M have the added benefit of giving
students at these Historically Black Universities experience with using leading
edge particle and gamma-ray detection technologies and developing experimental
techniques that are relevant to addressing high-priority national security
issues.