* 1140175
* Collaborative Research: The SEED-PA. A Practical Instrument for Assessing Individual Ethics Initiatives
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Cynthia Finelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 03/31/2016
* USD 86,656.00

Engineering ethics is an important topic in engineering education. There is
considerable interest in the engineering education community for an instrument
that can be used in ethics education. This collaborative project addresses the
need for such an instrument. The project team is building upon their current
research-based SEED (Survey of Engineering Ethical Development) instrument which
is grounded in theory and has been completed by 3,914 respondents at 19 partner
institutions across the nation. The project has four goals: 1). Create a
practical instrument for assessing individual ethics initiatives (SEED-PA); 2).
Use the SEED-PA to conduct four separate studies addressing important research
questions and demonstrating the utility, reliability, and validity of the
instrument; 3). Develop the SEED-PA User's Guide to assist in research design,
administration, data analysis, and results interpretation; 4). Broadly
disseminate the online SEED-PA and the SEED-PA User's
Guide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is advancing discovery about assessing
individual ethics initiatives and has the potential to transform undergraduate
education in engineering ethics. The instrument developed can be used by
engineering programs to address ABET learning outcomes on engineering ethics.
The project includes a multifaceted dissemination plan with focused and broad
dissemination mechanisms. The collaborating institutions span a range of
institutional types with diverse student bodies. The studies are likely to yield
results that are widely applicable.