* 1140038
* EAGER - Exploiting Strain-Induced Coupling between Rare Earth Ions and the GaN host for Improved  Electroluminescence and Magnetic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2014
* Volkmar Dierolf, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2014
* USD 158,898.00

The objective of this program is to provide the critical proof that the control
of the strain is the key for order-of-magnitude improvement of the optical and
magnetic properties of epitaxially grown gallium nitride layers doped with rare
earth ions. Controlling this so far hidden parameter that governs the desired
coupling of the rare earths ion to the electronic system of the host can have a
transformative impact for the utilization of the material system for light
emitting and magnetic devices.

The intellectual merit is based on experimental findings which show (1) that
rare earth ions can be excited most efficiently when they exhibit a strong
coupling to the host and (2) that the magnetic states and the resulting
magnetization depend on the direction of the piezoelectric field that is induced
by lattice mismatch. The program applies advanced microscopy and spectroscopic
tools and exploits existing or intentionally induced strain variations across
samples to reliably explore the relation between the strain and the coupling and
to determine the optimized strain conditions for both electro-luminescence and
room-temperature ferromagnetism, which can then be implemented in future device
designs. The broader impacts include the decisive performance improvements that
will enable the material system to become an attractive, energy efficient
candidate for applications in solid state lighting and for magnetic devices. The
outreach activities target involvement of minority students in the research
through Lehigh Physics? summer research program and partnerships with faculty
from historically black colleges.