* 1140841
* Evaluating Students' Learning and Attitudes in a Virtual Chemistry Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Kurt Winkelmann, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 199,867.00

The project is investigating the benefits of students performing simulated
chemistry laboratory experiments in the 3D immersive virtual world of Second
Life. Researchers at Florida Institute of Technology are creating the
environment and the virtual laboratories which are realistic, fully interactive
simulations of their real world analogues. The project is engaging multiple
sections of students enrolled in General Chemistry 1 Laboratory at Texas A&amp;M
University to complete several weeks of lab activities in Second Life to
complement the remainder of their lab course experiences which are traditional.
Other sections of students will conduct only traditional laboratory experiences.
The two sections are completing identical or nearly identical experiences
whether in the traditional lab or the virtual environment. The investigators are
answering two research questions: (i) How does the traditional or virtual
laboratory environment affect students' ability to achieve the learning goals of
the laboratory experiment, including knowledge and kinesthetic skills? (ii) How
does the laboratory environment affect students' attitudes towards learning
chemistry in the laboratory and performing laboratory
work?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is providing understanding of students'
attitudes and content knowledge of general chemistry laboratory activities
performed in a traditional manner as compared to that performed in an online
virtual world that also embraces social interactions. By the use of an on-line
practicum, offered to all students regardless of the learning cohort in which
they participated, the project is measuring students' gains in kinesthetic
("hands-on") laboratory skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research suggests
that virtual laboratory experiences lead to more favorable opinions of chemistry
by students, and to better academic performance. Verification of this outcome
can have a transformative effect on the way introductory chemistry laboratories
are taught. With challenged budgets and expanding populations, other
institutions of higher education may be interested in adapting the Virtual
Laboratory approach into their own curriculum. Results from this project could
help improve the outcomes of on-line and distance education approaches. The
virtual laboratory with its integrated social aspects, is providing more
students, and students of underrepresented groups, with access to high quality
laboratory education.