* 1140533
* Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs AGM 2012
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Andrew Fountain, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Crain
* 06/30/2016
* USD 99,990.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Supporting the largest national Antarctic science
program in the world, the United States plays a special role in setting national
and international research and stewardship priorities in Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean. As the focus for Antarctic scientific research in the United
States, the National Science Foundation?s Office of Polar Programs (NSF OPP) is
responsible for managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic
Treaty Area on behalf of the federal government and in the spirit of the
Antarctic Treaty. One element of the United States' national and international
leadership role is active participation in the Council of Managers of Antarctic
Programs (COMNAP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COMNAP will hold its 2012 meeting in
Portland, Oregon. The location and timing of the meeting were chosen to match
the planned Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) business meetings
and Open Science Conference. The study of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, and
their role in the Earth system, has never been more important. The region is
experiencing changes that are global in scope and the rapid pace of
technological development makes new observations and discoveries possible every
day. As research programs diversify and grow, so does the need for well
coordinated and thoughtful program management across the Antarctic. Hosting both
the COMNAP and SCAR meetings now will enhance the United States? leadership role
in the full complement of Antarctic activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Created in
1988, COMNAP supports working relationships among National Antarctic Programs
from around the world in order to develop and promote best practice in managing
the support of scientific research in Antarctica. This goal is met by serving as
a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an
environmentally responsible manner, facilitating and promoting international
partnerships, providing opportunities and systems for information exchange; and
providing the Antarctic Treaty System with objective and practical, technical
and nonpolitical advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs? pool of
expertise. COMNAP maintains a special, complementary relationship with SCAR -
the respective executives meet annually and both organizations attempt to
coordinate their bi-annual meetings to facilitate cross-participation in both
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this proposal are in that the meeting will promote international collaboration,
broaden the perspective of U.S. scientists, and provide an opportunity for the
next generation of polar scientists to interact with leaders in the field.
Hosting the joint XXXIIII COMNAP and XXXII SCAR offers a unique opportunity to
present Antarctic and Southern Ocean science to the public in a framework that
emphasizes the importance of cross-disciplinary approaches and international
collaboration. A diverse range of education and public engagement activities are
planned to coincide with the meetings in 2012. These include public art and
music events, public lectures in formal and informal settings, exhibit
development at the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry, and professional
development activities intended to bring informal education professionals
together with Antarctic scientists, in particular, early career scientists.
Students at Portland State University and other regional institutions will be
involved in meeting organization and operations, as both interns and volunteers.