* 1140022
* Multi-University Integration of Solid-State Chemistry and Powder X-ray Diffraction into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Michael Marvel, Aurora University
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 07/31/2015
* USD 115,272.00

The Chemistry Division of the Associated Colleges of the Chicago Area (a
consortium of 15 small liberal arts colleges), spearheaded by the Chemistry
Department at Aurora University, is introducing Powder X-Ray Diffraction (PXDR)
instrumentation to undergraduate chemistry students and to K-12 pre-service and
in-service teachers. The four goals the project is achieving are: (1) Delivering
a two-week, 60-contact hour, 4 credit, research-oriented, solid-state/materials
course, through workshops, to the large, broad and diverse undergraduate
population served by the consortium, with the course being offered at three
distinct times. (2) Delivering summertime research-oriented workshops for pre-
service and in-service K-12 teachers that focus on complex instrumentation as
applied to synthesis of inorganic materials with potential applications in
catalysis, waste remediation, alternative energy, or photonics. (3) Integrating
solid-state and materials chemistry coupled with the PXRD instrument across all
levels of the undergraduate curriculum at the lead institution. (4) Enhancing
research training of upper-division students through undergraduate research
experiences built around easy access to a PXRD
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is establishing the efficacy of a
workshop-style, highly-focused, and time-condensed course in providing
significant, research-driven laboratory experiences to students at a time when
this is their only intellectual commitment. The project also aims to motivate
students to become enthusiastic about chemistry in general, and solid-state
chemistry in specific. A long term goal is to increase the number of students
who enter graduate programs in solid-state chemistry or who are tapped as highly
qualified candidates for the materials industry. The use of the instrument in
the support of faculty-mentored research is leading to new experimental findings
as well as in the training of next-generation graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The variety of students eligible for the
condensed-format course, from the consortium schools, is ensuring a diverse
audience. The coupling of the project to the needs of pre-service and in-service
teachers is uniquely presenting hands-on access to sophisticated instrumentation
in a deliberate attempt to engender enthusiasm and excitement about the
research-based nature of chemistry. The project's courses, workshops, and
approach, built around a modestly priced, widely useful instrument can serve as
a model for adoptions and adaptations by many other institutions.