* 1140068
* Erosion and Exhumation History of the Nepalese Frontal Himalaya Since Earliest Miocene Time: Constraints on Kinematic History
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 513,085.00

The Himalayan Mountains in Nepal were formed over the last 55 million years by
forces associated with the collision of the Indian and Asian continents. Since
the onset of the collision, layered rocks draping the upper crust of India have
been crumpled and shortened by at least 650 kilometers as the Asian landmass has
overridden northern India. This process has produced the highest mountains on
Earth. These mountains are important in many respects: they control the climate
system of southern Asia, including the all-important Asian monsoon which
provides rain in a region that would otherwise be much drier; they store water
in the form of glaciers and snow, thus mitigating the effects of drought and
providing hydroelectric power to much of southern Asia; they generate the
sediments that form the agricultural breadbasket of the region, feeding
approximately one quarter of the world?s population; and they embody a dramatic
high mountain landscape upon which humans have been inspired to feats of
adventure, exploration, and religious devotion. As the mountains have grown,
continuous erosion has generated vast quantities of sediment that accumulates
along the southern flank of the Himalaya in the Indo-Gangetic foreland basin and
in deep sea fans that flank India on the floors of the Arabian Sea and the Bay
of Bengal. This sediment provides a record of the history of growth of the
Himalaya. Our project aims to reconstruct the history of deformation of the
Himalaya in Nepal. The analysis is forensic, as we attempt to retrodeform the
rocks that have been folded and thrust faulted in the Himalaya, according to
constraints imposed by thermochronology, structural geology, geochronology, and
the erosional sedimentary record. Thermochronology measures the time at which a
mineral passes through its "blocking temperature" with respect to a particular
radiogenic isotopic system en route to the topographic surface as the mountains
are growing and erosion is exhuming the rocks. Thermochronological ages can be
inverted to assess erosion rates and in some cases the timing of slip on major
faults. We will also use Uranium-Lead geochronology to determine the ages of
mineral grains in both the eroded sediments and the bedrock source areas of the
mountain range. Together these data will allow use to (a) determine the timing
of major thrust faulting events within the southern half of the Himalaya; (b)
calculate the rate of exhumation of the mountains; and (c) determine precisely
the specific sources of the sediments and when they were deposited. Our
fieldwork will involve sample collection, and detailed documentation of sections
of the sedimentary erosional products where they are uplifted and exposed in the
frontal Himalaya. This work promises to elucidate the tectonic and erosional
history of the Himalaya at an unprecedented level of detail, and has far-
reaching implications for our understanding of changing seawater chemistry, the
origin and timing of the South Asian monsoon, and the dynamic interplay between
tectonics and climate in orographic systems. Within the context of ongoing
research on Himalayan tectonics by numerous international groups, this work
fills a gap in understanding of the critical last ~20 million years of
deformation of the Himalaya, a timespan during which it is postulated that more
than one half of the total Himalayan shortening took place, and during which
many of the iconic features of the system developed, including the Main Central
thrust, the South Tibetan detachment, the Greater Himalayan leucogranites, and
the Lesser Himalayan duplex. Densely populated Nepal and northern India remain
seismically active, with potential for a &gt;M8 earthquake in a major seismic
gap in the western part of Nepal. Because estimates of earthquake probability
are in part based on understanding of the long-term history of shortening in the
frontal Himalaya, a small change in the long-term shortening rate would have
significant implications for predictions of co-seismic fault slip.