* 1140655
* Integrated Knowledge-Based Experiences for First-Year Biology and Chemistry Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Neal Abrams, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 06/30/2017
* USD 193,290.00

This project is designing an integrated curriculum between general chemistry and
biology laboratories unified by writing to create a common theme of STEM inquiry
for first-year students. It investigates how a cohesive first-year science and
writing curriculum can help students improve their capacities to synthesize
knowledge across disciplines, build contextual frameworks for assimilating new
knowledge, develop proficiency in laboratory and writing skills, and improve
attitudes toward science and communication. Project goals are met through the
development and assessment of integrated biology and chemistry laboratories,
writing modules relating to skills development (e.g., microscopy and other lab
techniques, data management and analysis, source analysis and integration,
scientific writing, peer review, oral communication), and investigation of
biochemical principles and processes (e.g., chemical nature of biomolecules,
oxidation-reduction and enzymatic reactions, light absorption by pigments,
chemical effects on cellular structures). This model for lower-division
interdisciplinary study is being developed to be broadly transferable to a wide
variety of post-secondary institutions, and contributes to an emerging paradigm
of coordinated scientific teaching among current and future faculty and
associated teaching assistants. The laboratory modules and integration pedagogy
are peer-reviewed, made publicly available, and disseminated to networks of STEM
and writing educators.