* 1140391
* Enriching IR Spectroscopy Learning through Inquiry-Based Activities
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Richard Moog, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 195,997.00

The goal of this project is to develop, implement and evaluate problem-based
(PB) laboratory experiments linked to process-oriented guided-inquiry learning
(POGIL) activities for student learning of Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR)
spectroscopy in analytical and physical chemistry. The POGIL activities focus on
student understanding of key IR spectroscopic concepts. The PB laboratory
experiments provide students with hands-on opportunities to explore fundamental
techniques and measurements, including attenuated total reflectance (ATR)
spectroscopy, as well as investigate advanced topics such as the
characterization of surfaces. The FTIR with ATR accessory acquired through this
grant is available for Agnes Scott College's undergraduate research
program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project stems from
the development and evaluation of new materials that integrate active-learning
in-class activities and problem-based laboratories. Self-contained modules are
designed to be used in any upper-level undergraduate course utilizing active
learning methods to study FTIR spectroscopy. All activities and laboratory
experiments are peer reviewed and classroom tested, which adds to the strength
of the evaluation plan. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact includes the
development of novel resources for upper-level undergraduate courses for any
practitioner wishing to use active learning methods to study FTIR spectroscopy
and/or fundamental principles illustrated by FTIR spectroscopy. Materials are
disseminated on the POGIL website, a national repository for curricular
materials employing this pedagogy, and through publications and workshops.