* 1140152
* RCN-SEES: A Research Coordination Network on Pan American Biofuels and Bioenergy Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* B Solomon, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 819,996.00

1140152 (Shonnard). This award is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and
Education for Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aim to address the
challenges of creating a sustainable world. This project will establish a
network of science and engineering researchers in North, Central and South
America to share knowledge and cooperate on research into the implications of
large-scale biofuels production in the Americas. The potential impact of large-
scale biofuels and bioenergy production on environmental systems and social
conditions is largely unknown. Yet despite this lack of fundamental
sustainability knowledge, there currently is a rapid movement toward the
development of biofuels and bioenergy production systems that will likely lead
to dramatic changes in human and natural systems. These changes may be
beneficial or detrimental, and may involve a number of inter-related issues such
as land ownership and management, creation of new employment opportunities,
occupational safety, unforeseen transportation and logistical challenges,
impacts on water availability and quality, and potentially many other changes to
social and environmental systems. This network of researchers will tackle these
important issues through cooperative research, education, and outreach programs,
leading to new knowledge of relevance to decision-makers in business,
government, academia, and other organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pan
American Biofuels and Bioenergy Sustainability RCN will consist of researchers
at universities and other organizations from North America (United States,
Canada and Mexico), Central America, and South America. The main biofuels and
bioenergy sustainability research themes will be a. land rights, b. water/energy
nexus issues, c. biodiversity/ecosystems d. energy policy, e. life cycle
environmental assessment, f. food and other systems, g. biogeochemical cycles,
and h. biomass supply transportation logistics. This RCN will have two main
deliverables; 1. a research roadmap report on sustainability of biofuels and
bioenergy in the Pan American region, and 2. a graduate course in sustainability
of biofuels/bioenergy to be developed within the network and disseminated to the
network through the internet. The students taking this graduate course will
emerge with a high-level understanding of a range of sustainability issues for
biofuels/bioenergy systems in different political, geographic, and societal
contexts in the Pan American region. Lectures will be developed and delivered by
content experts from the many participating institutions using an active-
learning format where students are required to analyze case studies and lead
class room discussions. A series of annual workshops and a major mid-project
conference will be the primary means of delivering on these project outcomes.
The RCN will be connected through a comprehensive cyber-infrastructure based
upon the HubZeroTM platform to support real time dissemination of the RCN
products, enable real time collaboration across the network, and provide for the
growth of the proposed RCN.