* 1140230
* CAREER: A Networking Approach to Host-based Intrusion Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 05/25/2011,05/31/2015
* Raheem Beyah, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2015
* USD 322,526.00

CAREER: A Networking Approach to Host-based Intrusion
Detection&lt;br/&gt;Proposal# 0844144&lt;br/&gt;Raheem A.
Beyah&lt;br/&gt;Georgia State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Day by day, threats to the cyber infrastructure are becoming
more complex and, in response, so too are defense mechanisms. One approach to
securing nodes is to place a defense mechanism (e.g., intrusion detection
system) on the node. This brings many challenges, with the most significant
being that potential vulnerabilities in the defense mechanism can provide an
additional avenue through which the host can be compromised. To address these
challenges, this research investigates completely decoupling the defense
mechanisms from the host, while continuing to provide insight about malicious
activity as if the defense mechanisms resided on the host. This requires the
development of new algorithms and the application of various techniques (e.g.,
statistical, machine learning, signal processing) to extract from a node?s
network traffic characteristics that enable the inference of the state of its
hardware components. Over the course of this project, a combination of
experimentation and simulation will lead to the development of empirical and
analytic models. The models will be used to develop network-based defense
systems that provide capabilities similar to those provided by mechanisms
traditionally considered host-based. This work leverages the concept of
information leakage to bridge the computer architecture, computer networking,
and network security fields. This project also seeks to broaden participation of
groups traditionally underrepresented in the areas of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Accordingly, through a summer academy, the
PI is actively engaging underrepresented middle school students by using current
technology to convey abstract computer architecture and computer networking
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;