* 1140677
* Advancing Diagnostic Skills Training in the Undergraduate Technology and Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* W. Tad Foster, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 01/31/2015
* USD 184,450.00

This project is developing and field-testing instructional design concepts and
educational software to teach diagnostic skills necessary to identify and solve
problems in complex technical systems. Using concept mapping software, along
with expert-system programs, the overall software package enables junior and
senior-level technology and engineering students to benefit from personalized,
iterative interactions that enable them to design and evaluate their analytical
processes for the diagnosis of a problem, compare thesir processes to those of
expert diagnosticians, and then refine their approaches. Advancing diagnostic
skills training in the undergraduate technology and engineering curriculum is
based on several theoretical anchor points: the first is the cognitive
development theory associated with the higher-order thinking skills of analysis
and problem-solving; the second is the application of hierarchical learning
strategies in the acquisition of concrete, abstract and process concepts in
technical systems; and the third is the proven practice of using iterative
feedback, rubrics and expert examples in improving learning. These foundational
theories and principles are being integrated into educational software developed
and delivered by stand-alone or networked computers, thereby adding to the
toolkit of STEM instructors. Overall, the strategy to increase the level of
advanced technical diagnostic skills is providing industry, government and the
military with a smarter workforce to improve our nation's overall competiveness.
The outcomes of the project are also contributing to the general STEM education
knowledge base.