* 1140575
* Collaborative Research: Teaching Computer Security Concepts Through Interactive (Non-Digital) Games
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Kate Lockwood, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2014
* USD 52,106.00

The objective of this project is the design, creation, evaluation, and
dissemination of a customizable, non-digital card game for teaching computer
security concepts to first- and second-year undergraduate students. The creation
of the game is motivated by a need to heighten the understanding and awareness
of computer security and privacy in an ever-increasing digital world, to act as
a gateway to future education and careers in computer science, and to generally
promote interest in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The project explores novel and creative ways to incorporate cyber-
security games into existing curricula across a wide variety of disciplines, in
particular, traditionally non-STEM and introductory courses. The project designs
games with simple mechanics but that teach complex ideas and substantial
security principles, which allow essential issues to be communicated to students
of diverse backgrounds, especially those students typically under-represented in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics. In particular, the games are
designed to engage students with low computer literacy, to dispel the myth that
computer science is a solitary or isolating pursuit, and to be deployed at
schools with little funding or support for IT resources. Games and course
materials are disseminated though printed samples, a project web site,
presentations at professional conferences, and at a local workshop the site will
host. This project involves the participation of Hartnell Community College.