* 1140163
* RCN-SEES A Global Water Diplomacy Network: Synthesis of Science, Policy, and Politics for a Sustainable Water Future
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Lawrence Susskind, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2017
* USD 749,448.00

This award is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aim to address the challenges of
creating a sustainable world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conflicts over water continue
to increase around the globe at local, national, regional and international
scales arising from complex interactions of natural, societal, and political
forces. While efforts to theorize about water systems have been many, the tools
and techniques available to pursue and implement these theories in practice have
often led to science that is 'smart but not wise'. It is important to integrate
scientific learning with the complex contextual reality of real world water
problems to find solutions where societal and political aspects are
incorporated. Such solutions to water problems bridge the divide between theory
and practice. This Research Coordination Network will create a "Water Diplomacy"
approach to address complex water problems where natural, societal, and
political elements cross multiple boundaries and interact in unbounded,
uncertain and nonlinear ways. This approach, rooted in emerging ideas of
complexity theory and negotiation, seeks to synthesize scientific objectivity
with contextual reality and create actionable water knowledge. The Water
Diplomacy approach posits that water resources could be more effectively managed
by understanding the interaction among individual components within the natural,
societal and political systems using recent developments in network theory. This
RCN will examine the adequacy of the Water Diplomacy Framework with three
propositions that challenge the conventional wisdom about water management: (a)
water is not a fixed resource; (b) water networks are open and continuously
changing; and (c) uncertainty, variability, nonlinearity, and feedback are not
exogenous. Building on these three propositions, this RCN will explore and
demonstrate the utility and effectiveness of cooperative rather than competitive
approaches to decision-making to address and resolve water conflicts. The
community building activities will focus on two interrelated goals: (i) engage
scholars and professionals from different domains of expertise to examine three
propositions in a range of field-based settings; and (ii) develop technology-
enhanced opportunities in data management and social networking to produce,
refine, and share results and best practices with the global
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key distinguishing feature of the Water
Diplomacy Research Coordination Network is the creation of a dynamic forum where
scholars and practitioners interact to define problems and develop solution
strategies. More than thirty RCN partners, many of whom have not worked together
before, have committed to approach water management questions in a new way. This
RCN will create an environment conducive to creativity and cross-disciplinary
synergy through dynamic interactions between RCN partners and an online
community of water theorists, practitioners, and decision makers. Such an
environment will facilitate innovation and excellence in research, applications,
and dissemination of data and findings generated from this RCN. Community
building activities will help make scientific findings actionable through
focused participation and shared learning. This RCN will prepare a new cadre of
water professionals who are not only scholars with strong disciplinary grounding
but also problem-solvers with interdisciplinary expertise and negotiation
skills. The gender, ethnic, and career-stage diversity of the RCN will ensure
enhanced diversity of the next generation of water diplomacy professionals. The
range of national and international participants involved will ensure that
people with different backgrounds and viewpoints are engaged in creating and
sharing actionable knowledge. Such sharing of knowledge is critical to managing
boundary crossing water problems in a globalized world.