* 1140400
* Collaborative Research: Mental Models of Students and Practitioners in the Development of an Authentic Assessment Instrument for Traffic Signal Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* David Hurwitz, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 03/31/2015
* USD 107,990.00

Developing conceptual knowledge situated in engineering practice has been
identified as a priority by national leaders in engineering education, with the
theoretically-founded expectation that it will result in students who are more
capable of innovative engineering design. Progress toward this goal requires
understanding fundamental ways of knowing and learning of both engineering
students and engineering practitioners, coupled with the design of research-
based curriculum. The goals of this research are to synthesize early career
professionals' and students' mental models of traffic signals and use this
knowledge to develop a fully validated traffic signal concept inventory (TSCI)
along with a set of ranking task exercises in traffic signal operations relevant
to engineering practice. This will be the first development of a concept
inventory and conceptual exercises using engineering practitioner knowledge.
This work will: 1) Determine core concepts for isolated traffic signals,
coordinated traffic signals, and systems of traffic signals; 2) Synthesize
student and practitioner conceptual understanding of these traffic signals; 3)
Develop a situated concept inventory and ranking tasks for traffic signals; and
4) Implement the TSCI and ranking tasks at 12 universities throughout the US and
actively disseminate the research results. In the first year of implementation
hundreds of students will be assessed with the validated TSCI. This study is
significant because it advances the field by identifying differences in
conceptual understanding between practicing engineers and students and develops
a concept inventory instrument and conceptual ranking exercises incorporating
practitioner understandings.