* 1140573
* Collaborative Research: Next-Generation Algorithms for Stochastic Spatial Simulation of Cell Polarization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Tau-Mu Yi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2015
* USD 513,776.00

Cell polarity, whereby cellular components that were previously uniformly
distributed become asymmetrically localized, is essential to the diverse
specialized functions of eukaryotic cells. A hallmark of cell polarity is
spatial localization. From a modeling point of view, spatial localization cannot
be understood without proper modeling of the spatial dynamics governing its
creation and time evolution. At the same time, spatial dynamics are profoundly
influenced by stochastic events that manifest as cellular noise. Therefore, deep
understanding of cell polarity inevitably requires the proper modeling,
simulation, and analysis of stochastic spatial dynamics. The fundamental problem
limiting work in this area in the past has been the computational complexity of
stochastic spatial simulations. This project develops the experimental data and
algorithms for modeling, simulation and analysis of spatial stochastic dynamics
arising in cell polarity in the yeast pheromone response system. A novel
algorithm is developed to address the computationally intensive task of spatial
stochastic simulation. The algorithm is then further developed and then
integrated into a powerful software infrastructure to enable its widespread use.
Experiments capable of capturing stochastic variability inform model development
and analysis.

Software developed as a result of this project enables routine simulation of
highly complex spatial stochastic phenomena across the sciences and engineering.
All software will be made widely available. Tutorial courses and presentations
at meetings and workshops will be given to ensure the accessibility of the
research. Graduate students involved in this project are provided with a unique,
highly multidisciplinary research experience. Students at UCSB work as a
tightly-knit team co-advised by Petzold and Khammash, with extended visits to
UCI to work in Yi's experimental lab, learning about the possibilities and
limitations of the experimental techniques. UCI students focused on experiment
spend significant time at UCSB working with the modelers, learning first-hand
what the systems-level approach can bring to biological research.