* 1141764
* Climatic Controls on Snow-Vegetation Interactions Across an Elevational Gradient
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Noah Molotch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2016
* USD 256,625.00

In the higher elevations of the western U.S., seasonal snow accumulation
provides the primary source of water input to the terrestrial ecosystem. Recent
changes in climate and vegetation cover (e.g. fire suppression, beetle
infestation, fire) have potentially large, yet unrealized implications for water
availability and ecosystem health. Forest structure has profound effects on snow
accumulation and snowmelt via interception, attenuation of solar radiation, and
other processes. We currently lack the mechanistic understanding needed to
address the impacts of annual, decadal and long-term forest dynamics on snowmelt
dynamics and water resources. This project targets this knowledge gap via an
integrated observing and modeling approach focused on rates of snow accumulation
and snowmelt in open versus sub-canopy conditions across an elevational
gradient. Distributed hydrologic instrument clusters spanning an elevational
gradient in the Colorado Front Range will be used to explore interactions
between snow and vegetation, and improve predictions of snow-vegetation
interactions associated with climate and vegetation change. Detailed analyses of
canopy radiative transfer using hemispherical photography will be used to
explain observed differences in snowpack dynamics and to develop robust forcings
for detailed snowmelt simulations. The distributed instrument clusters represent
the first comprehensive network of co-located snow, soil, and vegetation water
use measurements spanning a continental elevational gradient. The combination of
the measurements with new modeling capabilities will enable new understanding of
ecohydrological feedbacks and have the potential to fundamentally change our
ability to predict ecosystem response to climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mountain snowpack is the primary water source for 60
million people in the Western U.S. and one billion people globally. Recent
changes in climate and vegetation cover (e.g. fire suppression, beetle
infestation, fire) have potentially large, yet unrealized implications for
snowmelt and water sustainability. Patterns of snow accumulation and snowmelt
are highly variable in mountainous regions, varying with topography, climate,
and vegetation. In mountain forests, the ecological impacts of potential changes
in snowmelt and water availability are poorly known. The proposed research
targets this knowledge gap using measurements of snow depth and other water-
related variables in different types of mountain forests. The measurements will
be used to improve models that estimate solar radiation and snowmelt, providing
the tools needed to predict ecosystem response to changes in climate or land
cover. In this regard, the project will improve understanding of the linkages
between snowpack processes and land cover changes. The mountain snowpack is one
of the most sensitive hydrologic states to changes in climate. Hence, the
improved characterization of snowmelt will broadly address societal
vulnerabilities to climate change. The new levels of understanding achieved in
this research should have dramatic impacts on the research of others and the
conceptual model by which snow covered forested systems are studied. For
example, many biogeochemical and ecosystem models have parameterizations which
represent the processes studied here. Hence the proposed work will broadly
extend to collaborators working at the Niwot Ridge Long Term Ecological Research
site and other highland systems. Further, the distribution of snowmelt in these
systems dominates water inputs and therefore exerts a strong control on the rate
of soil erosion and mineral weathering, affording collaborations with the earth
surface and geomorphology communities via NSF?s Boulder Creek Critical Zone
Observatory (CZO) network ? with implications for cross-CZO research. Data from
this project will be made available to these communities through multiple
portals providing a direct link to these other activities. Another important
impact of the proposed research will be the educational opportunities.