* 1141371
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Investigations of the Rural Maya Community
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Santiago Juarez, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Cynthia Robin Mr. Santiago Juarez will conduct
research for his doctoral dissertation. His project will explore the role of a
peripheral farming community, Noh K'uh, in the complex economic and political
landscape of the Late to Terminal Classic Maya (A.D. 700-950). The Late to
Terminal Classic is commonly referred to as the period of 'collapse', due to the
decline and abandonment of many powerful Maya cities. Yet, in recent decades
archaeologists have demonstrated the differing effects of political and economic
instability in various regions, particularly the rural periphery. Mr. Juarez is
specifically interested in determining if the size, organization, and location
of Noh K'uh allowed it to develop during a period in which many lowland Maya
polities were declining or collapsing. Noh K'uh is situated in a part of the
southern lowlands that lack a large dominant power, and represents a unique
opportunity to study a peripheral community that is more than 40 kilometers from
the closest urban polity. In this study, Mr. Juarez will explore the extent to
which distance, small site size, and other aspects of community organization may
have insulated Noh K'uh from the political turbulence that defined the Terminal
Classic across much of the southern Maya lowlands; thus, greater complexity may
indeed lead to greater instability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines
central questions in social science research: the relationship between rural and
urban places and the factors that make societies stable. Since most people in
complex preindustrial civilizations lived outside of cities, rural and
peripheral regions offer an important means of analyzing how complex social
systems worked. Research at Noh K'uh will elucidate the social, political, and
economic relations of rural people who chose to live in peripheral regions.
Ultimately, this research will determine if smaller and less complex communities
are better placed to survive during tumultuous times than the developmentally
more complex city states. This situation finds reflection in many areas of the
Third World today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate
undergraduates from Northwestern during the laboratory analysis phase. The
department of Anthropology regularly trains students in laboratory methods to
provide relevant experience and to provide undergraduates with data sets for
senior theses. To complete this analysis in a timely manner, Mr. Juarez will
train undergraduates to assist in the microartifact and soil chemical analyses.
This research will also be presented at conferences and published in peer-review
journals both the United States and Mexico. Research results will be presented
regularly at Mensabak, to students at Northwestern, the local community in
Evanston, and the preparation of a web site that will be constructed in
conjunction with Rebecca Deeb of University at Illinois at Chicago.