* 1141900
* Collaborative Research: Examining the variation in earthquake parameters along the Nicaragua and Costa Rica subduction zone using onshore and offshore seismic data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Heather DeShon, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 51,027.00

Understanding how fault conditions impact earthquake rupture has been identified
as a fundamental challenge of the seismological community, especially along
shallow subduction megathrust faults where giant earthquakes can produce
devastating shaking and tsunami. The study addresses this issue by
characterizing earthquake source characteristics for comparison to specific
tectonic and geologic variations within a small geographic area along the Middle
America Trench, an area that has produced past large tsunami and earthquakes and
where unique onshore and offshore seismic recordings exist for a large catalog
of earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers hypothesize that
earthquake source characteristics such as apparent stress are related to
material conditions along faults and hence will differ within the subduction
zone. Along the subduction megathrust, there are numerous potential culprits for
altering the fault conditions. Subducted seamounts, ridges, fracture zones,
plate-bending faults, and variable sediment packets riding on the subducting
plate can provide significant variations in the megathrust geometry. Variable
pore fluid pressure can affect the strength conditions along the fault by
changing the effective normal stress. The ratio of compressional to shear wave
speeds (Vp/Vs) is sensitive to changes in fault conditions, such as the presence
of fluids in pores and cracks, temperature and composition, but not to slab
geometry. Thus, to determine how these conditions affect earthquake rupture,
both high quality data on fault conditions as well as extensive earthquake
catalogs are need, both of which are available along this study area. They will
be: 1) determining earthquake source spectra to provide estimates of the rupture
time and stress drop, which are two parameters commonly used in global studies
to describe earthquake rupture properties; and 2) calculating near source Vp/Vs
using waveform cross-correlation derived differential times following an
innovative technique. The Researchers will compare source parameters with the
wealth of geophysical data already available in Middle America, as well as with
the new estimates of Vp/Vs to help determine whether interplate fault segments
have unusual fluid pressures or material composition. This will allow them to
advance ideas about the role of fluids in earthquake
rupture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will be studying a region that has
a history of large (M&gt;7) earthquakes and tsunami earthquakes. Their results
should improve understanding of local seismic and tsunami hazard and also bear
on broader understanding of seismic and tsunami hazard along other subduction
margins. The project will also support the participation of 2 graduate students,
continue international collaborations, and produce results that will be
disseminated widely at national meetings, international publications, and
through online marine geophysical databases and PI supported webpages.