* 1141789
* Conference Support for the Fourth International Conference on Establishment Surveys (June 11-14, 2012 Montreal, Canada)
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Rebecca Nichols, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides partial support for the Fourth International Conference on
Establishment Surveys (ICES IV), to be held in Montreal, Canada in June 2012. A
nation's official statistics are directly affected by the quality of the data
derived from its business, economic, and agricultural surveys. Yet there are too
few commonly accepted and practiced methodologies for these surveys. The reasons
for this situation are diverse. Most importantly, establishment surveys face
much more difficult design and execution problems and far less is published on
strategies to solve these problems. Practitioners from government agencies,
academia, and the private sector around the globe will gather at this conference
to continue the tradition of sharing innovative techniques and best practices to
address common issues. Attendees will participate in contributed and invited
sessions, introductory overview lectures, poster sessions, and software
demonstrations. It is hoped that ICES IV will provide a stimulus for the
continued, interdisciplinary, cross-agency, and cross-country research
cooperation needed to address the unique features of establishment surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sample surveys, augmented with periodic censuses, are the
predominant mode for collecting data about businesses, farms, and institutions.
There is a remarkable commonality in the types of problems encountered in
designing and implementing sample surveys and censuses of such establishments.
Yet there is too little interaction between the researchers for these
applications. The ICES series of conferences serve an important role in the
world of establishment survey methodology. The survey world has continued to
change in the four years since ICES III, with increased possibilities for
electronic communication, reductions in response rates, and greater attempts to
harmonize international data. Invited and contributed sessions will address
issues of current relevance for establishment surveys, including topics on:
using collaborative work to improve establishment surveys; response burden and
motivation in official business surveys; large-scale harmonization of survey
programs; using administrative data as an alternative to survey data for
establishment collections; making economic indicator statistics more useful with
data dissemination and visualization software; managing the balance among cost,
quality, and risk in the design and implementation of establishment surveys; and
managing metadata for establishment surveys. The conference proceedings will be
available on the ICES IV web site shortly after the conference.