* 1141785
* Collaborative Research: The Japan March 11 Earthquake, Tsunami Inundation, and Initial Spread of Fukushima Dai-ichi Radionuclides into the Pacific Ocean: Model Assessment
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Rubao Ji, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2014
* USD 88,260.00

This project is a comprehensive interdisciplinary study of the March 11 initial
M=9 and M=7.9 earthquakes, the resulting tsunami wave generation, propagation
and coastal inundation along northern Honshu Island, and the initial pathways
and changes in Cs-237 concentrations as it enters the coastal waters at the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear facility and spreads across the shelf to deeper water.
The approach is to use a combination of advanced seismic and nested coupled
atmospheric/3-D ocean circulation numerical models plus available field
measurements to simulate these processes starting with the initial March 11 M=9
earthquake bottom movement through April 12. During this 33-day simulation, the
Cs-137 source concentration levels peaked and decreased towards the increasing
coastal and off-shelf concentration levels, indicative of cross-shelf transport
and shelf-ocean exchange processes, with a potential sedimentation loss and
biological accumulation in the near-shore region. Detailed descriptions of the
different model simulations, the resulting ocean circulation and water property
output fields and initial analysis will be uploaded to a project website on a
frequent basis for use by others interested in coastal physical and bio/chemical
processes in the study area and as initial conditions for studies of the long-
term spread of Cs-137 and other radionuclides in the Pacific
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The March 11 earthquakes,
tsunami waves, coastal inundation, and initial release of Cs-137 into the ocean
cover a wide range of time (from seconds to a month) and space (meters to 100's
of km) scales. The multi-scale modeling approach with advanced models should
produce a comprehensive and integrated description and understanding of the key
physical processes involved and an independent assessment of the initial fate
and spread of Cs-137 and its impact on the coastal ecosystem within the RAPID
grant period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study will foster
U.S-Japanese collaboration in several areas of ocean sciences (marine
geophysics, physical oceanography, and bio-chemistry related to Cs-137 and other
released radionuclides). The team includes one Japanese PhD student, and it is
anticipated that the models and model results posted on a website will be used
by researchers, students, and others as the study progresses. One outcome of
this study will be a tested new combined earthquake/3-D ocean model system that
can be used by researchers and coastal planners for assessing potential tsunami
flooding from future earthquakes in the megathrust zones east of Japan. This
system can be applied to other earthquake and or tsunami-prone areas.