* 1141905
* Intermediate Depth Earthquakes: Investigations of the Predominance and Cause of Subhorizontal Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Linda Warren, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2016
* USD 247,422.00

Deep earthquakes were discovered nearly 100 years ago, but how they can occur
outside the normal pressure-temperature conditions for brittle failure remains a
mystery. Following up on recent observations that earthquakes from ~75-300 km
depth often occur along subhorizontal faults, we have developed new hypotheses
and tests to investigate the predominance and cause of these faults. Do outer
rise faults remain weak as the slab bends and subducts? Alternatively, are the
fossil outer rise faults strong because they have healed? Does the stress field
in the bending slab result in downward pumping of water that initiates
earthquakes? Do sustained fault zones exist? Is rupture propagation an isobaric
process? Different seismic observations would support or refute each of these
hypotheses, and we have selected two study areas, Japan and Colombia, with
features and regional data sets ideal for answering these questions. In Japan,
we are using the broadband F-Net records to analyze the directivity of ~500
earthquakes down to magnitude ~4.5. In Colombia, we are collaborating with
Professor German Prieto of the Universidad de los Andes to analyze the Cauca
cluster of ~2000 earthquakes through relocation and source characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These analyses will advance understanding of a long-
unresolved question in the Earth sciences. In the process, the participation of
a graduate student, an undergraduate student, and an early-career scientist will
promote teaching and training, and the international collaboration will enhance
the infrastructure for research and education.