* 1141830
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Solid Freeform Fabrication of a Conceptual Artificial Photosynthesis Device
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Wenqiao Yuan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2012
* USD 99,822.00

The main objective of this EArly Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
research project is to fabricate an artificial photosynthesis device that is
capable of converting sunlight, CO2 and water into sugars for the production of
biofuels. Solid freeform fabrication (SFF) enhanced by high-resolution
heterogeneous printing technology will be investigated to design and build the
innovative device with multi-layer interconnected channels and micro-porous
structures. This research will enable manufacturing and deployment of large-
scale solar conversion systems that not only mimic the nature process of
photosynthesis for the production of biofuels, but also make these reactions
independent of the life of nature plants. An interdisciplinary research team has
been formed, synergistically combining the expertise of two investigators from
Drexel University and Kansas State University in solid freeform fabrication,
system design and control, biomaterials, biofuels and molecular biology. The
U.S. government aims to replace 20 percent (51 billion gasoline-equivalent
gallons) of fossil-based transportation fuels with biofuels by the year 2030.
Producing this amount of biofuel would require an unsustainably large cropping
area when using any bio-based sources (biomass) that are currently available. As
an alternative technology, artificial photosynthesis can produce tremendous
amounts of clean and renewable biofuels because of its extremely high solar
conversion efficiency and carbon neutral nature. However, lacking commercially
available artificial photosynthesis devices, there is a big gap between lab-
scale artificial photosynthesis technologies and in-field applications. This
project will research a new manufacturing system and method to first-time
fabricate a leaf-tree-like artificial photosynthesis device. This research will
be the first of its kind in solid freeform fabrication of artificial
photosynthesis device integrated with polymers and protein/enzyme. Knowledge
obtained from this study will guide design of structures and determination of
manufacturing methods of the artificial photosynthesis device, which will
eventually lead to large-scale use of commercially deployable constructs for
biofuel manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this
research will lead to a new technology for designing and manufacturing an
artificial photosynthesis device, which will help realize the vision of
affordable bio-based energy manufacturing. Economically viable manufacturing of
biofuels will greatly benefit the U.S. economy and energy security, as well as
society and the environment in general. Success of the proposed activities will
help expand the role of the manufacturing research community to create a new,
trillion dollar energy manufacturing industry in the United States. Two doctoral
students will be trained and three project-based learning modules will be
created to strengthen the undergraduate engineering curricula, engaging students
with design projects in design, manufacturing and energy engineering.