* 1141825
* Collaborative Research: Ship-based Science Technical Support in the Arctic 2011
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Daryl Swensen, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Renee Crain
* 08/31/2015
* USD 601,034.00

This proposal requests support to augment the marine research technical services
provided by the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) on their icebreakers for research
cruises in the arctic region. This proposal is a collaborative between the
Shipboard Technical Support (STS) department at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography (SIO) and the Marine Technician Group (MTG) at Oregon State
University (OSU) to provide the highest level of shipboard technical support
possible. The proposal will use a model for arctic shipboard technical support
that follows best practices of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory
System (UNOLS) fleet. An Arctic Cruise Coordinator will be recruited with the
exclusive responsibility for creating and overseeing a precruise planning
process based on existing SIO and OSU methods, modified to suit the needs of
scientists sailing on the USCG cutters in the arctic. The Coordinator will work
with all parties to develop efficient staffing and equipment assignments
customized for each cruise leg, and develop an annual technical support budget
(under the supervision of the STS manager) that will be submitted to NSF. If the
requirements for an Arctic cruise cannot be met using the available resources of
SIO and OSU, then the Coordinator will solicit marine technical support from
other UNOLS institutions. Education and training of students, new technicians
and USCG personnel in use of technology and techniques at sea is part of the
broader impacts of this proposal, thus broadening the technical knowledge base
that supports U.S. oceanographic research. SIO will support the acquisition and
appropriate handling of underway shipboard data in concert with national data
centers such as the NSF-supported R2R program, making data available to the
academic community and the public at large. SIO and OSU will coordinate with
NSF, USCG and the Arctic Icebreaker Coordinating Committee to define priorities
for maintenance and upgrades to science equipment onboard.