* 1141281
* The Future of a New England Mill Town
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Valerie Imbruce, Bennington College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2016
* USD 199,477.00

This project is matching academic rigor with experiential, interdisciplinary
learning in a sequence of two courses that ground students firmly in their place
of study: Bennington, Vermont, and its environs. Former mill towns like
Bennington dot the New England landscape. These are not the urban centers at the
forefront of sustainable design; but neither are they rural outposts or quickly
spreading suburbs. Through analysis of past resource-use regimes and human-
environment interactions, students in this project are gaining insight into what
a sustainable future could be.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum is designed
mainly for juniors and seniors and for environmental studies students, although
it is also appropriate for students concentrating in other disciplines, as well
as students interested in learning more about their new college
home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first course, "The Future of a New England Mill
Town," provides the geographic specificity needed for students to understand how
social, political, and biophysical processes influence each other. This
introductory course highlights core STEM knowledge (from ecology, chemistry,
geology, architecture, and psychology) central to sustainability issues, and it
also examines how STEM knowledge and approaches are integrated in a larger
societal whole through real problems in a tangible, localized
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second course is an advanced projects course
that involves individual internships with regional organizations during the
college's seven-week, non-residential winter Field Work Term. In this course,
students collaboratively design and implement case studies that address issues
of sustainability in the Bennington region, drawing on qualitative and
quantitative research methods from diverse disciplines. Results from projects
are archived and compiled as a resource for partner organizations and as a
catalyst for the development of future courses and
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While creating locally focused place-based
curricula, the investigators are also developing teaching tools that have
general applicability in integrating student experience with any locality.
Ongoing relationships with local community organizations, K-12 teachers, other
colleges in the region, and others with unique knowledge lay the groundwork for
future collaborations. The investigators are organizing workshops to collaborate
with other colleges and K-12 teachers. Local media are disseminating ideas
generated from students' projects.