* 1141503
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER: A Virtual eXchange to Support Networks of Creativity and Innovation Amongst Science, Engineering, Arts and Design (XSEAD)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Shawn Brixey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 10,824.00

Collaborative Projects: EAGER: A virtual eXchange to support networks of
creativity and innovation amongst Science, Engineering, Arts and Design
(XSEAD)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest
challenges facing the United States in research and education is how to
fundamentally encourage innovation across all sectors and spawn new solutions to
address global challenges. Increasing research evidence and industrial
innovations (i.e. mobile computing, social media) confirm that broad
interdisciplinary collaborations that include both science and art fields have
great potential for spawning creativity and innovation in computer science,
engineering and the sciences. An emerging hybrid community of scientists,
engineers, artists and designers is producing innovative and entrepreneurial
research that advances new knowledge and proposes holistic solutions to societal
challenges including health, education and environmental change. Yet, this
burgeoning interdisciplinary community continues to face problems in its efforts
to self-organize among constraints imposed by academic systems and historical
biases; it continues to seek a dynamic and synergizing research and outreach
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon lessons-learned, a new Virtual
eXchange to support networks of creativity and innovation amongst Science,
Engineering, Art and Design (XSEAD) will be developed. The XSEAD project will
address the following urgent needs of the interdisciplinary science-art
community: establish a cohesive view of the field and provide a mechanism to
attract entrepreneurs and industry; create a venue for multimodal documentation
of research outcomes; provide extensive databases of prior and current research;
allow rapid dissemination of research outcomes; facilitate forming of
collaborations and specialized sub-communities; document and help evolve
science-art curricula efforts and evaluation approaches; provide context and
support mechanisms for science-arts careers; establish evidence of the societal
impact of interdisciplinary science-art integration. The software engineering
development components of XSEAD will contribute further knowledge in three
technical areas: Content organization (improve the effectiveness of algorithms
for dynamic, usage based, organization of large multimedia databases);
Recommendation algorithms (promote the use of multi-relational structures for
providing effective recommendations); Community dynamics (develop novel
algorithms to extract structures that encode meaningful interactions in online
social networks).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;XSEAD will
expose general non-expert audiences to the evolution and potential of
collaborative research across science and arts. It will attract the interest of
young people searching for careers that combine the rigor of science and
engineering with the creativity and reflection of arts and design. It will serve
teachers and informal learning communities seeking exemplars for curricular
development, active practitioners looking for further institutional
opportunities to present and support their ongoing work, academics developing
related interdisciplinary efforts and commercial companies seeking cross-trained
expertise. XSEAD will enable rapid research exchange and in-depth peer-reviewed
scholarship between the worlds of science and art and provide a unique and
deeply engaging inroad to a vast and creative repository. XSEAD will help
promote new paradigms for developing human centric solutions to complex societal
problems (i.e. cost effective health and wellness, globalization and conflict,
adaptive K-12 learning, electronic communication and security). These paradigms
will combine knowledge across broad and diverse areas of human knowledge.