* 1141986
* Comprehensive high-precision relocation of global seismicity
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Felix Waldhauser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2016
* USD 218,376.00

Hundreds of thousands of earthquakes are detected and recorded each year by
regional and global seismic networks. Network operators routinely analyze their
seismograms to estimate various parameters, including time, location, and
magnitude of each new earthquake. This adds to a rapidly growing archive of
digital seismic data. Catalogs of earthquake locations are a fundamental source
of data in seismology, and in the Earth sciences in general. Yet these locations
have had notoriously low spatial resolution, which limits their potential to
address fundamental questions concerning the structure and composition of the
Earth?s interior, the nature of earthquakes, and the seismic hazards they impose
on our society and the built environment. The main goal of this project is to
significantly improve the location precision of millions of earthquakes on a
global scale by applying higher-order earthquake location methods that take
advantage of the increasing quantity and quality of seismic archives and the
availability of affordable computing power. This project will focus on using the
wealth of new data to better understand, in a comparative way, the seismogenic
structure and processes that control subduction zones worldwide. Results from
this project are expected to find many applications in the Earth sciences, and
to have social impact in the areas of natural hazards and seismic verification
of the CTBT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tremendous growth in global seismic
archives over the last several decades, the continuous fall in computing costs,
and advances in earthquake relocation methods provide a unique opportunity to
substantially improve the spatial resolution of standard global earthquake
catalogs. This project will use high-efficiency teleseismic waveform cross-
correlation and double-difference (DD) algorithms to comprehensively relocate
the more than 3 million earthquakes listed in the combined bulletins of the
International Seismological Centre and NEIC?s Earthquake Data Report, spanning
the years 1964-2011. The locations of hypocenters in these catalogs, typically
estimated one event at a time from phase arrival times observed at global
seismic stations, have notoriously low accuracy that hamper studies in a wide
range of research areas, not only in seismology, but in the geosciences in
general. This project aims at significantly increasing spatial resolution of the
catalogs by relocating the hypocenters simultaneously by using new procedures
that can cope with the computational load of this massive-scale undertaking
through harnessing computer clusters. Cross-correlation based phase delay times
will be measured on billions of pairs of waveforms, and efficient teleseismic
double-difference algorithms will be employed to invert these data in
combination with reported phase arrival times for the vector connecting their
hypocenters. The new global DD catalog has the potential to reveal
characteristic seismicity patterns in time and space, and to provide new
insights into seismogenic processes at unprecedented resolution. This project
will focus on the fine-scale structure of Wadati-Benioff zone seismicity and the
nature of narrow double-seismic zones, and analyze the relocated seismicity
associated with recent great subduction earthquakes to better understand their
structural and kinematic behavior. A global DD catalog will likely find many
applications in the Earth sciences, and may help in improving our understanding
of the physical processes controlling earthquakes, our ability to image the
structure and composition of the Earth?s interior, and our capability to
estimate the hazards imposed by large earthquakes.