* 1141692
* Collaborative Research: Are buried paleochannels effective reactors for water and solute transport in the deltaic subterranean estuary?
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Karen Johannesson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,996.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: ARE BURIED PALEOCHANNELS EFFECTIVE REACTORS FOR WATER
AND SOLUTE TRANSPORT IN THE DELTAIC SUBTERRANEAN ESTUARY? Alexander Kolker,
Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium Karen Johannesson, Tulane University
Jaye Cable, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill

Rivers deltas are one of the largest stores of minerals and organic-rich
sediments on earth. Their low relief and close proximity to the ocean also make
them one of the best systems to study how coastal ecosystems will respond to
climate change and sea-level rise in the coming decades. A wealth of previous
studies focused on the role deltas play in cycling carbon, nutrients, metals and
other elements. However, very little of this research has investigated the
subsurface connections between the main river and adjacent bays and wetlands.
Hydrological models of coastal bays associated with river deltas suggest more
freshwater is entering these systems than expected. This study will investigate
whether this missing component is groundwater discharge through buried ancient
channels in these deltas. Modern deltas consist of bays and bayous, sedimentary
deposits, and marshes formed and abandoned as the river changed course
throughout the Holocene. Over time, sandy-bottom bayous are buried and may leave
only a trace of their former existence at the surface. These buried channels
commonly retain a hydraulic connection to the main river, thus acting as a
conduit for discharge to adjacent bays during the annual spring/summer high
river stage. Within the Mississippi River Delta (MRD) system, this hydraulic
connection may be enhanced by 20 to 40 ft as a consequence of flood control
levees which may produce a river stage (i.e. head) as much as 15 to 22 ft above
the adjacent bay water levels. The central hypothesis of this research is that
buried ancient channels in deltas act as a vast network of subterranean
estuaries, which play a critical role in the transport of groundwater,
nutrients, and some metals to deltaic bays and ultimately the ocean. The
research addresses several major questions: Is deltaic submarine groundwater
discharge sufficient to satisfy current deltaic hydrologic and biogeochemical
budgets? How effective are paleochannel networks in the delivery of water and
elemental mass fluxes to the coastal ocean? These questions will be addressed
using geophysical surveys that can produce images of the structure of the delta
sediments and their salinity, as determined through sonars and electrical
conductivity. These studies will be conducted in concert with studies of
geochemical tracers (e.g. salt, radioactive and stable isotopes) and detailed a
study of hydraulic gradients between the river and a paleochannel system (e.g.
piezometers, pressure loggers, flow nets). Using the assembled understanding of
hydrogeologic flow patterns and rates, we will estimate the biogeochemical mass
fluxes associated with seasonal groundwater flow through this
paleochannel/subterranean estuary network (e.g. N, C, P, Si, Fe). Results should
improve the understanding of the role that the delta?s geology plays in its
hydrology and chemistry and how fluxes of water, nutrients and metals vary over
space and time. This work will then add to the understanding of how deltas and
other coastal ecosystems function, particularly in light of sea-level rise
predictions for the next 50 years.

Rivers have long been recognized a playing an important role global chemical
cycles. Despite this recognition, relatively little is know about how these
chemical cycles function below the sea floor, and the implications this has for
the chemistry of the coastal zone. The proposed study will examine these
processes in the Mississippi River Delta. This delta sits at the mouth of the
largest river in North America, and is the entry point to one of the most
important economic pathways in the United States. The Mississippi River Delta
also has a long history of scientific research, government water quality
monitoring, and stakeholder involvement. This provides the team with excellent
baseline information and opportunities to link findings to the needs of society.
The work will contribute to the education of three graduate students and several
undergraduate students. These students will study at leading research
universities and have the opportunity to work at a marine laboratory.