* 1141000
* TUES: Type 1: INSPIRE: INStructional materials for PrIvacy Research and Education
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Jaideep Vaidya, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,681.00

The ubiquitous collection and analysis of data through the IT infrastructure
creates a burgeoning privacy problem. Indeed, special care must be taken to
ensure that privacy is not breached from misuse of data flowing through our
systems. This project enables the formal study of privacy at the undergraduate
level. Currently, privacy is only informally studied, perhaps as a small part of
a general information security course, or even ignored when cybersecurity cannot
find a place in the curriculum, as happens with many regional colleges and
universities. The project examines how privacy can be incorporated into the
undergraduate curriculum at the appropriate level by identifying and developing
a comprehensive set of portable course modules and lab extensions that would
appropriately cover the key concepts and introduce privacy tools, techniques,
and methodologies. By developing course outlines at different levels of
granularity and corresponding instructional materials, retention and learning of
the important concepts at different scopes and levels of the undergraduate
curriculum can be ensured. The modular approach ensures that the developed
curricular materials are useful for a variety of undergraduate institutions. An
integral aim of the project is to find the right applications to introduce the
key concepts of privacy to undergraduates along with the state of the art
technological, sociological, and legal solutions, enabling integration of the
difficult concepts and their retention. The project results are broadly
disseminated through various channels, including institutional websites and
focused workshops.