* 1141218
* The Rehydroxylation Dating of Unglazed Ceramics by Infrared Spectroscopy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Christopher Stevenson, College of William & Mary Richard Bland College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 212,444.00

With NSF support Drs Christopher Stevenson and Mary Gurnick conduct research to
advance and improve a recently proposed ceramic dating technique. Ceramic
rehydroxylation dating (RHX) is a method applied to ancient ceramics to estimate
the age of prehistoric pottery based upon the amount of water absorption after
manufacture and firing in the kiln. This method has instantaneously captured the
interest of a vast global audience of archaeologists who work diligently at
developing and refining archaeological chronologies using ceramic materials from
archaeological sites. Chronology building is particularly challenging in
locations where simple earthen pottery with modest amounts of surface decoration
are part of the cultural technology. This dating method which provides a
quantitative age estimate for an individual fragment has the potential to be
highly informative and widely applied. Poor control over the timing of events in
the past has restricted the ability to evaluate hypotheses about past behavior
but RHX dating has the potential to eliminate much of this current
constraint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ceramic rehydroxylation dating method to be
refined in this research is highly advantageous for reasons of availability,
technical simplicity, and reduced cost. In many parts of the world, later phases
of prehistory have an ample ceramic record and pottery fragments are found in
many contexts. Thus the range of potentially useful samples is high. As
currently structured, the experimental design uses conventional technologies
such as infrared spectroscopy and therefore application of the dating method has
the potential to remain very affordable. In this research, the investigators
will clarify how the rehydroxylation process may vary with ceramic composition
and firing temperature and seek to keep the dating method as straight forward as
possible and within a single technology; that of infrared
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators in this research come from
the fields of archaeometry, chemistry, and historic/prehistoric archaeology at
established institutions such as the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH),
Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), and Richard Bland College (RBC). The
AMNH has access to large well-documented artifact collections of known age and
is currently engaged in a long-term study of prehistoric ceramics on St.
Catherine's Island, Georgia. VCU an RBC bring basic instrumentation and
expertise to the project that is relevant to the proposed research. The
researchers have designed a set of experiments to understand the varying
behavior of water adsorption in ceramics and have selected archaeological case
examples that can properly evaluate the results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team includes advanced researchers, two graduate students, and an
undergraduate assistant who will participate in the experimental, evaluative,
and publication phases. They will disseminate results at both the national,
state, and local level through presentations, publications and small museum
exhibits. The data collected will contribute to at least two advanced academic
degrees. Undergraduate students will participate in the research. More broadly,
the project will promote linkages between scientists and communities in the
United States and internationally as the laboratory protocols are refined and
the application of the method becomes increasingly applied.