* 1141795
* Two-stage Deformation of Olivine: Effects of Deformation History on Seismic Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Philip Skemer, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2017
* USD 266,665.00

Plate tectonics is characterized by rigid, moving landforms, or plates, which
cover Earth's surface. The motion of these plates fundamentally alters the
landscape of the planet. Moreover, plate motions are primarily responsible for
earthquakes, tsunamis, and many other natural hazards. The driving force for
this plate motion is the slow convection of Earth's mantle. A fundamental
problem in geophysics is understanding the flow patterns of mantle convection,
and how they interact with moving plates. To infer these flow patterns, we use
the tools of seismology to detect structures in Earth's interior that are
produced by the deformation of rocks. The objective of the proposed research is
to investigate details of how we infer flow patterns from seismological data.

Dense seismic networks and high resolution measurements of seismic anisotropy
provide new opportunities for insight into mantle deformation, particularly in
the vicinity of plate boundaries. However, to interpret seismic anisotropy in
terms of flow patterns the relationship between seismic anisotropy and
deformation kinematics must be understood. Most seismic anisotropy is generated
by the lattice-preferred orientation (LPO) of olivine, which forms and evolves
in response to progressive deformation. The pattern and rate of evolution
depends on the physiochemical conditions of deformation, and its effects on
microphysical deformation and recovery. In these projects, we are investigating
several factors, including the role of (1) temperature, (2) grain-size, and (3)
pre-existing LPO, on texture development. Our primary focus will be on the
mineral olivine, which produces most of the seismic anisotropy in the upper
mantle. We will conduct experiments to understand the sensitivity of
microstructural evolution to different laboratory conditions and to facilitate
extrapolation to Earth. Data collected in these experiments will provide a new
context for the interpretation of seismic anisotropy, especially in complex
kinematic settings.