* 1141745
* Quantification of the role of bedload and suspended load in the flux of inorganic carbon
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Carol Wicks, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 05/31/2018
* USD 296,769.00

Quantification of the role of bedload and suspended load in the flux of
inorganic carbon&lt;br/&gt;Carol M Wicks, Louisiana State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical models of landscape denudation in
carbonate terrains are based on an understanding of chemical processes and have
allowed an accounting of chemical erosion of carbonate in karst systems and of
one sink for atmospheric carbon dioxide. These existing models assume that the
mechanical removal of carbonate in karst terrain is negligible. This study will
test that assumption by adding mechanical removal of carbonate to the existing
geochemical models and will allow more precise accounting of atmospheric CO2
sinks associated with carbonate regions. There are three primary objectives to
the project: quantify bed load transport and flux of particulate inorganic
carbon, quantify suspended load transport and flux of particulate inorganic
carbon, and quantify the flux of dissolved inorganic carbon to compare to the
flux of particulate inorganic carbon and to allow calculation of the total flux
inorganic carbon. To characterize suspended load flux, direct sampling and
computation of the suspended load as the depth-integration of the product of the
suspended sediment concentration and the flow velocity will be used. Because it
is poorly understood, a major effort of this research will be to describe and
quantify bed load flux in karst conduits by determining sediment transport
relations for streams with bounded cross sections. The sediment transport
relations will be compared to observed bed load movement and to existing models
of sediment transport in surface streams. Our expected outcomes are developed
relations of bed load transport in karst streams, quantification of the flux of
particulate inorganic carbon as bed load and as suspended load, and a better
understanding of proportion of carbonate material that is removed from carbonate
terrains via physical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of carbonate
dissolution in karst settings have clearly demonstrated the significance of the
dissolution process as a transient sink in the global carbon cycle due to the
loss of carbon dioxide and the creation of bicarbonate. Chemical processes
clearly dominate removal of carbonate during low to moderate flow conditions.
However, during storm events, the mechanical movement of particles and cobbles
of carbonate material (bed load and suspended load) can be a major component of
flux of inorganic carbon. Over an annual cycle of storm events, the movement of
these particles may account for a large percentage of the annual removal of
mass. This study will specifically investigate movement of these particles and
improve our understanding of the carbon cycle and of landscape denudation. In
addition, this project integrates research and education through the research
experience of the Geology Intensive Orientation for Students program at LSU, a
program designed to help the incoming Freshmen make the transition to the
expectations of college-level course work prior to the start of their first fall
semester. The students in the Geology Intensive Orientation for Students will
conduct a sediment transport study in the Mississippi River and will be
introduction to global carbon cycle.