* 1141394
* Workshop: American Society for Plant Biologists Laboratory Leadership Workshop to be held in Minneapolis, MN on August 4-6, 2011
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Mary Tierney, American Society of Plant Biologists
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 22,150.00

Intellectual Merit: The American Society for Plant Biologists (ASPB) will host a
Laboratory Leadership Workshop for new and prospective PIs to provide training
in skills and approaches required for success in mentoring, networking, research
ethics, grant-writing, publication, teaching, and reaching out to the public.
The workshop will be held August 4-6, 2011 in Minneapolis, MN just prior to the
annual meeting of ASPB. Approximately 20 early-career faculty and 50
postdoctoral scientists are expected to attend. The format of the meeting will
be a combination of presentations by invited speakers and discussion among
participants. Sessions are aimed at dual-track professional development for
those interested in careers in research-intensive institutions and in
predominantly undergraduate institutions. Highlights of the workshop will be
published in an upcoming ASPB newsletter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The workshop will bring together established investigators and early-career
scientists with the aim of providing training in areas not usually encompassed
by the traditional route of postdoctoral training. The emphasis on networking
will have allow participants to build relationships that will last beyond the
workshop itself. Careful attention has been paid to encouraging participation by
women and minority scientists, through targeted advertising and availability of
travel grants.