* 1141938
* Beyond the 'Classical' Mantle Plume Concept:  Upwelling Dynamics, Seismic Structure, and Partial Melting of Thermochemical Plumes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Garrett Apuzen-Ito, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 197,192.00

The classical concept of mantle plumes describes a thermally buoyant upwelling
that rises through the entire mantle to feed a thin (~100 km) ?pancake? of hot
material ponding beneath the lithosphere and spawn hotspot volcanism. While this
theory is elegant in its simplicity and its ability to explain a variety of
observations, recent discoveries suggest that this idealization may no longer be
tenable for all hotspots. At the archetypal Hawaiian hotspot, for example, the
PLUME seismic tomography results shows compelling evidence for a plume-like body
originating in lower-mantle, however, they also reveal a low-velocity body in
the upper mantle that appears far too thick and asymmetric to be consistent with
a classical thermal pancake. In the South Pacific, a cluster of hotspots
populating the broad South Pacific Superswell each tend to be short-lived, show
inconsistent age progressions, and are not connected to a large igneous
province. Consequently, the classical plume theory has all but been discarded
for these hotspots, giving way to the hypothesis that relatively small, short-
lived ?plumelets? rising from the roof of a giant ?superplume? that is
stagnating in the mid mantle. For many ocean islands, including those in the
South Pacific and Hawaii, geochemical evidence reveals that mafic materials in
the mantle source?not only excess temperature?contribute to volcanism. In the
researchers? recent numerical simulations, mantle upwellings that are thermally
buoyant but compositionally (partially eclogite) dense show irregular and time-
dependent forms with potential for explaining many of above observations.
Indeed, ?thermochemical? mantle convection is topic of vigorous research but
very little work has been done to quantitatively explore the dynamical
processes, melting behavior, geophysical manifestations, and geochemical
consequences of thermochemical plumes interacting with mantle phase changes and
a moving lithospheric plate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has 3 main
objectives. (1) Explore the physics of thermochemical plumes in the mantle
transition zone and upper mantle and characterize the different forms of
upwellings as a function of properties such as plume radius (e.g. superplume,
Hawaiian-type plume), excess temperature, and eclogite content. (2) Establish
relationships between the above properties and observables that can apply
generally to hotspots world-wide such as the distribution, volume, and mafic
content of magmatism, swell geometry, and mantle seismic structure. (3) Test the
thermochemical plume hypothesis for hotspots in Hawaii, and the South Pacific by
comparing model predictions with geochemical and geophysical constraints,
especially the PLUME body wave tomography for Hawaii. This study will help
develop a new class of plume concepts that is both motivated by, and can be
tested against geophysical and geochemical data sets of ever increasing quality.
Thermochemical convection displays a such rich diversity of shapes and dynamic
regimes, and therefore this high-resolution modeling study has excellent
potential for discovering yet unrecognized behaviors that are relevant hotspots
and other upper mantle processes.