* 1141120
* Seamless Transition from Academia to Real-world (STAR): A Collaborative Partnership to Producing Industry Ready Graduates
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Sundararaman Anand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 04/30/2015
* USD 199,999.00

The project aims to bridge competency gaps between industry workforce needs and
what is provided in a traditional engineering education program. The team is
developing a model in which students work on real-world industrial problems that
will have a direct bearing on fundamental engineering concepts in all four years
of the mechanical engineering program. They are identifying problems that can be
broken down into sub-problems and mapped to a selected set of key concepts
taught in clusters of core courses. These case problems are being presented
under a virtual company framework. Students post their work in the virtual
company repository during different stages of the process so that the
instructor, industry partners, and other students can view the solutions and
procedures and provide periodic feedback. This is enabling students to learn to
assess their own work and that of their peers. Industry experts meet with
students to discuss the pros and cons of the solutions from a real-world
perspective. Since the problems span multiple courses, students need to develop
the ability to synthesize knowledge acquired from different courses in order to
develop complete solutions. The team is making their material available so that
other programs, depending on their connections with industrial partners, can
directly use the case problems developed under this project, customize the case
problems to meet local industry needs, or adopt the general model and develop
their own case problems. The evaluation effort under the direction of an
independent, qualified individual, is using a quasi-experimental approach with a
pre-post test and a comparison group to examine the project effects. Broader
impacts include the strong connection to industry, the dissemination of
materials and results, and a special focus on the involvement of individuals
from underrepresented groups