* 1141142
* Collaborative Research: Converging on a Physical Basis for Rate and State Friction through Nano-to-Macro-Scale Friction and Adhesion Experiments on Geological Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 280,000.00

Significance and importance of the project. Nucleation of earthquakes on
tectonic-scale faults in the Earth?s crust is controlled, remarkably, by
frictional processes that originate at micro- and nano-scale contacts between
fault surfaces. The earthquake cycle is typically studied via computer models
incorporating any of several empirical friction ?laws?. Such models reproduce a
rich variety of observed earthquake phenomena, despite the fact that the
friction laws upon which they are founded lack a physical basis. Stated simply,
the identities of the physical mechanisms that occur at nanoscale contacts
between the fault materials are unknown. Without a sound physical basis, the
researchers are severely limited in our abilities to reliably extrapolate
existing friction laws from laboratory measurements to natural systems, and
ultimately to reliably predict approaching earthquakes. That the friction laws
lack a physical basis largely reflects the difficulty of isolating and studying
processes that occur at nanoscale fault contacts. In this transformative study,
the researchers will employ cutting-edge methods of materials science,
principally atomic force microscopy, nanoindentation, and microindentation, to
isolate the frictional mechanisms that occur in experiments on rocks and on
faults in nature. Using these methods, the researchers will isolate the
frictional mechanisms occurring at a single contact on a fault surface, rather
than measure the integrated behaviors of many contacts at once (as in laboratory
experiments on rocks). The researchers aim to use this ?bottom-up? approach to
establish a robust, physics-based foundation for existing friction laws and to
proscribe their limits of applicability. The research may ultimately allow them
to determine whether they are able to detect accelerating creep on faults days
to hours prior to an earthquake, which would save many lives and mitigate
damages to human infrastructures. From the perspective of the scientific
disciplines of solid mechanics and materials science, insights gained by
identifying and connecting frictional behavior across many length scales have
potential application well beyond geophysics, for example, in many engineered
systems, including silicon-based micromechanical devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description. The overarching goals of the
proposed research are to isolate and identify the physical mechanisms that occur
at the nanoscale asperity contacts which comprise macroscopic frictional
interfaces. More specifically, the researchers seek to answer arguably the most
fundamental question regarding existing rate- and state-variable friction laws
as they pertain to the earthquake cycle ? What is the physical mechanism(s) that
gives rise to the observed time dependence of friction? The frictional stability
of an interface ? i.e., whether friction decreases or increases with increasing
slip rate, and therefore whether an earthquake can nucleate or not, respectively
? depends critically on the magnitude of the time dependence of friction,
otherwise known as frictional ?ageing?. In our previous work, they established
that a canonical observation from friction experiments on rocks and other
engineering materials ? that friction increases linearly with the log of the
time of stationary contact ? can be amply explained quantitatively by either 1)
creep of contacts at sufficiently high contact stresses (Goldsby et al., J.
Mater. Res., 2004) or 2) increased adhesive strength of contacts (stronger
chemical bonding) in the absence of contact creep (Li et al., Nature, 2012).
Explanation 2 is based on our atomic force microscopy (AFM) friction tests on
single nanoscale silica-silica contacts (Li et al., Nature, 2012). Intriguingly,
the magnitude of ageing in the AFM tests is far larger than in laboratory
friction experiments on rocks, by up to a factor of 100. This discrepancy is
readily explained by a contact mechanics model allowing for inhomogeneous slip
on a multi-asperity interface (Li et al., Nature, 2012). In addition,
microindentation experiments and complementary friction experiments on quartz at
low (2.2) pH and neutral (7) pH reveal no difference in indentation size between
tests at either pH, no ageing in rock friction tests at pH 2.2, but strong
ageing at pH 7. These observations strongly suggest that ageing is due to time-
dependent adhesion rather than contact creep, a conclusion that runs counter to
the prevailing wisdom. However, further work is required to determine if there
are conditions where both mechanisms can occur. In this new work, more
sophisticated experiments will allow us to discriminate between plastic
deformation and adhesion effects on frictional ageing. The researchers will
employ AFM, interfacial force microscopy, nanoindentation, microindentation, and
rock friction experiments to investigate the influences of water, temperature,
and chemical environment (namely, pH) on asperity creep and adhesion. The
researchers will also employ sophisticated in situ nanoindentation in the
transmission electron microscope to study, in real time, plastic deformation and
changes in chemical bonding using high resolution imaging, electron diffraction,
electron energy loss spectroscopy, and energy dispersive spectroscopy.