* 1141005
* Collaborative Research: Teaching Multicore and Many-Core Programming at a Higher Level of Abstraction
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Clayton Ferner, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2016
* USD 94,469.00

The project is addressing the need to train Computer Science undergraduate
students in programming computer systems with multiple execution cores.
Virtually all computer systems today have multiple cores and the trend is to
have increasing numbers of cores, increasing the complexity of effectively using
such computers. This project is exploring structured higher-level approaches,
which begins with decomposing problems into widely known computational patterns
and using higher-level tools to create programs. The work is drawing upon recent
research techniques on pattern programming and bringing these techniques into
the undergraduate curriculum. The educational materials are being developed at
two universities, University of North Carolina Charlotte and University of North
Carolina Wilmington and are being taught across the state of North Carolina on a
televideo network reaching all the state universities and many private
universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By design, this project is involving two
principal universities, one comprehensive university with a strong undergraduate
commitment (University of North Carolina Wilmington) and one research-oriented
school (University of North Carolina Charlotte) and many other institutions
through televideo distance learning. Two minority-serving institutions, North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University and Winston-Salem State
University, are directly participating in the study. Two workshops are being
presented for educators, one in Charlotte North Carolina and one in Washington
DC at the headquarters of the Southeastern Universities Research Association
(SURA).