* 1141868
* EAGER:  Multiple Transmitter Chains to Minimize Exposure to Electromagnetic Radiation in Portable Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Bertrand Hochwald, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

Portable wireless devices such as cell phones are becoming powerhouses of
computational ability, with multiple processors, large amounts of memory, touch
screens, cameras, and motion sensors all connected to WiFi, Bluetooth, 3G and 4G
transceivers. Many of these transceivers can transmit concurrently, and each
transmission exposes the user to some level of electromagnetic radiation. The
total exposure is potentially cumulative. At the same time, regulatory agencies
such as the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) are constantly being
challenged to re-evaluate their thresholds for exposure to electromagnetic
radiation as new science becomes available and as the public becomes more
reliant on portable wireless devices. This research examines using multiple
transmitters, commonly used to improve wireless performance, as a tool to
minimize exposure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research: (i) evaluates the
exposure effects of a portable device as a function of its transmitter
characteristics and the timing and phasing between transmitter elements; (ii)
designs communication and constrained coding techniques that minimize exposure
while not sacrificing wireless performance; (iii) evaluates the success of these
techniques using accepted testing procedures for exposure such as the SAR
(specific absorption rate) limit of 1.6 W/kg. The research characterizes the
tradeoff between minimizing near-field energy, which determines exposure, and
maximizing far-field energy, which determines wireless communication system
performance.