* 1141078
* Physics in Medicine: Active Learning Tools for Undergraduate Physics Courses Developed in a Joint Collaboration of STEM Scientists and Medical Experts
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Karen Marrongelle, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 01/31/2015
* USD 199,999.00

This project aims to satisfy the increasing need for medical physics course
material that is accessible to undergraduate STEM and health science majors, and
it links the teaching of physics to important applications in the medical field.
The primary goal of this project is to develop educational material for medical
applications in physics. The resulting materials are modular and can be used as
a whole in a specialized "Physics in Medicine" course or in part for
introductory physics classes. Six modules are being developed for important
medical topics like electrocardiography, optical instruments, ultrasound
imaging, laser eye surgery, radiation, and magnetic resonance
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this project results in worksheets
for group discussions, medical physics laboratory exercises, homework
assignments, in-class activities, use with existing computer-based physics
simulations, and formative and summative assessments to evaluate students'
understanding. The development of these teaching materials is being done in a
collaboration of experts from the fields of physics and medicine to foster
opportunities for students to apply interdisciplinary critical reasoning skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student learning is being evaluated by utilizing both
formative and summative pre and post assessments of skills, knowledge, and
attitudes for each of the learning modules (6 assessments total). In
collaboration with the PIs, the external evaluator is developing a student
evaluation of the course which is used to make adjustments of the modules and to
help judge their overall success in teaching this material. The advisory board.
consisting of experts in medicine and physics. is providing further guidance on
the soundness of the developed material. All course materials produced during
the project are being disseminated to educators via the "Physics in Medicine"
course website and commercial partners. Subsequently, reports on learning
outcomes are being prepared for peer-reviewed journal articles and presentations
at academic conferences.