* 1141926
* Reconstruction of Near-Surface Tornado Wind Fields from Forest Damage Patterns in Complex Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Chris Peterson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Hallar
* 07/31/2013
* USD 99,575.00

The recent 27 April 2011 tornado outbreak spawned three long-track tornadoes
that passed across heavily forested landscapes and mountainous regions. One
tornado rated EF-4 passed over the western portion of the Great Smoky Mountains
National Park, and two other tornadoes, rated EF-2 and EF-3, crossed the
mountains of northern Georgia in the Chattahoochee National Forest. Given that
this tornado outbreak caused severe economic and human losses to the nation, a
prompt and thorough scientific investigation is
imperative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines observed forest damage in
complex terrain with simulated vortices in an effort to reconstruct the near-
surface wind field during the passage of tornadoes. The objectives are to 1)
retrospectively characterize surface wind fields for three strong, long-track
tornadoes in heavily-forested landscapes, and 2) determine the aspects of rugged
topography that may influence the low-level wind field of strong and relatively
rare tornadoes in the mountains. These objectives will allow a test of the
hypothesis that significant topographic variations influence the strength and
behavior of tornadoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;Because of the difficulties inherent in obtaining direct or
remotely-sensed observations of tornadoes in the mountains, alternative
approaches that retrospectively characterize the near-surface wind fields must
be sought. This rare and notable event provides a unique and valuable
opportunity to assess a tornadic wind field along the entire path of the tornado
in a heavily forested and mountainous area. Each tornado track through a
national forest creates a research opportunity consisting of tens of thousands
of trees, each of which provides information on the ambient wind speed and
direction when it fell. Combined with information on the physical surroundings,
such as slope, topographic position, soil types, and surface elevation, these
trees in a tremendous variety of surroundings provide a perfect scenario with
which to implement a wind field reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, no
studies incorporate terrain into numerical models of low-level tornado dynamics.
Thus, the importance of observational studies that characterize the near-surface
tornadic wind field in complex topography remains paramount. Damage surveys
relying on aerial photography, with confirmation by ground surveys in a portion
of the study area, will reveal tree characteristics, location, and orientation
data for use as input to a simulation of the interaction between an idealized
vortex and trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The broader
benefits to society are plentiful. Results of the research may aid risk
assessments by the insurance industry, emergency managers, and forest
authorities. The analyses may highlight areas that are more vulnerable to
tornadoes in the mountains and will thus shape future structural engineering and
geographical placement guidelines for schools, storm shelters, or trailer parks.
The tree damage model may reveal characteristics of trees that could eventually
lead to improvements in vegetation damage indicators for the Enhanced Fujita
scale. Lastly, the PIs expect to educate the general public through online and
local news releases regarding the study and its results, with emphasis on the
fact that strong tornadoes can and do occur in the mountains. This effort will
enhance general awareness of the threat of tornadoes in areas where the public
may not recognize the dangers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the research
will train both graduate and undergraduate students. The PIs and students will
participate in various national conferences and workshops. The project will also
promote interdisciplinary collaborations from areas such as meteorology,
forestry, ecology, environmental engineering, geography, and social sciences.