* 1141997
* Joint United States-New Zealand Research Workshop on Geothermal Energy Resources; Mighty River Power, Rotorua Campus, New Zealand; November 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Chad Deering, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 68,923.00

The overarching goal of this United States-New Zealand workshop on geothermal
systems is to bring together researchers and industry representatives from New
Zealand with senior and junior researchers and graduate students from US
institutions, with the goal of forming long-term funding partnerships and
research collaborations. The workshop will consist of the following five key
activities: &lt;br/&gt; A. It will provide a venue for industry to educate
researchers on their needs and the &lt;br/&gt; challenges of characterizing,
monitoring, and managing hydrothermal reservoirs; &lt;br/&gt; B. Researchers
will be given the opportunity to present their own research and &lt;br/&gt;
discuss how it may be useful for the investigation of hydrothermal systems;
&lt;br/&gt; C. Both researchers and industry representatives will offer their
ideas regarding &lt;br/&gt; future challenges in the study of hydrothermal
systems; &lt;br/&gt; D. Representatives of potential funding venues (e.g.,
industry, NSF, DOE) will be &lt;br/&gt; invited to explain their funding
priorities and to discuss how workshop &lt;br/&gt; participants can become
involved; &lt;br/&gt; E. Workshop participants will collaborate on the
development of a proceedings that &lt;br/&gt; will be available for broad
distribution to the US and NZ communities&lt;br/&gt;These activities will take
place within a framework of professional talks, moderated panel discussions,
informal group interaction, and a one-day field trip. During the final day of
the workshop, breakout groups will outline and draft the series of white papers
that will form the basis of the workshop proceedings. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This joint NZ-US workshop will be held at the Mighty River Power
Rotorua Campus. It will be an important venue for acquainting US researchers
with the work in progress in New Zealand, for making researcher-industry
contacts, and for showcasing current US research in hydrothermal systems and EGS
to New Zealand academics and industry representatives. The workshop also offers
a training opportunity for students at US academic institutions. In addition to
the training these students may receive, they will have the opportunity to meet
a broad spectrum of hydrothermal and EGS researchers from the US, NZ, academia
and industry. These interactions will provide a powerful means of energizing
student interest in geothermal research, and may prove formative for these
students? careers. It is also envisioned that several collaborative proposals on
geothermal energy exploration and utilization will be developed and submitted to
funding agencies in the US and New Zealand.