* 1141449
* Building Excellence in Undergraduate STEM Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,017,077.00

Technical Description The project is supporting The American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) to organize and run Principal Investigator (PI)
meetings in 2013 and in 2015 for the Transforming Undergraduate Education in
STEM (TUES) program (and its predecessor, the Course, Curriculum, and Laboratory
Instruction (CCLI) program). The objective of the conferences is to provide
opportunities for TUES/CCLI PIs to share methods and strategies for preparing a
diverse undergraduate student population to enter the scientific workforce and
to participate as citizens in a technological society. The overall outcome of
these conferences is for TUES PIs to identify collaborators, strategies, and
actions that they and others can use to strengthen the design, development, and
implementation of promising project approaches to transform undergraduate STEM
education. The conferences include plenary lectures, poster sessions,
interactive workshop discussions on topics of interest to those leading TUES
projects, and opportunities to network with other faculty and educational
leaders engaged in improving undergraduate STEM education.

Broader Significance Each conference includes more than 500 TUES/CCLI PIs and 50
other participants, including publishers and staff of professional societies,
foundations, and business. All TUES/CCLI PIs selected to participate in the
conferences must present a small group session or a poster. Other non-NSF
participants are expected to disseminate information about strategies and
concepts. To ensure diversity among the topics and participants, selection is
taking into account discipline, type of project, type of institution,
race/ethnicity, gender, disability, and geographic location. The on-site project
evaluation is capturing actions that participants intend to take immediately
after each conference. An online follow-up survey is capturing actions that
participants are taking no later than three months after each conference.
Products to be developed include conference programs with printed abstracts and
glossy post-conference publications with case studies of exemplary TUES
projects.