* 1141976
* Dynamical coupling of deformation and melt transport in the Earth:  A combined theoretical and experimental study
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Marc Spiegelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 235,906.00

Plate tectonics remains the over-arching context for solid earth geophysics and
describes the motion of the solid Earth's surface by the relative movement of
~14 rigid plates that interact along weak boundaries. These boundaries provide
the locus for most of the planet's earthquakes and volcanoes and while their
location and relative motions are well described by plate tectonics, their
dynamics and properties remain poorly understood. A key feature of plate
boundaries, however, is that many of them are magmatic with active volcanism and
it may be that the interaction of molten rock (magma) with its solid host can
lead to the necessary structures and weakness preserving plate boundaries.
Laboratory experiments by the PI and others, demonstrate that deformation of
partially molten rocks can lead to spontaneous localization into melt-rich
networks that weaken the rock and provide efficient paths for heat and melt
transport. Thus understanding the dynamics of partially molten systems is
critical for understanding the behavior and evolution of plate boundaries. The
aim of this project is to advance our theoretical understanding of the process,
in order to extrapolate results from experiments to a wide range of conditions
in the Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There exists a wealth of data from high-
pressure and temperature experiments on partially molten rocks deformed in
torsion, from which a great deal of information about the mechanisms active in
stress-driven segregation may be inferred. The emphasis of this project is to
develop better theoretical and computational models of these experiments. We are
using two methods in parallel to model the process and compare model to
experiment. The first is to develop numerical models of the partial differential
equations derived from two-phase flow or magma dynamics theory, solved in
torsional deformation geometry. A spinoff of this work will be the development
and release of an advanced computational system for general multi-physics
problems. The effects to be tested will include various constitutive models for
matrix deformation as well as various effects of surface energy and damage. The
second methodology is to develop effective macroscopic constitutive models
within a non-equilibrium thermodynamic framework, using a formalism that is
well-established in metallurgy but is just beginning to be applied to earth
science. This method describes the structural characteristics of the material
with "internal state variables", and tracks the stored and dissipated energy
associated with those. The result will be thermodynamically consistent
constitutive equations that can be solved in geodynamic models that explore the
large-scale effects of stress-driven segregation occurring at length scales much
smaller than can ever be resolved in a geodynamic model. This effective
constitutive model will also include melt transport properties so that the
potential consequences of coupling between deformation and fluid flow can be
explored in subduction zones, ridges, rifts and other planetary settings.