* 1141877
* Collaborative Research: Climate Change and Predatory Invasion of the Antarctic Benthos
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Richard Aronson, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 09/30/2018
* USD 836,104.00

Elevated temperatures and ocean acidification are both threatening the Southern
Ocean. The effects of these environmental changes are poorly understood, but
preliminary data suggest that they are driving a biological invasion.
Specifically, large populations of skeleton-crushing king crabs, Paralomis
birsteini, have been detected off Marguerite Bay on the West Antarctic
Peninsula. These crabs appear to be invading the continental shelf region where
benthic communities have evolved in the absence of such top-predators. Thus,
this invasion could result in a wholesale restructuring of the Antarctic benthic
ecosystem. The proposed work seeks to document this invasion and better
understand the effects of the introduction of P. birsteini on the ecology of
this region. A towed underwater vehicle will be used to photographically image
communities, and communities with and without P. birsteini will be compared
quantitatively. Additionally, crabs will trapped and various aspects of their
morphology and physiology will be assessed. This research is unique in that it
will document a biological invasion in real-time and it will therefore enhance
our general understandings of the drivers of invasion and resilience in
biological communities. Results will be widely disseminated through publications
as well as through presentations at national and international meetings. In
addition, raw data will be made available through open-access databases. This
project will support the research and training of undergraduate and graduate
students and will foster an international collaboration with British scientists.
Researchers on this project will participate in outreach thorough the
development of K-12 curricular materials.