* 1141934
* Anisotropic Mantle: Advancing Models of Regional Flow and Associated Seismic Signature
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Donna Blackman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,964.00

Flow within the mantle is the key process by which heat and material are
transferred between the deep Earth and the surface we live on. One of the few
ways of determining the pattern of this flow is to measure seismic anisotropy-
an indication that propagation of waves occurs faster in one direction than
another. Anisotropy can be linked to mantle flow because minerals that make up
the mantle tend to slowly align when subjected to shear forces and the direction
they align typically has faster seismic wave speeds compared to the cross
direction. In this project, prior laboratory rock deformation results will be
combined with computer simulations of regional flow, where motion of tectonic
plates generates the forces to deform mantle rocks. The new question to be
addressed is whether alignment of minerals can significantly stiffen, or weaken,
the mantle and whether this may influence the overall pattern of flow, thus
potentially altering exchange mechanisms such as production of magma. Seismic
waves that travel along Earths surface are well suited for documenting the
variation in anisotropy with depth. A secondary aspect of the project is to
determine optimum surface wave data analysis methods for detecting complex
patterns of anisotropy such as are expected to develop near tectonic plate
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A suite of numerical models will elucidate the
effects that flow-induced texturing can have on the viscosity structure of the
upper mantle and the extent to which it influences the pattern of flow that
develops, as well as the associated seismic signatures. The main advance that
the geodynamical part of this study will provide is explicit inclusion of
anisotropic rheology in models of upper mantle flow. A multi-scale
(nanometer-100's km), linked numerical procedure is required and updates to
existing programs are an integral part of the effort. The flow modeling will
emphasize evolution away from an oceanic spreading center, but insights on the
relationships between flow structure and the patterns/magnitudes of seismic
anisotropy will be relevant to other settings such as the Hawaiian plume and
subduction zones. The new seismological modeling for this study will document
how surface wave dispersion depends on the distribution of (elastic) anisotropy.
This has not been studied previously for linked models of mantle flow and
texturing but it is a key aspect, especially in light of seismic array data that
are now becoming available. The complexity of expected anisotropic structure
within ~1000 km of plate boundaries and intraplate hotspots require that the
full suite of body and surface wave analyses be performed in order to discern
structure with the minimum possible non-uniqueness. At the same time, a
quantitative assessment of the potential bias and limits of resolution is needed
for seismic waves in settings where both vertical and lateral structure vary
continuously. By providing a strong suite of forward models, we will set the
stage for inverse approaches that can be applied during seismic data analysis.