* 1141895
* Partial Melting at Mantle Conditions: Effect on Elastic, Anelastic, and Plastic Behavior
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Donald Weidner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The temperature within the Earth is high enough to melt rocks as evidenced by
volcanoes and volcanic rocks. Here we wish to address the question of how
important partial melting is in defining the mechanical properties of regions
within the mantle. The association of low shear wave velocity and low viscosity
with partial melting has been part of the lore since the early days of plate
tectonic theory. The strong rigid lithosphere defined the plates that were
lubricated from below by the plastically weak aesthenosphere. The seismic
verification came from the ubiquitous low velocity zone (at least under oceanic
plates). The implicit assertions of this model are 1) velocity and viscosity are
both affected by small amounts of partial melting, 2) shear modulus is more
affected than bulk modulus, and 3) the top of the low velocity zone marks the
onset of melting and the bottom of the low velocity zone is thus defined by the
disappearance of partial melting and the increase of both viscosity and
velocity. Laboratory studies, however, have not fully endorsed this view of the
material response to partial melting. While partial melting is often associated
with low seismic shear wave velocity zone (LVZ); laboratory studies have
suggested that partial melting may not be effective in creating the large
velocity variation in the upper mantle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our main potential
contribution to this problem comes from our capability to assess these questions
over the pressure range of 0 - 15 GPa and 700 - 2000K that are relevant to the
conditions of the low velocity zone. Previous studies have been capable of
pressures of up to 0.3 GPa. The low velocity zone in the upper mantle is found
at 3 - 7 GPa and the upper mantle itself extends to about 14 GPa. Thus, our
study will be the first that can analyze these properties at the conditions
where the Earth phenomena are found. We will use the facilities at the National
Synchrotron Light Source where we have developed high-pressure equipment capable
of achieving these goals. The use of X-rays to probe the sample provides a
piezometer to measure stress and images to measure strain. Our system can
operate in a DC mode to generate steady state flow and AC at frequencies of 0.1
- 0.001 Hz. This research will provide a learning experience for students
including graduate students in the preparation of their PhD and undergraduates
students in the focus of a summer research project. The results will be used
throughout the Earth sciences as fundamental information on the behavior of the
Earth's interior. The tools that are developed will be made available to other
researchers for studying strength related properties of materials. These tools
(software and hardware) will immediately become part of the COMPRES operated
synchrotron facility and available to all in the community that wish to use
them. The tools developed here will be useful for studying material properties
under extreme environments and will be useful to develop better industrial
materials.