* 1141838
* Collaborative Workshop: An Internet Resource for Integrating Plate Tectonic and Paleogeographic Mapping with On-line Earth Science Databases
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Scott Lidgard, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2014
* USD 20,047.00

Collaborative Workshop: An Internet Resource for Integrating Plate Tectonic and
Paleogeographic Mapping with On-line Earth Science Databases

Scott Lidgard, Melanie Hopkins, Field Museum of Natural History?EAR-1141839
Bradley Sageman, Northwestern University?EAR-1141841

ABSTRACT This workshop will begin the process of developing a community wide,
web-based resource that tells Earth's story and provides the earth science
community with a research tool that researchers can use to "see how their data
fits" into the grand story of Earth System evolution. Workshop participants will
discuss how to build such a dynamic internet resource. The focus of the workshop
is to create an internet resource that integrates plate tectonic,
paleogeographic and paleoclimatic mapping with existing and potential future on-
line Earth Science databases (e.g., The Paleobiology Database, GeoStratSys,
COSUNA database, PALYNODATA [palynology], USGS mineral database, GlobalGeology,
and others). Such a system would provide scientifically-accurate, publicly
accessible maps of the changing configuration of the continents and ocean basins
back through time (~ 1 billion years). The plate tectonic history of the Earth
provides the spatial-temporal framework required to better understand the
evolution of life, the shift of global climate from Ice House to Hot House
conditions, changes in the circulation and chemistry of the oceans, and the
reshaping of the Earth's land surface. This will be the first such effort at
developing a community-wide system/network in which all relevant subdisciplines
can participate in and benefit from its results. This has come about because
Chris Scotese freely contributes for use up front his non-proprietary web-based
library of paleogeographic maps developed over the last 40 years through his
work with industry and in part supported by NSF.