* 1141747
* Travel Grants for the American Physical Society Division of Fluid Dynamics Annual Meeting 2011, Baltimore, MD, November 20-22, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Jonathan Freund, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

1141747 Freund The funding from NSF will provide partial support of participant
travel to the American Physical Society, Division of Fluid Dynamics, 64th Annual
DFD Meeting 2011 in Baltimore, MD, November 20-22, 2011. This is the largest
international annual meeting of fluid dynamicists in the world, with 2000
anticipated attendees. The meeting has been successfully run for over sixty
years.

The chief intellectual merit of this conference lies in the exchange of
scientific ideas, presentations of cutting edge research, and exposure to a
richly diverse array of topics in virtually every sub-discipline of fluid
dynamics. The broader impact will be to increase participation of students and
young scientists in the US who would not otherwise be able to afford to travel
to the meeting and pay associated costs. Preference for awarding the NSF
sponsored funds is given: (i) to those presenting talks at the meeting, (ii) to
those who have not received such an award in the past, and (iii) to no more than
one applicant from a given research advisor. Since the awards are meant to
supplement participant travel funds, not to cover these entirely, the committee
takes into account the travel budget entered on the application. Special effort
is made to achieve diverse participation from underrepresented groups in
engineering, including women and members of minority groups.