* 1141916
* Collaborative Research:  Mantle Structure and Dynamics of the Ross Sea from a Passive Seismic Deployment on the Ross Ice Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Richard Aster, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 229,718.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to establish an ice
shelf network of 18 broadband seismographs deployed for two years to obtain
high-resolution, mantle-scale images of Earth structure underlying the Ross Sea
Embayment. Prior marine geophysical work provides good crustal velocity models
for the region seaward of the ice shelf but mantle structure is constrained by
only low-resolution images due to the lack of prior seismic deployments. The
proposed stations would be established between Ross Island and Marie Byrd Land.
These stations would fill a major geological gap within this extensional
continental province and would link data sets collected in the Transantarctic
Mountain transition/Plateau region (TAMSEIS) and in West Antarctica (POLENET) to
improve resolution of mantle features beneath Antarctica. The proposed
deployment would allow the PIs to collect seismic data without the expense,
logistical complexity, and iceberg hazards associated with ocean bottom
seismograph deployments. Tomographic models developed from the proposed data
will be used to choose between competing models for the dynamics of the Ross
Sea. In particular, the PIs will investigate whether a broad region of hot
mantle, including the Eastern Ross Sea, indicates distributed recent tectonic
activity, which would call into question models proposing that Eastern Ross
extension ceased during the Mesozoic. These data will also allow the PIs to
investigate the deeper earth structure to evaluate the possible role of mantle
plumes and/or small-scale convection in driving regional volcanism and tectonism
across the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this deployment will be of broad
interdisciplinary use. This project will support three graduate and two
undergraduate students. At least one student will be an underrepresented
minority student. The PIs will interact with the media and include K-12
educators in their fieldwork.