* 1141400
* Collaborative Research:  A Multiscale Analysis of Chemotactic Bacteria Transport in Heterogeneous Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Roseanne Ford, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 303,045.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A MULTISCALE ANALYSIS OF THE TRANSPORT OF CHEMOTACTIC
BACTERIA IN HETEROGENEOUS POROUS MEDIA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roseanne M. Ford
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;Brian D.
Wood School of Chemical, Biological, and Environmental Engineering, Oregon State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemotaxis is the ability of motile bacteria to
sense chemical concentration gradients in their local surroundings and swim
toward higher concentrations of pollutants that they degrade. In the subsurface,
&lt;br/&gt;bioremediation is often hindered by the inability to achieve good
mixing between injected substances and &lt;br/&gt;the resident contaminants. In
such situations, chemotaxis might be exploited to enhance the mixing of
&lt;br/&gt;bacterial populations within contaminated zones. The goal of this
study is to connect direct experimental measurement of chemotaxis in physically
and chemically heterogeneous porous media with appropriate mechanistic
descriptive theory. Two main hypotheses will be used to organize the research
effort. They will combine both (a) multiscale experimental observations, and (b)
a multiscale upscaling analysis to develop a theoretical framework that can
describe chemotaxis in chemically and physically heterogenous media at
microscopic and macroscopic scales. The first hypotheses is that in porous media
with trapped sources of nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL) pollutants, chemotactic
bacteria will have measurably slower transport than non-chemotactic bacteria. In
particular, chemotactic bacteria will exhibit greater retardation and tailing
than will non-chemotactic mutants because of selective trapping of chemotactic
bacteria at the fluid-NAPL interfaces. The second hypothesis is that transport
of bacteria under chemotactic versus non-chemotactic conditions are dramatically
different in the presence of large-scale heterogeneities. Although chemotaxis is
inherently a pore-scale process, the net influence of chemotactic bacteria on
transport from high to low conductivity regions of a heterogeneous medium will
be experimentally measurable, and will have relevance to bacterial transport in
the field. This project will combine innovative experimental designs for data
collection and upscaling to develop multiscale models for chemotaxis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to develop an
understanding of the macroscopic scale (bulk) transport behavior of chemotaxis
in porous media. This necessarily involves linking the macroscale transport to
the essential microscale features of the system that control chemotaxis.
Improvements in the ability to measure phenomena at small scales has lead to
experimental data sets that contain detail that was nearly unimaginable even a
decade ago. The development of such extraordinary data sets has also frequently
promulgated the question ?how does one make sense of these data? Is there a way
to search for essential features of behavior in them?? New archetypes for data
analysis (e.g., machine learning algorithms, data mining) have been employed as
methods to assess such data sets. When applied to the problem of large data sets
arising from physical systems, upscaling methods are among these data analysis
archetypes. Outcomes from this proposal will result in more robust models for
predicting microbial transport in groundwater systems, which will lead to
improved design and implementation of bioremediation schemes.