* 1141314
* Collaborative Research: TUES: Type 1: EDURange: A Cybersecurity Competition Platform to Enhance Undergraduate Security Analysis Skills
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jens Mache, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 78,343.00

The objective of this project is to develop a cybersecurity lab environment
(EDURange) that is open to the public and allows creation of custom exercises in
a 'live-fire' setting. It is designed to provide students with an active
learning environment focusing on analysis skills rather than on training based
on a pre-packaged set of tools. Preparing cybersecurity exercises is a major
obstacle in many academic programs but the proposed environment is simple enough
that faculty with limited knowledge of cybersecurity can employ it in the
classroom. The exercises are accompanied by tutorials linked to learning
objectives. EDURange's design, its lab scenarios and scoring system, reward the
effort that students spend on analysis and reverse-
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on: (1) the
construction and deployment of cybersecurity scenarios in local and cloud
environments; and (2) using the scenarios as an assessment tool for both
students in the course of their studies as well as an independent benchmark for
other cybersecurity training curricula.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;EDURange scenarios
are well-documented and of varying difficulty and complexity to make them
attractive to a wide range of academic programs and institutions. The scenarios
are hosted in a publicly available cybersecurity testbed and in a cloud
environment. The project includes outreach activities at the annual SIGCSE
conference.