* 1141022
* Preparing Computer Science Students for the Multicore Era: Teaching Parallel Computing in the Undergraduate Curriculum Early and Often
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Dan Tamir, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 149,118.00

The widespread deployment of multicore-based computer systems over the last
decade has brought about drastic changes in the software and hardware landscape.
However, most undergraduate computer science (CS) curricula have not embraced
the pervasiveness of parallel computing. In their first years, CS undergraduates
are typically exclusively trained to think and program sequentially. However,
too firm a root in sequential thinking can be a non-trivial barrier for parallel
thinking and computing. Thus, there is an urgent need to teach multicore and
parallel computing concepts earlier and often in CS programs.

This project addresses the rapidly widening gap between highly parallel computer
architectures and the sequential programming approach taught in traditional CS
courses. It proposes to systematically integrate parallel computing into current
undergraduate curricula. Specifically, its goals are to develop course modules
and projects for introducing parallel computing concepts in several early
computer science courses, to design an upper-level multicore programming course
that serves as a capstone for parallel computing concepts, and to promote this
model by making all relevant material freely available.

The enhanced curriculum equips CS students with skills that are highly sought
after by the computing industry. The planned outreach activities help broaden
the participation of female and Hispanic student groups in STEM education. The
free teaching modules and the active dissemination encourage the building of a
community of educators interested in introducing parallel computing in the
undergraduate curriculum. Finally, the developed teaching material is
contributing to ACM/IEEE's model CS undergraduate curriculum.