* 1141768
* Karst Conduit Hyporheic Zone Exchange
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* John Wilson, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 02/28/2018
* USD 261,540.00

Karst Conduit Hyporheic Zone Exchange&lt;br/&gt;John L. Wilson, New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
attempt to measure, for the first time, hyporheic exchange at the margin of a
karst conduit (cave below the water table). Hyporheic exchange in surface
streams is a relatively new field, but related publications are growing
exponentially as the implications for flow contaminant transport, residence time
distributions, biogeochemistry and biology are realized. One definition of the
hyporheic zone is the subsurface volume where water enters from the stream,
travels through the subsurface, and returns to the stream. Hyporheic zones in
streams exist at a variety of nested spatial and temporal scales whether there
is net gain, net loss, or even no net exchange along the course. The fundamental
fluid dynamics of karst conduits are not different from streams, and karst
conduits have the same features that cause hyporheic flow in fluvial systems.
This project will investigate whether, as with streams, hyporheic exchange
occurs in karst conduits, regardless of larger-scale net exchange with the
aquifer. Karst-conduit hyporheic exchange, and related biogeochemical
processing, then becomes a fundamental component of the karst water cycle. The
project will be conducted in a phreatic conduit field site in the unconfined
Floridan Aquifer; additionally there will be a nearby air-filled analog site
that was exposed to similar processes at some time in the geologic past. Cores
will be taken from the phreatic and analog sites. Porosity, permeability, and
petrophysical measurements will be used a proxy indicators of past conduit
hyporheic flow. The core holes at the phreatic site will be equipped with
multilevel samplers and injectors, and a series of dye traces will be conducted
to observe karst-conduit hyporheic flow. Modeling will be used throughout the
project, first to help plan the field work and then to synthesize the data.
Results from the data and models will give insights into the temporal and
spatial scales of hyporheic flow. The project will end with modeling as a
predictive tool to generalize our results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Karst aquifers
supply water to 25% of the United States, and almost all water to some regions,
e.g. 90% of Florida's population. New mathematical models and field studies will
be used to illuminate a previously unrecognized process, karst hyporheic
exchange at the margin of a flowing karst conduit, in which the conduit and
surrounding karst rock matrix exchange water with consequences for karst
chemistry and biology. As does hyporheic exchange in surface streams, karst
hyporheic exchange may impact water supply, water quality, and ecology, and will
be of interest to environmental agencies and interest groups at the local, state
and federal level.