* 1141812
* Interferometric Imaging of Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Alison Malcolm, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2012
* USD 120,001.00

Earthquakes and volcanism are phenomena that directly affect a large number of
people in the US and throughout the world. A major driving force for these
mechanisms can be found deep down under the surface inside subduction zones --
areas where two tectonic plates move towards each other, one sliding underneath
the other. Seismic imaging is a method of estimating rock properties, which in
turn reveal physical processes that take place in the subsurface. The quality of
seismic images depend on many factors, the most important of which are the
location of seismic sources (earthquakes) and recording devices (geophones) as
well as signal distortions caused by the complicated nature of the Earth's
interior. This project aims at developing a novel seismic signal processing
algorithm that removes many of the problems associated with traditional imaging
methods. This algorithm is based on seismic interferometry, a technique that
allows to numerically turn sources such as earthquakes into virtual geophones
capable of recording a signal at a location where no physical device can be
placed. It is expected that the proposed algorithm will ultimately result in
higher-quality and higher-fidelity images. Those images will provide additional
clues about the important physical processes inside the subduction zones and
their role in triggering earthquakes, tremor, and volcanic activity.

When choosing the acquisition geometry for imaging purposes, it is ideal to
place physical sources and receivers as close to the area of interest as
possible. Doing so boosts the signal energy, improves the illumination of the
area, increases the effective receiver aperture and greatly reduces the errors
in the signal introduced by wave propagation over long distances. While many
earthquakes naturally originate inside the subducted crust or mantle, placing
receivers inside the subduction zone at the depth of tens of kilometers is
technologically impossible. Seismic interferometry provides a method of
redatuming (numerically moving) receivers located at the surface to be as if
they were located at the source locations. Local earthquakes can then act as
physical sources or, when desired, as virtual receivers. Our new technique,
which combines classical seismic interferometry and source-receiver wavefield
interferometry, uses teleseismic events as well as data produced by large local
earthquakes and converts them into virtual data that we would have observed had
we actually had physical receivers inside the subducting slab. The great benefit
of this redatuming procedure is the construction of a virtual local seismic
survey that can be used to produce an image of precisely the area that we are
most interested in. We have already developed the method for the acoustic case;
with this project we will extend the work to the elastic case and investigate
the necessary source and receiver distribution for the method to produce high-
quality data from which a detailed image of the subducting slab can be formed.