* 1141949
* SBIR Phase I:  Versatile Biobased Plastics from Omega-hydroxylated fatty acids
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Jiali Cai, SyntheZyme LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,976.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will create a family of
bioplastics containing omega-hydroxyfatty acid (omega-HOFAs) repeat units to
fill a gap in commercially available bioplastics. First, the effects of omega-
HOFA chain length on corresponding polymer (P[omega-HOFA]) material properties
will be elucidated. Then, reactive blending methods will be studied to generate
bioplastics that exploit both polylactic acid (PLA) strength and P(omega-HOFA)
ductility. Blend process parameters (e.g. time, temperature, catalyst, and
catalyst concentration) will be varied to adjust P(omega-HOFA)/PLA
transesterification which will result in ?fine-tuning? of phase compatibility
and optimization of blend physical-mechanical properties. We anticipate that,
relative to PLA, P(omega-HOFA)/PLA blends will have significantly improved
hydrolytic stability, impact resistance, and warp resistance. Requirements will
be established for reactor configuration and corresponding process variables as
a function scale for both P(omega-HOFA) synthesis and reactive blending.
Furthermore, the compostability of P(omega-HOFAs) and P(omega-HOFAs)/PLA will be
determined. Successful completion of the proposed Phase I research program will
result in a thorough analysis of material thermal and physico-mechanical
properties needed for identification of commercial applications and to further
engage strategic industrial partners.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop new
biobased materials that meet evolving needs of consumers while providing cost-
performance advantages over existing products. Many current bioplastics have
inherent problems that limit their market penetration. Of particular relevance
to this program is PLA that is hindered in its potential use due to its brittle
behavior, inadequate vapor transmission properties, hydrolytic instability, and
low impact strength. Our omega-HOFAs provide a versatile readily renewable
building block to the plastics industry that through homopolymerization,
copolymerization and blending can be used to produce a wide-range of bioplastics
with desired physical and mechanical properties. Preliminary work on blends of
P(omega-HOFAs) with PLA show that many deficiencies of PLA, such as its brittle
behavior, are eliminated while blends show important improvements in strength
relative to P(omega-HOFAs). This work will focus on gaining fundamental
information on the physical-mechanical properties of these blend materials as
the degree of transesterification is manipulated by reactive blending.
Furthermore, an understanding will be gained on how blending effects the
biodegradability of both components. The outcome of this work will be renewable
biodegradable plastics that out-perform their petroleum derived competitors and
decrease our dependency on petroleum for chemical production.