* 1141936
* Molecular Level Characterization of Dissolved Organic Carbon and Microbial Diversity in the WAIS Divide Replicate Core
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Christine Foreman, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2015
* USD 162,266.00

This award supports a detailed, molecular level characterization of dissolved
organic carbon and microbes in Antarctic ice cores. Using the most modern
biological (genomic), geochemical techniques, and advanced chemical
instrumentation researchers will 1) optimize protocols for collecting,
extracting and amplifying DNA from deep ice cores suitable for use in next
generation pyrosequencing; 2) determine the microbial diversity within the ice
core; and 3) obtain and analyze detailed molecular characterizations of the
carbon in the ice by ultrahigh resolution Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron
Resonance Mass Spectrometry (FT-ICR-MS). With this pilot study investigators
will be able to quantify the amount of material (microbial biomass and carbon)
required to perform these characterizations, which is needed to inform future
ice coring projects. The ultimate goal will be to develop protocols that
maximize the yield, while minimizing the amount of ice required. The broader
impacts include education and outreach at both the local and national levels. As
a faculty mentor with the American Indian Research Opportunities and BRIDGES
programs at Montana State University, Foreman will serve as a mentor to a Native
American student in the lab during the summer months. Susan Kelly is an
Education and Outreach Coordinator with a MS degree in Geology and over 10 years
of experience in science outreach. She will coordinate efforts for comprehensive
educational collaboration with the Hardin School District on the Crow Indian
Reservation in South-central Montana.