* 1141021
* Collaborative Research: Analytical Method Transfer - Development of Case Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Bernard Ricca, St. John Fisher College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 111,881.00

In this collaborative project undergraduate students enrolled in senior-level
analytical chemistry laboratory courses at St. John Fisher College and Kennesaw
State University are creating two novel experiments that are being validated
through Analytical Method Transfer (AMT). Students at one college develop the
experimental method, standard operating procedures, and figures of merit (i.e.,
accuracy, precision, specificity, selectivity, sensitivity, repeatability,
reproducibility, linearity, range, detection limit, quantitation limit,
robustness, and ruggedness). The experiment is transferred to the partnering
college to undergo method equivalency testing by students. The experiments
involve the dissolution of pharmaceutical dosage forms with the development of
dissolution curves (release rates). Using UV-Vis spectroscopy or HPLC methods,
the students determine the concentration of the active pharmaceutical ingredient
in the dissolution media. A statistical comparison of the figures of merit
determines the success of the AMT. The transferred experiments and student-
generated data are being developed into case studies that use POGIL exercises.
The student learning outcomes related to the AMT are being assessed through a
standard pre-test and post-test method using multiple choice and free-response
questions. In addition, students at four other colleges are evaluating the
developed POGIL activities but are not using instrumentation. The collected data
will be used to determine whether the learning outcomes for students
participating in a laboratory POGIL activity (with access to instrumentation)
are equivalent to those for students participating in a classroom POGIL activity
(with no access to instrumentation). Student interviews are being conducted to
determine whether any learning gains in AMT may be attributed to the POGIL
activities. The interview results provide contextual information allowing
project staff to tailor the POGIL activities to the students' experiences. Site
visits also are being used to evaluate the fidelity of the implementation of the
POGIL activities by documenting variables such as adherence to project goals and
use of effective POGIL. The findings from the project are being disseminated
through publications and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
teaching of AMT places students at the forefront of the global learning
environment in analytical chemistry. Students 1) use a new instrument, a
dissolution tester, not currently available in most analytical chemistry
laboratories, and 2) address the curriculum concept of AMT, which is conducted
world-wide but not currently taught to undergraduates. This engages both
students and faculty in the discovery of acceptance criteria for an AMT based on
figures of merit.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This project is designed to
facilitate adaptation of a new laboratory experiment at other sites and promotes
a collaborative effort of an inter-institutional faculty-student partnership.
The results are being disseminated broadly, helping to build a STEM education
community. The technical skills of students are being broadened, enabling them
to become competitive in the global market place.