* 1141442
* Collaborative Research: Career Enhancement of Academic Women in Earthquake Engineering Research (ENHANCE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Rachel Davidson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2015
* USD 10,113.00

This collaborative project builds upon previous successful efforts supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) with the goal to enhance the career of
academic women in earthquake engineering research through mentoring, empowering,
supporting, promoting and networking (nationally and internationally).
Activities supported by federal agencies and professional societies to promote
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers to women have
resulted in increased female interest and improved female retention rates. Yet,
women are still underrepresented in STEM-related fields, as the percentage of
female science and engineering degree recipients and of employed female
scientists and engineers is smaller than their percentage of the population. In
the field of earthquake engineering, even though female participation has
definitely increased since the mid-1980's, the field is still predominantly
male. The term "academic women" herein includes tenure and tenure-track faculty
members, research faculty, postdoctoral students and senior graduate students.
This goal will be achieved (i) by one-on-one mentoring of junior tenure-track
and research faculty in the United States with workshops for successful proposal
and paper preparation, as well as with discussions and insights related to
issues of women in engineering; (ii) by creating a national and international
community for academic women in earthquake engineering research through the
establishment of a private website using the unique Information Technology (IT)
capabilities of the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES); and (iii) by evaluating this effort's outcomes through
surveys of participants that will assess the project's effectiveness. This award
brings together the expertise of seven female faculty from six diverse
institutions (Drexel University, Northeastern University, Stanford University,
University of Delaware, University of Minnesota, and University of Texas at
Austin). Their combined background encompasses all aspects of academia in the
earthquake engineering field. They will be assisted by a four-member Advisory
Board that includes experts in junior faculty mentoring and in building
communities. Their collective commitment and effort in mentoring their junior
female colleagues across the United States, in creating a community of academic
women in earthquake engineering research, and in reaching out to their
international female peers will enhance the career of female faculty around the
world. This career enhancement will provide the necessary nourishing environment
that will lead to more significant scholarly accomplishments (submission of
proposals, publication of journal papers and international collaborations) by
female faculty in earthquake engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
effort focuses on the enhancement of the career of female faculty in earthquake
engineering research, and as such, it is directly related with a number of the
NEES education, outreach, and training (EOT) objectives including the desire to
build a community and workforce development. An increase in the achievements and
visibility of female faculty in earthquake engineering will greatly influence
the recruitment of the next generation, provide more role models in the
classroom, and encourage more undergraduate students to pursue advanced degrees
and, eventually, a career in academia. In addition, it will create a community
of international female academicians in earthquake engineering research that
will enhance their professional life and foster international collaborations.
This project aims at making the full potential of this underrepresented group
flourish, thus benefiting the world with their contributions in seismic disaster
prevention and mitigation.