* 1141536
* Conference Support for Student Participation at the 2012 International Symposium on Flexible Automation; St. Louis, Missouri; June 18-20, 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Yong Huang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides funding for 50 undergraduate and graduate students studying
in the U.S. to attend and/or present their research papers at the 2012
International Symposium on Flexible Automation (ISFA 2012), June 18-20, 2012 in
St. Louis, MO. The biennial ISFA symposium, which has been sponsored by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and the Institute of Systems,
Control and Information Engineers (ISCIE) in Japan, was initiated in 1986. The
title ?Flexible Automation? was selected as a general term referring to
automation technologies essential to meet the increasing requirements of modern
manufacturing. While many of these requirements, such as flexibility,
intelligence, lead-time reduction, and lean manufacturing, have been identified
over the years, they continue to pose new challenges. New challenges, coming
from networked computer-aided manufacturing, freeform fabrication, enterprise
resource planning, cell production, emanufacturing, and green/energy
manufacturing, have broadened the research agenda and thus the scope of this
symposium. ISFA 2012 will highlight related cutting edge flexible automation
research in technical papers and panel sessions. Fifty students will be selected
for conference support mainly based upon their research statements. Other
criteria, (e.g. underrepresented status and paper authorship) will also be
considered. The conference support opportunity will be announced through the
email lists of ASME Dynamic Systems and Control Division (DSCD) and
Manufacturing Engineering Division (MED) and ISFA 2012 session organizers. ISFA
2012 undergraduate and graduate participants will learn the state-of-the-art of
automation and manufacturing research through keynote presentations, plenary
sessions and regular paper presentation sessions. They will also have
opportunities to interact with industrial researchers, professors, and other
undergraduate and graduate students both here and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixing of newly trained and experienced
researchers at ISFA 2012 creates a unique intellectual environment in which
student participants will attend high-caliber technical presentations and be
exposed to the state-of-the-art flexible automation research, interact with peer
students, and meet with senior leading researchers in the field. These
experiences are expected to shape their future careers in automation science and
engineering. More than 50 undergraduate and graduate students will attend ISFA
2012 to learn about the latest progress and current challenges in flexible
automation research. Interactions with other graduate students will also
establish future domestic and international collaborations. This conference
experience will be invaluable for developing the skills of this highly talented
group of students who, as future automation and manufacturing professionals and
academics, will drive U.S. efforts to regain a competitive edge in flexible
automation technology.