* 1141840
* The Iron Age Geomagnetic Field
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 366,339.00

The interplay between archaeology and the study of the Earth's ancient magnetic
field goes back to the late 19th century when physicists realized that ceramics
and other archeological materials could retain a record of the ancient magnetic
field. Ceramic materials were among the very first targets of modern
experimental methods to determine the ancient field strength and the field known
as "archaeomagnetism" remains vibrant today. Archaeologists are beginning to
take advantage of the powerful constraints on ages of material for which full
magnetic vectors are possible in regions with an accurate reference model and
geomagnetists are taking advantage of the growing archeomagnetic data base which
is producing more high quality data with better age constraints. However, partly
owing to the experimental difficulties in recovering ancient magnetic field
strength from geological and archaeological materials and partly because of a
lack of well-dated materials for study, the archaeomagnetic data base remains
heavily biased towards European data from the last millennia. This grant will
support efforts to expand the global data set over the last four millennia,
including new radiocarbon age control and new paleomagnetic and archaeomagnetic
data from places that are currently under-sampled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research supported here will have implications for numerical simulations of the
geomagnetic field, and provide higher resolution age constraints for
archaeological research. An accurate picture of paleointensity changes on a
global scale (a goal to which this project contributes but does not solve by
itself) is essential for understanding variations in the production of
radiocarbon and the calibration of the radiocarbon time scale. Finally, this
proposal will help support the continued development of online paleomagnetic
teaching materials in the form of the Essentials of Paleomagnetism online
textbook project of the PI (see http://magician.ucsd.edu/Essentials) and
facilitate offering of online classes in paleomagnetism offered to graduate
students the world over.