* 1141170
* TUES: Collaborating Across Boundaries to Engage Undergraduates in Computational Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Kim Pearson, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2017
* USD 186,770.00

Computer science educators recognize that rapid advances in technology and the
emergence of a global economy make it essential to national competitiveness to
expose students from all disciplines to the ideas of computational thinking.
Computational thinking includes a broad range of mental tools and concepts from
computer science that empower specialists in all disciplines to more effectively
adopt, use and develop computational tools to solve problems, design systems and
understand human behavior. To adequately prepare a workforce for the changing
economic and global landscape, the project is developing a model that enables
students with diverse perspectives and disciplinary backgrounds to learn how to
collaborate and integrate concepts from their respective fields to develop
technology-based solutions for complex real-world problems. The model includes
collaboration with a community partner, making it practical for the many
campuses with community engaged learning curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach is deeply rooted in the considerable research base on pedagogy in
computer science, the liberal arts and journalism, as well as how students
learn. The project is demonstrating how to adapt computer science and non-
computer science courses, and is developing a suite of assessment instruments to
measure outcomes for participants. The model is replicable for a wide range of
computing-dependent disciplines and local community partners. Through
multidisciplinary, collaborative and immersion experiences, undergraduate
students better internalize how to take responsibility for engaged citizenship
in a complex and diverse society, while advancing their critical, analytic and
computational thinking.