* 1141792
* Collaborative Research: Strain accumulation and release at the Kuril subduction zone from postseismic observations on the Kuril GPS Array in 2007-2014
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Goran Ekstrom, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2016
* USD 340,000.00

The 1,200-km-long Kuril megathrust in the northwest Pacific Ocean is one of the
most seismically active regions on the Earth. It was the last major subduction
zone totally unexplored by methods of space geodesy. In 2006?2007, a doublet of
great earthquakes in this region partly ruptured one of the most conspicuous
gaps in subduction-zone seismic activity (the 15 November 2006 Mw 8.3 thrust
event and the 13 January 2007 Mw 8.1 extensional event). A large 15 January 2009
Mw 7.4 thrust earthquake in the same region demonstrated the heightened seismic
hazard. The Kuril GPS Array was installed several months before the 2006?2007
earthquakes in collaboration between US and Russian scientists. Observations on
the array documented coseismic and postseismic surface deformation following the
great Kuril earthquakes. The immediate focus of this final phase of the project
is on acquiring irreplaceable, transient postseismic data spanning the time
period 2007?2014. This project will continue collaboration between US
universities and institutions of the Russian Academy of Sciences. The data from
the Kuril GPS Array collected in 2006?2011 allowed us to develop models of
coseismic slip and models of postseismic mechanisms. It was shown that most of
the postseismic motion was caused by the viscoelastic relaxation of shear
stresses in the weak Maxwell viscosity asthenosphere. From experience with other
postseismic studies, longer time series will allow us to develop more robust
models of postseismic deformation and models of interseismic frictional coupling
on the subduction interface. The complete 8-year-long data set is required to
address fundamental problems: How much of the strain built up from subduction of
the Pacific plate beneath the North American plate (the Sea of Okhotsk) has been
released in the 2006 and 2007 Kuril earthquakes coseismically and
postseismically? Is it possible to explain postseismic surface deformation at
the Kuril subduction zone with the linear viscous mantle or a stress-dependent
rheology is required? These problems are especially important after the giant
2011 Mw 9.0 Tohoku earthquake, which made the scientists question the validity
of conventional precursors of large earthquakes: location of seismic gaps and
location of asperities (patches of high frictional locking at a subduction
interface).