* 1141979
* 2K11 and Beyond: The Emerging Fields of Inter/Multidisciplinary Computer Science in Biomedical Education and Research
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Zhongming Zhao, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2012
* USD 13,200.00

Bioinformatics and systems biology are complementary disciplines that hold great
promise for the advancement of research and development in complex biomedical
systems, agricultural, environmental, pharmaceutical and medical sciences as
well as public health, drug design, genomics and other similar areas. Research
and development in these two disciplines impact the science and technology of
fields such as medicine, food production, forensics, agriculture, pharmacology,
engineering and bio-mathematical and biophysical sciences, among others. This
impact is accomplished by advancing fundamental concepts in molecular biology,
genomics and medicine, helping us understand living organisms at multiple
levels, developing innovative implants and prosthetics, creating new medical
image technologies, and improving tools and techniques for the detection,
prevention and treatment of diseases. The International Joint Conference on
Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and Intelligent Computing (IJCBS) 2011 provides
a common platform for the cross fertilization of ideas and will help shape
knowledge and scientific achievements by bridging these two very important and
complementary disciplines into an interactive and attractive forum. Keeping this
objective in mind, IJCBS 2011 is aimed at promoting interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary education and research, especially for underrepresented groups
such as women, minorities, and students with disabilities, as well as faculty,
engineers and scientists in these broad but very important scientific fields.
The IJCBS 2011 will provide travel support to those under-represented groups and
support distinguished workshops and keynote and tutorial lectures delivered by
the world's top scientists in their fields. The IJCBS 2011 will host these
special sessions focusing on interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary education
and research in order to foster collaboration between the bioinformatics and
systems biology domains. The IJCBS 2011 is markedly a large flagship
international conference in these fields, seeking long term collaborations at
the emerging interface.