* 1141828
* EAGER: Towards New Scalable Stochastic Flow Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

The process of clustering or partitioning of nodes within a graph is a
fundamental task with applications in many areas ranging from social network
analysis to chip design and from biological network analysis to the analysis of
intelligence networks. This project seeks to explore and develop a new class of
algorithms for graph clustering based on the principle of stochastic flows. Such
algorithms have been used effectively on small scale biological networks and
have been shown to be robust to noise effects. However, widespread utilization
has been limited due to the lack of scalability of the algorithm and its
inability, in its current form, to accommodate domain-specific constraints on
clustering.

This exploratory project seeks to address these two limitations: First, it seeks
to develop a novel approach for supporting flexible clustering in the context of
stochastic flow clustering, allowing users to control the skew of the resulting
clustering arrangement (e.g., to ensure balanced clusters), and allowing the
nodes of a graph to participate in multiple clusters (so as to allow clusters to
overlap). Second, it seeks to develop solutions that can scale to very large
graphs (e.g. social networks, web graphs) through the innovative applications of
graph sparsification and novel parallel algorithms on high performance systems.
Open source implementation of the resulting a proof-of-concept solution will be
distributed to the broader scientific community.

The scientific impact of this exploratory research agenda include the following:
First, if one is successful in scaling up stochastic flow algorithms to web-
scale datasets while retaining its many advantages, this would open up a viable
robust and improved alternative to the current state-of-the art. Second, one can
also employ stochastic flow clustering algorithms in a manner analogous to
spectral methods on more traditional data sources (non-graphical), enabling more
wide-spread use of flow clustering algorithms.

The broader impacts of the project include increased research-based training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in data analytics.
Additional information about the project can be found at: http://www.cse.ohio-
state.edu/~srini/EAGER11/