* 1141802
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamics and Transport of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current in Drake Passage (cDrake) Analysis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* D. Randolph Watts, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 549,996.00

The Southern Ocean, dominated by the huge Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC),
is responding markedly to climate change, being driven by circumpolar winds that
have increased over the past ~30 years, and warming significantly more that the
global ocean over the past ~50 years. Geographically, the Drake passage provides
a natural ?chokepoint? for measuring the time varying transport of the ACC
component flows. In turn this provides us with a means of taking the ?pulse? of
the Southern Ocean circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cDrake field
experiment is an IPY project to resolve seasonal to interannual variability of
the ACC over a four year period. Using an array of (~40) bottom-moored Current
and Pressure-recording Inverted Echo Sounders (CPIES) which measure bottom
pressure along with the travel time of 12kHZ sound pulses to and from the
surface, a time series of velocity and temperature profiles over a grid array
has been assembled over a 5 year timespan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A full analysis
of the CPIE and ancillary hydrographic data sets (e.g. CTD, ADCP and XBT) will
be undertaken to resolve the ACC transport variability, partition its vertical
structure between barotropic and baroclinic components, and its lateral
structure partitioned between the many jets and fronts that comprise the ACC in
the Drake Passage.