* 1141326
* The Demographic Consequences of Environmental Variability and Individual Heterogeneity in Life-history Tactics of a Long-lived Antarctic Marine Predator
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Donald Siniff, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 867,272.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Erebus Bay population of Weddell seals in
Antarctica?s Ross Sea is the most southerly breeding population of mammal in the
world, closely associated with persistent shore-fast ice, and one that has been
intensively studied since 1968. The resulting long-term database, which includes
data for 20,586 marked individuals, contains detailed population information
that provides an excellent opportunity to study linkages between environmental
conditions and demographic processes in the Antarctic. The population?s location
is of special interest as the Ross Sea is one of the most productive areas of
the Southern Ocean, one of the few pristine marine environments remaining on the
planet, and, in contrast to the Antarctic Peninsula and Arctic, is undergoing a
gradual lengthening of the sea-ice season.&lt;br/&gt;The work to be continued
here capitalizes on (1) long-term data for individual seals and their polar
environment; (2) experience collecting and analyzing data from the extensive
study population; and (3) recent statistical advances in hierarchical modeling
that allow for rigorous treatment of individual heterogeneity (in mark-recapture
and body mass data) and inclusion of diverse covariates hypothesized to explain
variation in fitness components. Covariates to be considered include traits of
individuals and their mothers and environmental conditions throughout life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will continue to (1) provide detailed data on
known-age individuals to other science projects and (2) educate and mentor the
next generation of ecologists through academic and professional training and
research experiences.