* 1141866
* Collaborative Research: East Antarctic Outlet Glacier Dynamics: Investigations of Beardmore Glacier
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Howard Conway, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 479,853.00

Conway/1141866&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to conduct a
suite of experiments to study spatial and temporal variations of basal
conditions beneath Beardmore Glacier, an East Antarctic outlet glacier that
discharges into the Ross Sea Embayment. The intellectual merit of the project is
that it should help verify whether or not global warming will play a much larger
role in the future mass balance of ice sheets than previously considered. Recent
observations of rapid changes in discharge of fast-flowing outlet glaciers and
ice streams suggest that dynamical responses to warming could affect that ice
sheets of Greenland and Antarctica. Assessment of possible consequences of these
responses is hampered by the lack of information about the basal boundary
conditions. The leading hypothesis is that variations in basal conditions exert
strong control on the discharge of outlet glaciers. Airborne and surface-based
radar measurements of Beardmore Glacier will be made to map the ice thickness
and geometry of the sub-glacial trough and active and passive seismic
experiments, together with ground-based radar and GPS measurements will be made
to map spatial and temporal variations of conditions at the ice-bed interface.
The observational data will be used to constrain dynamic models of glacier flow.
The models will be used to address the primary controls on the dynamics of
Antarctic outlet glaciers, the conditions at the bed, their spatial and temporal
variation, and how such variability might affect the sliding and flow of these
glaciers. The work will also explore whether or not these outlet glaciers could
draw down the interior of East Antarctica, and if so, how fast. The study will
take three years including two field seasons to complete and results from the
work will be disseminated through public and professional meetings and journal
publications. All data and metadata will be made available through the NSIDC web
portal. The broader impacts of the work are that it will help elucidate the
fundamental physics of outlet glacier dynamics which is needed to improve
predictions of the response of ice sheets to changing environmental conditions.
The project will also provide support for early career investigators and will
provide training and support for one graduate and two undergraduate students.
All collaborators are currently involved in scientific outreach and graduate
student education and they are committed to fostering diversity.