* 1141363
* RAPID: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The 2011 Historic High Flows in the Atchafalaya Basin:  How will Hydrologic transport Alter Nutrient Retention (C and N)?
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Durelle Scott, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 17,617.00

The diversion of nutrient-rich water through forested wetlands--especially
within the Lower Mississippi River Basin--is one proposed approach to reduce
nutrient export to coastal estuaries. The primary objective of this research is
to quantify nutrient retention and carbon mineralization as river water is
transported through the Atchafalaya Basin Floodway System (ABFS). By
characterizing water transported via channelized sections of the basin in
contrast to the un-channelized spillway including the forested swamps, the
research team expects to find enhanced nutrient removal within water diverted
through the spillway due to increased residence time and enhanced contact with
floodplain sediments. Samples will be collected across the basin over the flood
period (12 weeks). Water isotopes and conservative anions will be measured to
quantify water sources and infer water residence time. Nutrients (phosphorus and
nitrogen species) will be measured to quantify system processing and delineate
spatial differences across the ABFS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although diverting
water is a proposed approach to reduce nutrient export, and associated hypoxic
zone extent, in the Gulf of Mexico, the effect of very large-scale diversion on
the magnitude of nutrient reduction is not well understood. The current flooding
in the Lower Mississippi (highest levels since 1927) has resulted in the Army
Corps of Engineers opening the Morganza Spillway into the ABFS for the first
time since 1973. The opportunity to explore the fate of the nutrient-rich
Mississippi water through the ABFS is unprecedented and will provide valuable
insight into the coupling of hydrology and biogeochemistry of the Atchafalaya
River and Floodplain. This study will provide insights on nutrient reduction
associated with large scale diversion of spring runoff water.