* 1141948
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Penguin Foraging Reveals Phytoplankton Spatial Structure in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* David Ainley, H.T. Harvey & Associates
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 79,286.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ross Sea is believed to contributes a huge
portion (~1/3) of the primary productivity of the Southern Ocean and is home to
a similar large portion of the top predators (e.g. 38% of Adelie, 28% of Emperor
penguins) of the Antarctic sea ice ecosystem. The trophic pathways in this
system are complex in both space and time. One scenario for the Ross Sea
ecosystem is that diatoms are grazed by krill, which are in turn the preferred
food of fish, penguins and other predators. Phaeocystis colonies, on the other
hand lead to grazing by pteropods and other organisms that are a non-favoured
food source for top predators. Remotely sensed chlorophyll, indicating all
phytoplankton, is then suggested to be a relatively poor predictor of penguin
foraging efforts. This is also consistent with notion that algal species
composition is very important to penguin grazing pressure, mediated by krill,
and perhaps resulting in selective depletion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research sets out to use an autonomous glider, equipped with a
range of sensors, and informed by satellite chlorophyll imagery to be combined
with 3-dimenisonal active penguin tracking to their preferred foraging sites.
The effect of localized grazing pressure of krill on the appearance and
disappearance of algal blooms will also be followed. Overall the objective of
the research is to reconcile and explain several years of the study of the
foraging habits and strategies of (top predator) penguins at the Cape Crozier
site (Ross Island), with the dynamics of krill and their supporting algal food
webs. The use of a glider to answer a primarily ecological questions is subject
to moderate to high risk, and is potentially transformative.