* 1141944
* Spatio-temporal changes of earthquake and fault zone properties before and after the Mw7.1 Duzce event
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Yehuda Ben-Zion, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2014
* USD 129,485.00

The studies focus on systematic efforts to detect and quantify evolutionary
changes of earthquake and rock properties that precede and follow large seismic
events. We use multiple techniques to examine evidence for accelerated faulting
process before the Mw7.1 Düzce earthquake on the North Anatolian fault, and to
provide detailed results for postseismic effects following both the Düzce and
the preceding Mw7.4 Izmit earthquakes. The study employs extensive waveform data
set recorded by a tight fault zone array, with several stations located within
the rupture zones of the Ýzmit and Düzce events, which operated from a few days
after the Ýzmit mainshock until ~3 month after the Düzce event. The data set
contains many events recorded in close proximity to the hypocenter of the Düzce
mainshock, over a time interval including aftershocks of the Ýzmit earthquake,
foreshocks and aftershocks of the Düzce mainshock, and the Düzce event itself.
Previous studies based on ~26000 events detected in triggered-mode seismograms
with standard techniques provided high-resolution information on the fault zone
structure and co/postseismic changes of seismic velocities. Uncovering
additional small events buried in the noise of the recorded waveforms can
increase the available data significantly and offer unprecedented opportunities
for tracking spatio-temporal changes of earthquake and fault properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine in detail evolutionary fault zone processes,
the investigators perform research focusing on the following tasks: (1) Use the
recently developed waveform matched filter technique to detect all possible
additional earthquakes during the operation period of the network. (2) Use the
updated catalog with many previously-undetected small events to search for
patterns indicative of accelerated pre-earthquake activity around the hypocenter
of the Düzce mainshock, as well as in the entire region covered by the data. (3)
Identify clusters of repeating events in the complete updated data set, and use
waveforms of the repeating event clusters to study temporal evolution of seismic
velocities and earthquake source properties at various locations across the time
of the Düzce mainshock. The newly-detected additional small events will increase
significantly the resolution of results compared to those of previous studies.
The project is expected to provide the most detailed results to date on temporal
changes of fault processes and rock properties near and around the hypocenter of
a large continental strike-slip earthquake. The study can provide fundamental
in-situ results on the earthquake initiation process, postseismic effects and
other aspects of earthquake and fault physics.