* 1141847
* EAGER: Exploratory Software Development &amp; Experiments of Dynamic DNA Nanosystems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,997.00

There is important need for a synergistic combination of (i) software
development that provides rapid development of the experimental DNA nanosystems
and (ii) experiments of novel DNA nanosystems, which will guide and provide
feedback to the software development efforts. The project will develop software
that will provide an integrated design/specification/simulation/optimization
environment for designing molecular devices that self-assemble as DNA
nanostructures and change state in reaction to their environment, based on a
programmable series of hybridization reactions. The integrated methodology will
include a molecular programming language that allows high-level specification of
states of DNA nanostructures and their state-transitions (involving key
hybridization and strand displacement reactions), without fully specifying
underlying strand sequences or nanostructures, and provide a WYSIWYG (visual)
method for input. A molecular compiler will compile the molecular program into a
detailed specification of component DNA stands and hybridization reactions. A
thermodynamic and kinetic simulator will calculate equilibrium densities of
assembled nanostructures and key kinetic reaction properties; speeding its
computations by novel use of decompositions of the strands into component
subsequence domains and tensor product decompositions of the state space.
Specification (sequence domain-level) and sequence compilation tools will be
integrated with thermodynamic and kinetic simulators, so simulations can be done
at sequence-domain level, rather than base-pair level, resulting in considerable
speedups. A novel experiment design subsystem will give suggested design of
experimental demonstrations for verifying assembly of the intended
nanostructures, and key reaction steps. Support by the EAGER program will allow
a two-year early development phase to test and demonstrate novel concepts and
designs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational Objectives include cross-disciplinary
training of graduate students, carefully supervised mentoring for
undergraduates, and summer internships for high school students and teachers.
There is substantial multidisciplinary impact to nanoscience, biochemistry and
chemistry, which will profit from the introduction of key methodologies derived
from mainstream computer science, such as programming languages and compilers,
and compiler optimization, particularly since these will be highly specialized
and tailored for the specific needs of DNA nanostructures and hybridization
reactions. The integration of a molecular programming language, with a molecular
compiler, and simulator, with feedback to provide optimization will provide
unique enhanced design capabilities for these science disciplines. To maximize
impact and use of this software, there is a planned staged external distribution
of prototype software system that will incorporate feedback from users.