* 1141096
* Critical Thinking with Data Visualization (CTDV)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Naren Ramakrishnan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2017
* USD 199,943.00

Data Analytics (DA) is a field that merges quantitative methods in statistics,
data mining, and computer science to discover and summarize information in data.
In practice, a good application of DA requires comprehensive critical thinking
skills that (1) extend beyond the application of quantitative statistical or
computational methods and (2) include qualitative forms of thought, such as
formalizing potential biases, communicating personal judgment, exploring
multiple solutions, assimilating new information with old, and assessing
implications of discoveries. Unfortunately, current methods in teaching DA focus
primarily on its quantitative aspects; only after students master quantitative
theory and methods do they have an opportunity to think critically about
applications. Students who fail to complete current DA courses neither develop
comprehensive DA skills nor experience how complex quantitative summaries may
advance knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are attempting to
revolutionize current practice in teaching introductory DA to first- and second-
year college students. Specifically, they are developing a new course, "Critical
Thinking with Data Visualization" (CTDV), which synchronizes teaching methods in
DA with critical thinking and makes DA accessible to diverse learners. CTDV
includes four modules, each of which is motivated by a different real-world case
study and focuses on one DA method (e.g., multidimensional scaling). CTDV uses
novel interactive data visualization software (and techniques therein) as a
platform for students to build from what they know and construct their
understanding of (1) how to think critically, (2) the role of data in problem
solving, and (3) some mathematical and computational methods for summarizing
complex datasets. The software is based on methods called Bayesian Visual
Analytics (BaVA), which have been developed by the investigators (see NSF Award
No. 0937071). BaVA enables domain experts--e.g., biologists or homeland security
analysts--to assess complex datasets and incorporate their expert knowledge
within quantitatively rigorous data characterizations, without technical
training in statistics or computer science. For this reason, BaVA fosters
creative, critical thinking and problem solving with data and is ideal for
experiential learning of DA concepts in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team is developing CTDV (including its objectives, curriculum, lesson
plans, case studies, and course materials), designing the interactive data
visualization software (including tests of usability), implementing CTDV (or
modules within it), and assessing the success of CTDV. The assessment includes
both quantitative (e.g., tests) and qualitative measures (e.g., surveys and
interviews) that take place before, during, and after the students experience
CTDV. In addition, the team is disseminating CTDV via a comprehensive Web site,
papers, and conference workshops.