* 1141235
* US-Based Students Support to Attend the ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems 2011 (ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS 2011)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Maria Cruz, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2012
* USD 25,691.00

This travel support enables U.S.-based students to attend the 19th ACM
SIGSPATIAL GIS 2011 Conference, held in Chicago, Illinois, USA, November 1-4,
2011 (http://acmgis2011.cs.umn.edu/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACM SIGSPATIAL
GIS conference has established itself as the world's premier conference to
foster research in the areas of Spatial Data and Analysis and Geographic
Information Systems (GIS). The conference provides a forum for original research
contributions covering all conceptual, design, and implementation aspects of GIS
ranging from applications, user interfaces, and visualization to storage
management and indexing issues. It brings together researchers, developers,
users, and practitioners carrying out research and development in novel systems
based on geospatial data and knowledge, and fostering interdisciplinary
discussions and research in all aspects of GIS. It is the premier annual event
of the ACM Special Interest Group on Spatial Information (ACM SIGSPATIAL). The
conference seeks to continuously advance the state of-the-art in spatial data
management and spatial data analysis and broaden its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial travel support and
conference registration for 20-25 qualified U.S. based graduate and promising
undergraduate student participants. The students will greatly benefit from
attending this conference, as they will be able to partake in the current state-
of-the-art in the area of geospatial systems and applications, present their
work, and potentially make connections for research collaborations and research
mentoring. The total number of ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS participants in the past has
been in excess of 250 participants, with a majority of the participants from the
U.S., followed by Europe and Asia. The conference participation has shown a
steady increase in the past few years due to the growing importance of
geographic information. A strong representation of U.S.-based graduate students
at ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in the
important research areas crucial for U.S. infrastructures and applications that
critically depend on geo-referenced information. Those who receive the award
will be featured in the NSF Student Supported Research special section of the
combined Poster, Demo, and PhD Showcase Session, a major event in the conference
that lasts for over three hours and is attended by all conference participants.