* 1141054
* Collaborative Research: Online Collaboration to Understand Preservice Teachers' Developing MKT
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Amy Brown, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,773.00

Teacher education faculty from four diverse institutions (Utah State, West
Virginia University, Mills College, and St. Petersburg College) are
collaborating with the Math Forum to study the development of Mathematical
Knowledge for Teaching (MKT) in elementary Preservice Teachers (PTs) who
participate in online mathematics mentoring experiences. The study is
investigating the retention and application of this knowledge during the PTs'
student teaching experiences in the field. Faculty, along with their PTs, are
learning to use the Virtual Fieldwork Sequence (VFS), a structured set of online
modules that supports PTs to work with grade level mathematics, identify student
strengths, and provide feedback to "live" students on-line. A key element of the
professional development model and a large part of its uniqueness is that the
faculty are reflecting on and analyzing the data and describing the findings
from their pilot study, including the impact of the VFS on student MKT.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is expected to yield significant findings
concerning the learning of preservice teachers by investigating how MKT might be
further developed. The project adopts an on-the-job approach to the professional
development of the involved faculty, a strategy that prior research has shown to
be significant in promoting change in teaching practices. One of the outcomes is
an on-line professional development module that is collaborative, situated, and
focused on developing preservice teachers' MKT. The students involved are non-
traditional, underrepresented minority, first-generation college students. The
project has an impact on both the teaching approaches of faculty of
undergraduate STEM students and the students' MKT both of which are currently
recognized as areas of STEM education needing improvement.