* 1141918
* RAPID: Social Influence and Social Networking in the Wake of the Tornadoes of April 27, 2011: An Examination of the Social Psychological Processes
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Rosanna Guadagno, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This project investigates how interactions on social media such as Facebook (FB)
impacted the behavior of people affected by the tornado that hit Tuscaloosa, AL
on April, 27, 2011. It will examine how interactions on FB influenced
preparations prior to the disaster (e.g., by influencing people to take cover),
the mobilization of recovery efforts (e.g., by spreading information on recovery
efforts) and the psychological functioning of victims (e.g., by communicating
with friends and family and providing social support). FB posts will be
qualitatively analyzed to determine (a) the spread of information
(contagiousness); (b) normative expectations; and (c) emotional functioning and
support provided at each time point. A subsequent survey will examine how FB
usage (past and present) impacts on psychological functioning three and six
months after the storm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project
will provide new scientific knowledge about how social influence processes
affect perceived social support and psychological well being after disasters.
Specifically, the project will extend the prior literature on social networks by
(a) examining the impact of social influence processes as well as the spread of
images on coping in online social networks such as FB; (b) focusing on the
warning phase of an impending disaster in addition to the aftermath; (c) examine
both the victims of the disaster as well as members of their social networks and
how appeals for social and monetary support spread; and (d) assessing individual
coping at multiple time points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The
results will provide new insights into how to optimize communication after
disaster, leading to better preparation, better mobilization of recovery
efforts, and better psychological coping. Results will be disseminated widely to
disaster planners, researchers and practitioners through conference
presentations, journal publications, data sharing, and via a dedicated website
disseminating the methodology and results of the project. In addition, the
project will help train new investigators in the area of crisis communication,
will fuel student theses and dissertations, and will provide mentorship
opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups.