* 1141983
* Observations of a newly discovered fault: Tomography, locations and source mechanisms for aftershocks of the M7.1 Darfield, New Zealand earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Ellen Syracuse, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2014
* USD 117,256.00

The Mw7.1 September 4, 2010 Darfield earthquake and the subsequent Mw6.3
February 22, 2011 Christchurch earthquake were the most damaging earthquakes in
New Zealand since the 1931 Hawke?s Bay earthquake. The latter event caused
enormous damage throughout Christchurch, New Zealand?s second largest city.
These earthquakes occurred on previously unmapped faults in the eastern South
Island. The behavior of this earthquake sequence has led to many questions about
the fundamental characteristics of the fault on which they occurred and the
local geology and tectonics. Five Victoria University of Wellington seismometers
and nine PASSCAL seismometers were installed in the region surrounding the
surface rupture of the Darfield earthquake within two weeks of its occurrence
and were removed in mid January 2011. Using data recorded at these temporary
stations and additional permanent regional stations, the researchers will study
the aftershocks of the Darfield earthquake in order to investigate the
seismically active fault structure, the temporal evolution of aftershocks and
fault activity, and the regional seismic structure. A relocated aftershock
catalog will be developed based on the GeoNet catalog for New Zealand. The
investigators will examine how seismicity evolved throughout the fault system,
with a focus on faults that had been identified beneath Christchurch prior to
the February 2011 earthquake. The algorithm tomoDD will also be used to
simultaneously solve for P- and S-wave velocities in the region surrounding the
fault rupture. The benefit of this will be two-fold: the improved 3D velocity
model will result in improved aftershock locations and it will constrain the
local subsurface structure. For example, a velocity contrast across the fault
could be used to constrain its age, which is currently a topic of controversy.
Focal mechanisms will be calculated for aftershocks.In conjunction with
aftershock locations, focal mechanisms will allow the researchers to constrain
the directions of motion along the various fault segments that have been active
in the aftershock sequence. By searching for repeating earthquakes and non-
volcanic tremor, they will be able to explore the variety of ways in which the
faults associated with the Darfield earthquake move. Repeating earthquakes may
be caused by a section of fault that is experiencing aseismic creep, either
before or after a large earthquake. By studying the first four months of the
aftershock sequence of the 2010 Darfield earthquake, they will help establish
the fault structure of previously unknown fault segments, understand the
evolution of activity along them, and understand the factors that contributed to
the more devastating 2011 Christchurch earthquake.