* 1141839
* Collaborative Research:  A 1500m Ice Core from South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 445,555.00

1142517/Saltzman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support for a
project to drill and recover a new ice core from South Pole, Antarctica. The
South Pole ice core will be drilled to a depth of 1500 m, providing an
environmental record spanning approximately 40 kyrs. This core will be recovered
using a new intermediate drill, which is under development by the U.S. Ice
Drilling Design and Operations (IDDO) group in collaboration with Danish
scientists. This proposal seeks support to provide: 1) scientific management and
oversight for the South Pole ice core project, 2) personnel for ice core
drilling and core processing, 3) data management, and 3) scientific coordination
and communication via scientific workshops. The intellectual merit of the work
is that the analysis of stable isotopes, atmospheric gases, and aerosol-borne
chemicals in polar ice has provided unique information about the magnitude and
timing of changes in climate and climate forcing through time. The international
ice core research community has articulated the goal of developing spatial
arrays of ice cores across Antarctica and Greenland, allowing the reconstruction
of regional patterns of climate variability in order to provide greater insight
into the mechanisms driving climate change. The broader impacts of the project
include obtaining the South Pole ice core will support a wide range of ice core
science projects, which will contribute to the societal need for a basic
understanding of climate and the capability to predict climate and ice sheet
stability on long time scales. Second, the project will help train the next
generation of ice core scientists by providing the opportunity for hands-on
field and core processing experience for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. A postdoctoral researcher at the University of Washington will be
directly supported by this project, and many other young scientists will
interact with the project through individual science proposals. Third, the
project will result in the development of a new intermediate drill which will
become an important resource to US ice core science community. This drill will
have a light logistical footprint which will enable a wide range of ice core
projects to be carried out that are not currently feasible. Finally, although
this project does not request funds for outreach activities, the project will
run workshops that will encourage and enable proposals for coordinated outreach
activities involving the South Pole ice core science team.