* 1141087
* Integrating High Speed Computer Numerical Control Machining Simulator, Precision Metrology &amp; Machine Tool Calibration &amp; Simulation Systems into Engineering Technology Curri
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Radian Belu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 12/31/2014
* USD 199,992.00

The project is to design and implement: 1) CNC machine control simulator systems
to enhance the cognitive learning aspects of online laboratories; and 2)
simulator interfaces for metrology and quality control systems to enhance the
cognitive learning aspects of online labs. Project activities also include
improving and re-developing seven current industrial training modules covering
High Speed CNC machining, prototyping, machine tool calibration, precision
metrology, offline and online quality control, remote monitoring and supervision
of machining and robotic assembly processes, and quality assurance and computer
aided design/machining (CAD/CAM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
advance knowledge and understanding of student learning in laboratory experience
that combines actual and virtual components and is delivered both in person/on
location and through the Internet. The model has the potential to transform the
training process for the workforce in various sectors, regardless of their
location, to meet the needs of the relevant industries. Existing knowledge about
student learning serves as a base upon which the project activity is built,
along with experiences in a pilot version of one of the proposed labs in which
students reported a high level of verisimilitude in the lab exercises. The
commitment to sustain the project after the end of NSF funding comes from both
the institution and industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training model
has the potential to significantly lower training costs in precision-
manufacturing. The project will increase the number of students and graduates in
mechanical and industrial technology programs to meet the industry's demand for
a skilled workforce.