* 1141832
* Collaborative Research: Geodetic Constraints on Moment Deficit and Physics-based Earthquake Cycle Models in the Source Region of the M 9 Tohoku, Japan Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Kaj Johnson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 93,403.00

The Mw 9 March 11, 2011 Tohoku earthquake, resulting in 25,000 fatalities, was
the largest&lt;br/&gt;earthquake to strike Japan in modern times. The failure of
long-term forecasts to anticipate an&lt;br/&gt;event of this magnitude is
leading to a reevaluation of our scienti c understanding of
subduction&lt;br/&gt;zone fault dynamics. At the same time, the enormous
Japanese investment in seismic and&lt;br/&gt;geodetic monitoring provides an
unprecedented opportunity to study processes leading to
giant&lt;br/&gt;earthquakes. The investigators will focus here on two aspects of
the quake that raise central issues for our ability&lt;br/&gt;to forecast future
hazards globally: 1) the constraints that geodetic strain accumulation
place&lt;br/&gt;on the seismic moment budget, and 2) how the distribution of
mechanical properties on the&lt;br/&gt;plate interface control seismic versus
aseismic slip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forecasts of seismic hazard rely primarily
on the historical record, paleoseismology, and&lt;br/&gt;geodetic strain
accumulation. While a strict time-predictable model has proven
inconsistent&lt;br/&gt;with geodetic data in some areas, the rate of strain
accumulation must strongly in&lt;br/&gt;uence the recurrence rate and/or size of
large earthquakes. Previous analyses of the extensive Japanese&lt;br/&gt;GPS
data set regularize the underdetermined inverse problem; the inferred plate
coupling is&lt;br/&gt;thus conditional on the choice of regularizing functional.
In addition, most assumed no coupling at the trench, an area that effectively
lies in the model null-space. The researchers propose rather to estimate
rigorous bounds on the moment deficit rate, independent of any regularizing
functional. They also propose to systematically explore the effects of time-
dependent viscoelastic effects on estimates of slip
deficit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tohoku earthquake also raises profound
questions about the frictional properties of&lt;br/&gt;the subducting plate
interface. Mw &gt; 7 events along the Japan-Kurile trench have
repeated&lt;br/&gt;in nearly the same locations. Substantial afterslip following
these events suggested that the&lt;br/&gt;fault surrounding these seismic
`asperities' have different frictional properties, e.g.,
velocity&lt;br/&gt;weakening `asperities' surrounded by velocity strengthening
regions. The fact that the March&lt;br/&gt;11 earthquake seems to have ruptured
through both areas raises important questions. Is the&lt;br/&gt;asperity
paradigm fundamentally flawed? Or did the M 9 activate other weakening
mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;(thermal pressurization?) that allowed it to rupture
through velocity strengthening regions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To distinguish
between competing hypotheses the researchers will use a combination of GPS data
based&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis testing and physics based fault modeling. They will
test whether or not post-seismic&lt;br/&gt;GPS data can be fit with afterslip
only in regions that have not experienced seismic slip in&lt;br/&gt;the last
several decades. They will test alternative physical models that could
account&lt;br/&gt;for the observed behavior, by extending our numerical codes
that couple rate-state friction,&lt;br/&gt;thermal pressurization, and dilatant
strengthening to three dimensions. This will allow them to&lt;br/&gt;test for
example whether dilatancy could stabilize slip in otherwise velocity weakening
regions,&lt;br/&gt;or thermal pressurization could allow ruptures to extend into
velocity strengthening areas.