* 1141690
* Collaborative Research: Novel interdisciplinary flume experiments to investigate the role of the hyporheic zone in greenhouse gas generation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Daniele Tonina, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 247,624.00

Collaborative Research: Novel interdisciplinary flume experiments to investigate
the role of the hyporheic zone in greenhouse gas generation&lt;br/&gt;Daniele
Tonina, University of Idaho &lt;br/&gt;Kevin Feris and Shawn Benner, Boise State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hyporheic zone is the band of saturated
sediment surrounding the stream, where stream waters mix with pore-water. This
zone plays an important role in the nitrogen cycle, which has been radically
altered by anthropogenic food and energy production. Furthermore, this zone may
be a significant source of the potent greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O),
potentially emitting for up to 0.7 Tg y-1, equivalent to 10% of global
anthropogenic N2O emissions. While the degree of hyporheic exchange is strongly
influenced by stream flow and streambed topography, the relationship between
those physical processes and the resulting microbially-mediated geochemical
reactions leading to N2O generation and release remains poorly understood. The
goal of this interdisciplinary research is to understand, quantify, and
parameterize the influence of streambed hydraulics and morphology on the
emission of N2O from the hyporheic zone. The generation of N2O via
denitrification primarily occurs within the streambed sediments where the
catalyzing microbial community is present. Therefore, the mass transport of
oxygen, nitrates, ammonium and N2O by hyporheic flow strongly influences
reaction rates, residence times, and subsequent N2O production. By extension,
stream flow and channel morphology presumably control, and may be effective
predictors of, N2O generation rates. However, a number of important in-situ
processes remain poorly understood. For example, the amount of reactive nitrogen
converted to N2O versus N2 is quite small (0-6%) but highly uncertain, due in
part to an incomplete understanding of the genetic composition of the dominant
microbial community and the hydrologic factors affecting their distribution and
activity. Additionally, controls on the contribution of in-situ reactive
nitrogen generation vs. that delivered by the stream are not easily determined
in natural systems. Indeed, the inherent spatiotemporal complexity of natural
systems limits the strength of traditional observational approaches and
precludes explicit expression of these interactions in predictive mathematical
models. To overcome limitations of traditional observational field approaches,
this research will use a series of manipulative large-scale flume experiments.
Large-scale flume experiments will provide unprecedented control while
maintaining intrinsically important variables such as a realistic microbial
community, water composition, stream flow, and channel structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop new understanding of the
fundamental interaction among surface-subsurface water exchange, nitrogen
transformation and N2O emissions from the hyporheic zone and ultimately from
streams. It will explain the role of the hyporheic zone as a biochemical
transformation zone by coupling hyporheic hydraulics to biochemical reactions,
through numerical-analytical models and flume experiments. Results from this
work will act as building blocks for modeling N2O emissions from streams at the
watershed scale. Thus, this first stage of controlled manipulative
experimentation is essential in advancing our knowledge of water resources at
the large scale.