* 1141411
* The Effects of Soluble Impurities on the Flow and Fabric of Polycrystalline Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2016
* USD 336,456.00

Baker/1141411

This award supports a project to undertake a systematic examination of the
effects of soluble impurities, particularly sulfuric acid, on the creep of
polycrystalline ice as function of temperature, strain rate and impurity
concentration. The working hypothesis is that soluble impurities will increase
the flow rate of polycrystalline ice compared to high-purity ice, that this
effect will be temperature dependent and that the impurities by affecting the
re-crystallization and grain growth will change the fabric of the ice. Both
H2SO4-doped and high-purity poly-crystalline ice will be produced by freezing
sheets of ice, breaking them up, sieving the ice particles and then sintering
them in a mold into fine-grained cylindrical specimens with at least ten grains
across their diameter. The resulting microstructures (dislocation structure,
grain size and shape, grain boundary character and micro-structural location of
the acid) will be characterized using a variety of techniques including: optical
microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, including secondary electron imaging,
electron backscattered patterns, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, electron
channeling contrast imaging, and X-ray topography. The creep of both the
H2SO4-doped and the high-purity polycrystalline ice will be undertaken at a
range of temperatures and stresses. The ice?s response to the creep deformation
(grain boundary sliding, dislocation motion, re-crystallization, grain boundary
migration, impurity redistribution) will be studied using a combination of
methods. The creep behavior will be modeled and related to the microstructure.
Of particular interest is how impurities affect the activation energy for creep.
The intellectual merit of the work is that it will lead to a better
understanding of glacier ice and will enable glaciologists to model the
influence of impurities on the flow and fabric development in polycrystalline
ice. The broader impacts of the project include the knowledge that will be
gained of the effects of impurities on the flow of ice which will allow
paleoclimatologists to better interpret ice core data and will allow scientists
developing predictive models to better address the flow of ice sheets under
various climate change scenarios. The project will also lead to the education
and training of a Ph.D. student, several undergraduates and some high school
students. Results from the research will be published in refereed journals.
Several undergraduates, typically two per year, will also perform the work.
Dartmouth aggressively courts minority students at all degree levels, and we
will seek women or minority group undergraduates for this project. The
undergraduates will be supported by Dartmouth?s nationally-honored Women In
Science Project or by REU funding. The undergraduates? research will integrate
closely with the Ph.D. student?s studies. Hanover High School students will also
be involved in the project and develop an educational kit to introduce students
to the properties of ice. Results from the research will be published in
refereed journals and presented at conferences.