* 1141995
* EAGER:  Using Network Dynamic fMRI for Pre-Surgical Localization of Epileptogenic Foci
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Lilianne Mujica-Parodi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Mujica-Parodi, L., Millett, D. E. and Shaw, S.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1141995&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;Intractable
epilepsy is often treated surgically through the ablation of presumed
epileptogenic foci, yet there exists a significant portion of patients for whom
foci cannot currently be identified with precision through standard diagnostic
techniques (EEG, MRI, PET). Information-theoretic methods adapted from dynamical
systems and statistical physics have been applied to EEG to identify seizures,
and most recently have been applied to the identification of seizure foci, with
some success. However, clinical adoption of these techniques has failed due to
EEG's poor spatial resolution. While fMRI has excellent spatial resolution, its
hemodynamic time-series are significantly too short and sparse to permit
application of most standard information theoretic methods, such as time-delay
embedding, fractal dimension, and entropy. The research proposed in this
application is designed to establish the clinical utility of computational
techniques that combine the sensitivity to circuit dysregulation found in EEG
with the spatial resolution found in fMRI, thereby defining a fundamentally new
direction for future clinical research. In this application, we will develop
techniques for the application of power spectrum scale invariance to fMRI time-
series, a method we have previously shown to have utility with respect to the
identification and anatomical localization of dysregulation within the
paralimbic circuit. These techniques will be tested in the identification of
epileptogenic foci, validated by comparison with standard neuropsychological
assessment, intracranial monitoring, and/or surgical
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Approximately three
million Americans suffer from epilepsy; it is estimated that fully two thirds of
these individuals are unsuccessfully treated by the current state of the art.
Successfully managing the disease early is critical, since repeated seizures can
cause irreversible brain damage and death. Because the current state of the art
is not capable of clearly identifying epileptogenic foci with the high degree of
spatial resolution required for successful surgical intervention; if successful,
our proposed direction would revolutionize treatment of intractable epilepsy.
This proposal is unique in that it is organically interdisciplinary, integrating
computational techniques adapted from dynamical systems and statistical physics
with direct and immediate clinical applications, and thus fits within the scope
of the National Science Foundation's GARDE program and EAGER funding mechanism
by addressing the treatment of disability through the novel and transformative
development of advanced engineering tools.