* 1141978
* Multidimensional "omics" characterization of microbial metabolism and dissolved organic matter in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Christine Foreman, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,040.00

Uncovering the dynamics of dissolved organic matter (DOM) is central to an
understanding of the global carbon cycle, as organic material from lakes,
streams, oceans and soils passes through this pool. DOM acts as a key energy
source for microbes in many ecosystems and therefore can affect regional
nutrient cycling patterns. For example, preliminary results suggest that
organisms isolated from a supraglacial stream on Cotton Glacier, Antarctica, may
be important in DOM cycling in this relatively simple, low temperature system.
However, little is known about the functional attributes of the microbes that
interact with DOM in the environment. This project will use state-of-the-art
genomics, proteomics and metabolomics approaches to understand the mechanisms by
which two microbial isolates, CG3 and CG9_1, affect DOM cycling. Liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry will also be used to better characterize the
microbially-derived DOM from this ecosystem. This project will support the
research and training of one undergraduate and two graduate students. Results
will be widely disseminated through publications as well as through
presentations at national and international meetings. In addition, raw data will
be made available through open-access databases. Understanding the relationship
between cold-adapted microbial metabolisms and DOM pools is important as more
than 90% of the Earth?s oceans are below 5 degrees Celsius.