* 1141929
* Geophysics of Iron in the Earth's Core
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Wendy Mao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2014
* USD 287,101.00

Analyzing the seismic waves that pass through our planet have provide
observations of its internal structure including, the Earth's core which is
composed of a liquid iron-rich outer region which lies above the solid, iron-
rich inner core. In order to understand the constituents that make up this most
remote region in our planet, we propose to conduct the challenging laboratory
experiments at the high pressures and temperatures that exist in the Earth?s
deep interior, and to measure of the properties of iron-rich materials which can
be dramatically altered under the extreme conditions. The primary goal of the
present research is thus to understand the Earth's core which plays a central
role in the evolution, magnetism, dynamic processes, and thermal evolution of
our planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon our progress resulting from our
prior support, this project takes a two-pronged approach: using static high-
pressure techniques in a diamond anvil cell for accurate determination of
elastic properties and dynamic compression created by powerful lasers for
ultrahigh pressure-temperature sound velocity measurements. For the static high-
pressure experiments, we propose to determine the equation of state, aggregate
compressional and shear wave velocities, velocity anisotropy and lattice
preferred orientation, and elastic tensor of iron using a suite of complementary
synchrotron x-ray techniques. For the dynamic experiments, we will collaborate
with the Shock Physics Group at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and use
the Janus laser facility to determine the compressional and especially the shear
wave velocities (using a transverse displacement interferometer set-up) for iron
and iron alloys. The combination of the static and dynamic results will provide
important information for helping to understand and interpret the complex
seismic signatures in the Earth's core. The anticipated, high pressure-
temperature elasticity data for iron will be valuable to a wide variety of
researchers involved in deep Earth studies (e.g. theoretical mineral physicists
for improving their calculations, seismologists for interpretation of their
observations, and geodynamicists for constraining their models). In addition,
the technical advances will be useful to other experimentalists in the
geosciences as well as fundamental and applied sciences.