* 1141339
* Introducing Research Experiences at Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Chitra Solomonson, Green River Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2016
* USD 269,890.00

Community colleges are increasingly the entry point for future STEM
professionals. Almost half of all college students in Washington State attend
community or technical colleges. While more students each year transfer from
community colleges to four-year university STEM programs, most community
colleges are unable to give students a "hands-on" undergraduate research
experience. This puts students at a disadvantage when they transfer to
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Green River Community College (GRCC) and the
University of Washington (UW) have responded by integrating "Inquiry Lab
Modules" (ILMs) into upper-level community college science courses. ILMs focus
on cutting-edge interdisciplinary fields such as organic photovoltaics and
organic electronics. Students work in research teams to propose research
questions, conduct experiments, analyze their results, and share their findings
with peers. GRCC faculty members are implementing two ILMs in physics and plan
to subsequently develop others in fields such as
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GRCC faculty members work with UW faculty and
graduate students to ensure that ILMs provide authentic, transferable
experiences that increase student retention in STEM fields - especially within
underrepresented groups. Through visits to advanced research labs at the UW,
students can build on research experiences that began in ILMs at GRCC. This will
improve their success in transferring to STEM programs at UW or other
universities. Students also acquire vital knowledge and skills for future STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ILMs are relatively low-cost and are designed for
easy adaptation to a variety of scientific fields. The Washington State Center
of Excellence for Careers in Education is facilitating a dissemination workshop
for non-GRCC community college faculty members to implement ILMs on their own
campuses. ILM documentation is being made freely available on professional
websites frequented by two-year college physics faculty and is being presented
at national meetings of the American Association of Physics Teachers.