* 1141230
* Transforming STEM Education at Small Rural Colleges: Incorporation of Remote Access NMR to Create an Authentic Laboratory Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* William Shay, North Dakota State College of Science
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2016
* USD 191,824.00

This project is introducing an NMR spectrometer to a remote access
instrumentation network serving five small, rural colleges in the northern
plains. Remote access collaboration experiments and mini-projects are being
developed for student teams who will not physically meet each other. Students
enrolled in introductory, general and organic chemistry, regardless of their
location, directly operate the NMR to analyze their own samples. An online
teaching and learning community for the instructors involved in the project is
being established to promote additional understanding of strategies to enhance
student learning using remote access instrumentation networks. The intellectual
merit includes development of new curricular materials and pedagogies to
transform how small, remote colleges approach educating students, by providing
authentic hands-on learning experiences, instead of relying on simulations and
published materials. The broader impacts of the proposal include improved
infrastructure for teaching and research at all five campuses through
acquisition of the NMR. Multi-layered evaluation is being used to measure the
impact on students' (a) content knowledge, laboratory skills and engagement, (b)
ability to transfer and integrate knowledge between the laboratory and lecture
courses, and (c) professional skills, such as critical thinking, communication,
collaboration and professional behaviors. Dissemination of the project's
benefits and challenges provides a model for other small colleges to provide
hands-on remote access to modern instrumentation.