* 1141234
* Center for Performative Design and Engineering Technology: Pioneering Performative Processes in Design and Engineering Technology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Iem Heng, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 05/31/2015
* USD 199,820.00

The School of Technology and Design at New York City College of Technology
proposes to create a new Center for Performative Design and Engineering
Technology that will pioneer performative design education. The project takes as
its inspiration the broad focus on laboratory-based learning that brings
technological education to a higher level of integration and broader faculty
engagement across an entire division. The Center will become the focus of
interdisciplinary project-based learning for faculty and students from its nine
constituent departments where they will conduct research projects using state-
of-the-art technologies in cross-cutting applications that mirror industry
practice. The project will produce a laboratory design to support
interdisciplinary research by configuring equipment and instrumentation for
optimal collaborative use. A faculty team will create a web-based tutorial
system for asynchronous learning to accompany interdisciplinary applications of
cutting-edge technology. They will also design a new interdisciplinary capstone
course and four cross-disciplinary projects for baccalaureate-level students.

This project will provide a model for other institutions with similar programs
to emulate. By bringing project-based interdisciplinary team collaborations to
the fore, the project will contribute to an on-going paradigm shift in the way
engineering design is taught. The project will also broaden participation since
New York City College of Technology serves a high percentage of underrepresented
minority students and is one of the nation's top producers of underrepresented
minority associate degree graduates in STEM fields.