* 1141973
* Enhanced Spatial Resolution Surface Melting over the Antarctic  Peninsula (1958 - to date) from a Regional Climate Model Validated through Remote Sensing Observations
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Marco Tedesco, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 01/31/2016
* USD 257,101.00

1141973/Tedesco

This award supports a project to generate first-time validated enhanced spatial
resolution (5-10 km) maps of surface melting over the Antarctic Peninsula for
the period 1958 - to date from the outputs of a regional climate model and
different downscaling techniques. These maps will be assessed and validated
through new high spatial resolution (2.25 km) surface melting maps obtained from
the QuikSCAT satellite for the period 1999 - 2009. The intellectual merit of
this work is that it would be the first time that the outputs of a regional
climate model would be used to study surface melting over Antarctica at such
high spatial resolution and the first time that such results are validated by
means of an observational tool that has such a large spatial coverage and high
spatial resolution. The results generated in this study would also provide a
first-time opportunity to study the melt distribution over the Peninsula and its
correlation with climate drivers, such as the Southern Annual Mode (SAM) and the
El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) at these unprecedented spatial scales. The
enhanced resolution melting maps will also offer a unique opportunity to study
melting trends and patterns over specific regions of the Peninsula, such as the
Wilkins and the Larsen A and B ice shelves and evaluate whether the extreme
melting observed during the recent collapses was unprecedented over the + 50
years. The broader impacts of the project are that it will integrate research
and education by fully supporting one female undergrad student, a PhD student
and partially supporting a PostDoc. The work will be done at a minority-serving
institution and the PhD student who worked on the development of the high-
resolution melting data set from QuikSCAT will become the PostDoc who will work
on this project. Teaching and learning will be supported by incorporating
research results into graduate and undergrad level courses and will be
disseminated over the web and through appropriate channels. Results from this
project will also benefit the society at large as they will improve our
understanding of the links between atmospheric patterns and surface melting and
they will contribute to improving estimates of sea level rise from the
Antarctica continent.