* 1141993
* Collaborative Research: Microbial Community Assembly in Coastal Waters of the Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Jeremy Rich, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 02/29/2016
* USD 304,459.00

The Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) has experienced unprecedented warming and
shifts in sea ice cover over the past fifty years. How these changes impact
marine microbial communities, and subsequently how these shifts in the biota may
affect the carbon cycle in surface waters is unknown. This work will examine how
these ecosystem-level changes affect microbial community structure and function.
This research will use modern metagenomic and transcriptomic approaches to test
the hypothesis that the introduction of organic matter from spring phytoplankton
blooms drives turnover in microbial communities. This research will characterize
patterns in bacterial and archaeal succession during the transition from the
austral winter at two long-term monitoring sites: Palmer Station in the north
and Rothera Station in the south. This project will also include microcosm
incubations to directly assess the effects of additions of organic carbon and
melted sea ice on microbial community structure and function. The results of
this work will provide a broader understanding of the roles of both rare and
abundant microorganisms in carbon cycling within the WAP region, and how these
communities may shift in structure and function in response to climate change.
Results will be widely disseminated through publications as well as through
presentations at national and international meetings. The research will provide
training opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students and will
enhance international collaborations with the British Antarctic Survey.