* 1141435
* Determination of regional fluid flow and gas flux rates for a continental plateau using cosmogenic and radiogenic noble gas isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Tullis Onstott, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 24,820.00

Determination of regional fluid flow and gas flux rates for a continental
plateau using cosmogenic and radiogenic noble gas isotopes&lt;br/&gt;Thomas
Kieft, Tullis Onstott&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology,
Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Until recently, the only available
approach for quantifying regional-scale subsurface fluid flow was by dating
ancient groundwater using cosmogenic chlorine-36 or radiogenic noble gas
analyses. However, cosmogenic chlorine-36 is difficult to quantify in saline
groundwater, and radiogenic noble gas dating relies on too many poorly
constrained assumptions. A new cosmogenic isotope method based on krypton-81 is
more accurate due to well constrained input rates and is made possible by
developments in laser-based atom trap trace analysis. This project will compare
cosmogenic krypton-81 dating to radiogenic noble gas isotope data in deep
fracture water in the Witwatersrand Basin of South Africa, for which
considerable background data already exist as part of ongoing geomicrobiology
investigations, and in the nearby Bushveld Igneous Complex. The investigators
will collect gases from deep fracture waters sampled in deep South African mines
using a novel degassing system, while preventing air contamination. Gas samples
will then be purified and sent to Argonne National Laboratories for krypton-81
analysis. Other tracers, including radiogenic noble gases, will be quantified by
traditional mass spectrometric methods. The subsurface residence times derived
from groundwater dating will enable: 1) a better understanding of the physical
and geochemical processes associated with meteoric water flow through fractured
rock containing saline fluids, 2) a better calibration of the flux of radiogenic
noble gases, abiogenic hydrocarbons and hydrogen from the continental crust, 3)
the temporal delineation of a potential paleoclimate record stored in the oxygen
and hydrogen isotopes of the paleometeoric water, 4) a clearer understanding of
regional scale fluid flow for this elevated continental plateau for which the
uplift rates and cooling have been determined in published reports, 5) better
constraints on the rates of cycling of organic and inorganic carbon by the deep
continental biosphere, and 6) better constraints on the subsurface residence
times of microbial communities, with biogeographical and evolutionary
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is the first time that krypton-81
analyses will be applied to fractured rock fluid systems that are a
characteristic of deep continental crust. The combination of radiogenic and
cosmogenic noble gas analyses will improve our estimates of the rates of fluid
flow, gas diffusion, biogeochemical cycling of elements and microbial evolution
in these systems. This study will also provide better constraints on the water
budgets and fluxes in the old mine infrastructure of the Witwatersrand Basin,
which in turn will provide the scientific basis for modeling the flooding of
these deep mines, which is leading to the development of acid mine conditions
today and which will become an increasing problem in the future for South
Africa.