* 1142806
* SBIR Phase I:  Scale-up Flexible Radio Frequency Electronics via Roll-to-Roll Nanomembrane Printing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Hongjun Yang, Semerane, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
cost-effective high-performance flexible radio frequency (RF) electronics based
on a crystalline nanomembrane roll-to-roll printing process. Such flexible
electronic systems can concurrently demonstrate high speed (>5 GHz), high
reliability and high conformability/flexibility, with much simplified, high-
yield, and low-cost material integration and assembly processes. Continuous
roll-to-roll printing processes, which are commonly used for polymer and
amorphous silicon based flexible electronics manufacturing, will be developed
for crystalline semiconductors, which are typically batch processed on rigid
substrates for high-performance miniaturized electronics.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to offer
cost-effective, high-speed flexible/conformal electronics and integrated
circuits at RF frequency, which are highly desirable for a wide range of market
applications, including phased array antennas, conformal
communication/surveillance systems, wearable electronics, high-performance
flexible sensors, and high resolution/low power consumption flexible
imaging/display systems. This technology is expected to bridge the gap between
high-performance rigid electronics and low-cost flexible electronics, offering a
unique product for high-speed flexible RF electronics. The roll-to-roll printing
process will also enable scale-up production and manufacturing of crystalline
semiconductor nanomembranes for cost-effective flexible RF electronics and
photonics.