* 1142020
* FAULT-ZONE STUDIES OF THE M9 TOHOKU-OKI, JAPAN EARTHQUAKE SEQUENCE
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Donald Helmberger, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2014
* USD 181,062.00

One of the grand challenges for the seismology community involves slippage along
plate boundaries. Energy released from many years of locking along subduction
zones is made particularly difficult to understand since they occur beneath the
deepest portions of the oceans. But they are very important because large
subduction zone earthquakes pose one of the greatest natural hazards to mankind,
either by strong shaking, flooding (tsunami), or a combination of both, i.e.,
the recent Tohoku-Oki Earthquake. Rupture properties of these rare events are
poorly understood, especially Tsunamigenic Earthquakes (TE) with little pre-
tsunami shaking such as the 1896 Sanriku earthquake. The well recorded 2011
Tohoku-Oki earthquake sheds some new light on these issues where a generic
interplate event at depth appears to have triggered a rare TE event.
&lt;br/&gt;Recent reports indicate that the strong shaking came from rupture at
depth &gt;30km with relatively small magnitude (Mw~8.5) with 3D amplification
occurring primarily at relatively short-periods (2-10 sec) and higher, whereas,
the flooding was caused by the large displacement (Mw~9) close to the trench
(&gt;50m) and was dominated by relatively long-period (&gt; 20 sec) radiation.
The mixture of these rupture styles presents significant challenges in the
analysis and modeling of this earthquake and requires data sets covering a broad
range of periods. Fortunately, the data coverage on the Japanese Islands is
remarkable providing the best set of observations ever recorded for both the
main event and the many aftershocks. The investigators will use high-resolution
waveform modeling to investigate the variation in fault zone structure in an
attempt to understand the great variation in rupture properties both along
strike and as a function of depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is a program of
technique development along with broadband inversions of the Tohoku-Oki
earthquake sequence. The basic aim is to address the locations and source
parameters of these events embedded in a 3D structure, exploiting our semi-
automated Cut-and-Paste (CAP) method for regional data (0 to 400 km) and CAPt at
teleseismic distances. Joint inversions will be used to establish the most
transparent paths to arrays for extending the broadband inversions of the main
event and large foreshocks and aftershocks.