* 1142489
* SBIR Phase I:  Selenium Biopolymer Spacers to Prevent Biofouling of Reverse Osmosis Modules
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Robert Hanes, Selenium, Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,537.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
incorporate antimicrobial properties into the materials of a reverse osmosis
(RO) membrane module, providing constant protection from bacterial attachment.
Bacterial growth on the surface of RO membranes is a significant problem for the
membrane industry, due to both increased energy consumption due to back pressure
and cleaning costs. Also, current methods used to remove bacterial growth from
membranes lead to additional problems, such as chemical oxidation and damage to
the membrane material while minimally impacting bio-film formation. We propose
to design and manufacture an organo-selenium bio-composite spacer, which will
constantly inhibit bacterial attachment to the RO membrane. This is possible
because organo-selenium continuously produces superoxide radicals, which targets
bacterial cells with no negative effect upon the surrounding water.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are that the chemical and labor
costs for the maintenance of the membranes with organo-selenium will be reduced
since the need to take a membrane module offline for cleaning will be reduced or
eliminated. In addition, this will also reduce energy requirements to pump the
water through the membrane. This is important for the food, water and wastewater
reclamation (ie desalinization), health care, and the electronic industries, as
many of these sectors employ membrane separation techniques during commercial
operation.