* 1142156
* Zircon Hf Isotopes and the Continental Evolution of Dronning Maud Land, East Antacrtica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Horst Marschall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 06/30/2015
* USD 303,699.00

Geochemical studies of single mineral grains in rocks can be probed to
reconstruct the history of our planet. The mineral zircon (ZrSiO4) is of unique
importance in that respect because of its reliability as a geologic clock due to
its strong persistence against weathering, transport and changes in temperature
and pressure. Uranium-Lead (U-Pb) dating of zircon grains is, perhaps, the most
frequently employed method of extracting time information on geologic processes
that shaped the continental crust, and has been used to constrain the evolution
of continents and mountain belts through time. In addition, the isotopic
composition of the element Hafnium (Hf) in zircon is used to date when the
continental crust was generated by extraction of magma from the underlying
mantle. Melting of rocks in the mantle and deep in the continental crust are key
processes in the evolution of the continents, and they are recorded in the Hf
isotopic signatures of zircon. Although the analytical procedures for U-Pb
dating and Hf isotope analyses of zircon are robust now, our understanding of
zircon growth and its exchange of elements and isotopes with its surrounding
rock or magma are still underdeveloped. The focus of the proposed study,
therefore, is to unravel the evolution of zircon Hf isotopes in rocks that were
formed deep in the Earth?s crust, and more specifically, to apply these isotopic
methods to rocks collected in Dronning Maud Land (DML), East
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dronning Maud Land (DML) occupied a central
location during the formation of supercontinents ? large landmasses made up of
all the continents that exist today - more than 500 million years ago. It is
currently thought that supercontinents were formed and dismembered five or six
times throughout Earth?s history. The area of DML is key for understanding the
formation history of the last two supercontinents. The boundaries of continents
that were merged to form those supercontinents are most likely hidden in DML. In
this study, the isotopic composition of zircon grains recovered from DML rocks
will be employed to identify these boundaries across an extensive section
through the area. The rock samples were collected by the investigator during a
two-month expedition to Antarctica in the austral summer of 2007?2008. The
results of dating and isotope analyses of zircon of the different DML crustal
domains will deliver significant insight into the regional geology of East
Antarctica and its previous northern extension into Africa. This has
significance for the reconstruction of the supercontinents and defining the
continental boundaries in DML.