* 1142661
* US-China Workshop: Identification of Challenges and Opportunities for Large Scale Deployment of the Smart Grid
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2014
* USD 38,580.00

The project will support a workshop on the identification of challenges and
opportunities for the large scale deployment of the smart grid, to be held in
Washington D.C. area in early 2013. This workshop will be organized by Virginia
Tech's Advanced Research Institute and Southeast University of China. It will
bring together approximately 50 smart grid experts and researchers from both the
United States and China. This workshop is designed to create a synergy among
workshop participants from the U.S. and China. Specific objectives for the
workshop are: (1) To identify challenges of smart grid development in the United
States and China, (2) to identify technologies ? both electric power and
communication infrastructures ? necessary to support smart grid development and
high penetration of intermittent renewable energy sources, (3) to identify best
practices and lessons learned based on the deployment experience in smart grid
projects, (4) to identify challenges and research topics that the participants
can use as a context to propose new research in this field, and (5) to provide
international networking opportunities and potential for future research
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that presentations and
discussions at the workshop will lead to a better understanding of research
challenges and the identification of R&amp;D opportunities for international
research collaboration. This activity will in turn serve as a basis for future
academia-industry collaboration and for conducting joint research and/or setting
up joint programs on smart grid. It is also expected that this workshop will
help build awareness and promote educational and research exchange visits in
smart grid related topics. Efforts will be made to recruit women researchers
from academia, government and national laboratories, as well as participants
from underrepresented groups.