* 1142735
* SBIR Phase I:  Online High Fidelity 3D Modeling of Produce Using Low Cost Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Parag Batavia, Neya Systems, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 145,485.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates the
feasibility of employing high?resolution, colorized, 3D models of food produce
captured with structured light technology to identify (ID) and sort produce by
quality. The feasibility of accomplishing this within the real-time constraints
of in-field harvesting will be determined. The PROBLEM being addressed is that
high fidelity modeling currently requires controlled calibration and acquisition
processes, expensive sensor hardware and time consuming global optimization
algorithms taking minutes, or hours, to complete. The proposed APPROACH is to
research novel processing algorithms to extend 2D super-resolution principles
and exploit new probabilistic motion and sensor error models to achieve precise
multi-frame registration and fast global optimization. This research will
exploit new methods which operate on smaller clusters of ?similar? pixels and
leverage 3D probabilistic occupancy mappings, taking advantage of imaging and
geometry features simultaneously to reduce computation time and noise. If
achievable, the BENEFITS include development of a cost-effective and feature-
rich advanced data modeling technology that can be integrated into produce
collection machinery and used to cost-effectively segment individual food items
based on cosmetic imperfections. This is expected to provide both reduced costs
and increased revenues to small and medium farm
enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project addresses two areas: 1) a critical gap within domestic produce
farming which prevents small farmers from competing with large, corporate
enterprise farms in terms of efficiency, quality control and product pricing and
2) a very real advance in the broader area of sensor systems and technology.
Although a distributed, low cost modeling and sorting application for fruits and
vegetables is targeted in Phase I, the technology should provide similar
benefits to the broader consumer foods market by improving the distribution and
sorting of meats, seafood, cheeses or even baked goods, and the like, while also
advancing many other areas that can benefit from good ID and sorting technology.
At the very least, this cost effective, automated, sorting capability is
expected to increase small farm revenues by at least 25% and provide the offeror
with a burgeoning, worldwide business through its strategic partners. In
addition, such an affordable, and fast, 3D data modeling and inspection
technology for accurately categorizing geometric defects can be expected to have
a much broader impact within the field of data modeling and inspection.