* 1142910
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-Invasive Intracranial Pressure Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Anthony Bellezza, Third Eye Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a noninvasive intracranial pressure (ICP) monitor based on a pilot
clinical study correlating ocular blood pressure and blood flow parameters to
ICP. The proposed novel device will combine several standard medical techniques
used by ophthalmologists to gather data. The ultimate goal for this project is
to develop a portable, easy-to-use unit that will be used by medical personnel
on patients in the hospital and prior to their arrival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts/commercial potential of this project are improving the diagnosis
of elevated ICP and reducing the complications associated with unnecessary
invasive procedures on patients with head injury. ICP monitoring is a common
tool for physicians treating patients with acute intracranial hypertension
caused by neurological disorders, trauma, and stroke. Knowledge of a patient's
ICP progression aids the physician in determining the optimal medical and/or
surgical treatment. Every year, these surgical procedures expose patients to
significant complications. Commercialization of a noninvasive ICP monitor would
significantly decrease the burden on patients and to the healthcare system in
the diagnosis and treatment of head injury by determining ICP more cheaply and
safely than current technologies. A non-invasive method would also address the
need for additional long term ICP monitoring data and expand the knowledge of
how mild or moderate traumatic brain injury relates to ICP.