* 1142158
* Antarctic Notothenioid Fish Freeze Avoidance and Genome-wide Evolution for Life in the Cold
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Arthur DeVries, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 646,240.00

Antarctic notothenioid fishes exhibit two adaptive traits to survive in frigid
temperatures. The first of these is the production of anti-freeze proteins in
their blood and tissues. The second is a system-wide ability to perform cellular
and physiological functions at extremely cold temperatures.The proposal goals
are to show how Antarctic fishes use these characteristics to avoid freezing,
and which additional genes are turned on, or suppressed in order for these
fishes to maintain normal physiological function in extreme cold temperatures.
Progressively colder habitats are encountered in the high latitude McMurdo Sound
and Ross Shelf region, along with somewhat milder near?shore water environments
in the Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP). By quantifying the extent of ice
crystals invading and lodging in the spleen, the percentage of McMurdo Sound
fish during austral summer (Oct-Feb) will be compared to the WAP intertidal fish
during austral winter (Jul-Sep) to demonstrate their capability and extent of
freeze avoidance. Resistance to ice entry in surface epithelia (e.g. skin, gill
and intestinal lining) is another expression of the adaptation of these fish to
otherwise lethally freezing conditions.

The adaptive nature of a uniquely characteristic polar genome will be explored
by the study of the transcriptome (the set of expressed RNA transcripts that
constitutes the precursor to set of proteins expressed by an entire genome).
Three notothenioid species (E.maclovinus, D. Mawsoni and C. aceratus) will be
analysed to document evolutionary genetic changes (both gain and loss) shaped by
life under extreme chronic cold. A differential gene expression (DGE) study will
be carried out on these different species to evaluate evolutionary modification
of tissue-wide response to heat challenges. The transcriptomes and other
sequencing libraries will contribute to de novo ice-fish genome sequencing
efforts.