* 1142795
* EAGER: Identifying Emergent Opportunities in Science
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Kevin Boyack, SciTech Strategies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 01/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This exploratory project (EMERG) is aimed at developing the capability to
predict emerging topics in science from a highly detailed global model of the
scientific literature. Identification of emergent opportunities in science is a
central issue in academia and practice. Applications range from a simple
understanding of the broader context in which individual research is conducted
to the direction of research funds toward emerging topics. Previous studies of
emergence have had the following shortcomings: they are retrospective (the area
of emergence is identified after the fact), narrowly defined (lacking the
context of related scientific topics) and/or highly aggregated (field level
rather than topic level).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is based on a highly
detailed global model of science, consisting of hundreds of thousands of micro-
communities over a period of nine years (2000-2008). The average size of these
micro-communities is 15 papers per year. Micro-communities are linked from year
to year using co-citation methods. Some micro-communities are part of long
thread-like structures while others may be isolated. At the micro-structure
level, science appears to have a high level of discontinuity. The mixture of
continuity and discontinuity makes it possible to see emergence at the topical
level. A variety of indicators, some structural, some based on the micro-
community contents (articles, authors, ages, etc.), and some based on full text
analysis, are calculated for each micro-community. The hypothesis is that
several, if not all, of the proposed indicators will correlate with emergence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test this hypothesis, a data from research funding
agencies and foundations that identified emergent micro-communities will be
collected, together with identifying and tracking the key articles responsible
for emergence in those areas. This history will be compared with the results of
indicators from the model of science. If successful, the indicators can be
applied to a current (rather than retrospective) model, suggesting the
particular current micro-communities in science that are emerging or that are
likely to emerge in the next year or two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides a completely new method for developing useful knowledge about the
micro-structure and dynamics of science and technology from literature
databases, whether of scientific literature, patent, grant, or web resources.
This work has the potential to transform the way the structure and dynamics of
science and technology are understood, and to impact conduct and management of
research at the scientists, students, general public and policy maker levels.
Project results will be disseminated via web site
(http://www.mapofscience.com/emerg.html) and publications.