* 1142630
* SBIR Phase I:  Long Lasting Organic Formulation to Effectively Manage Blood Sucking Diptera
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Agenor Mafra-Neto, ISCA TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I&lt;br/&gt;project will
develop a long lasting organic formulation to effectively manage
and&lt;br/&gt;suppress populations of mosquito vectors of disease. The banning
of DDT and&lt;br/&gt;other persistent mosquito larvicides several decades ago
has created a major gap&lt;br/&gt;in vector management that has yet to be
effectively filled by generations of&lt;br/&gt;environmentally friendly
chemicals and formulations that followed. The&lt;br/&gt;consequences are
tangible to the human population worldwide. We are
currently&lt;br/&gt;experiencing more pain, suffering, and deaths from mosquito
transmitted&lt;br/&gt;diseases than when DDT was available. Biological
larvicidal formulations have&lt;br/&gt;been proven safe and effective in
controlling mosquito larvae, with the caveat&lt;br/&gt;that they have a very
short field life which requires frequent reapplications to&lt;br/&gt;sustain
control, in turn making them too expensive for adoption by most
areawide&lt;br/&gt;vector control programs. Because of this, biological
larvicidal formulations&lt;br/&gt;are seldom used preventatively. This SBIR
project will bridge this gap and&lt;br/&gt;increase the longevity, and
usability, of biological larvicides. Success will result in&lt;br/&gt;direct
mitigation of soil and waterways pollution commonly associated
with&lt;br/&gt;conventional pesticides for mosquito
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this research
are, if&lt;br/&gt;this SBIR project is successful, the development of a
biological, long lasting&lt;br/&gt;larvicidal formulation that will
significantly change the way parasitic mosquitoes&lt;br/&gt;are managed
worldwide, making it much more effective, reducing disease
and&lt;br/&gt;suffering, and saving lives while significantly reducing non-
target effects and&lt;br/&gt;environmental pollution. This is a worldwide market
opportunity of over&lt;br/&gt;$2B/year.