* 1142874
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Catalysts Based on Doped Carbon Nano-Fibers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Paul Matter, PH Matter, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on
development of&lt;br/&gt;an economical process for production of nano-structured
non-precious metal electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, many electrode applications
use precious metals that make the technologies&lt;br/&gt;prohibitively expensive
for wide-scale adoption. The materials being developed on this&lt;br/&gt;project
have unique properties compared to conventional materials used in
electrodes,&lt;br/&gt;and can be incorporated into a number of important
applications. The materials are&lt;br/&gt;based on carbon nano-fibers, a similar
material to carbon nano-tubes. The unique&lt;br/&gt;properties of these
materials can be optimized by tuning particular features at
the&lt;br/&gt;nanometer scale. In this project, a scalable process (up to
tonnage quantities) using low&lt;br/&gt;cost starting materials will be
developed for the production of these advanced materials&lt;br/&gt;with high
performance for target electrode applications. The production process will
be&lt;br/&gt;based on a unique patent-pending manufacturing route that allows
the nano-structured&lt;br/&gt;carbon to be produced more economically than
conventional routes. The process&lt;br/&gt;conditions will also be optimized to
produce materials with the preferred properties for&lt;br/&gt;target electrode
applications. The project will result in demonstration of a material
with&lt;br/&gt;better performance than conventional electrodes that can be
manufactured at a fraction&lt;br/&gt;of the cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be related to more
efficient&lt;br/&gt;forms of energy storage and usage. The strongest value
proposition is for replacement&lt;br/&gt;of precious metals for use in air
electrodes used in applications ranging from fuel cells&lt;br/&gt;and batteries,
to industrial electrolysis. These applications are of particular interest
since&lt;br/&gt;an inexpensive and stable electrode material could allow
significant efficiency&lt;br/&gt;improvements to some of the largest sources of
electricity consumption in the U.S.,&lt;br/&gt;including energy storage for
transportation, and chemical production. For example,&lt;br/&gt;because of their
superior energy density (an order of magnitude higher), metal
air&lt;br/&gt;batteries could potentially replace lithium ion batteries for use
in electronic devices and&lt;br/&gt;electric vehicles. Additionally, with stable
low cost air electrodes, the electrochemical&lt;br/&gt;production of chlorine
(which consumes approximately 2% of electricity in the U.S.)&lt;br/&gt;would be
30% more efficient. The materials developed in this project will
cost&lt;br/&gt;significantly less and last longer than current state-of-the-art
materials, enabling their&lt;br/&gt;wide-scale adoption. The less expensive
electrode materials will consequently reduce&lt;br/&gt;the cost of battery, fuel
cell, and electrolysis technologies, ultimately enabling the&lt;br/&gt;adoption
of more efficient and higher performing means of energy storage and use.