* 1142594
* SBIR Phase I:  A Profilometry/Sidewall Imaging Tool for High Aspect Ratio Microstructures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Shane Woody, INSITUTEC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses a novel
metrology sensor to enable advanced multi-dimensional measurements of high
aspect ratio structures. The current proposed work focuses on a novel
methodology using nanoneedles to create a new nano-metrology sensor and extend
our current feature measurement capability to include sidewall imaging of high
aspect ratio microstructures ranging from 75 micrometer down to 500 nm wide and
50 to 100 micrometer deep. The demand for new and more capable microscale
measurements has been driven by the increasing miniaturization of components in
a wide range of products and industries including MEMS, medical implants, and
many more. Existing measurement technologies are unable to meet the current and
future micro-metrology needs in these industries. Specifically, they suffer
several critical deficiencies 1) limited in their ability to measure deep narrow
features and sidewalls 2) multiple measurement tools are required to measure
form, waviness, and roughness and 3) complete inability to perform three
dimensional measurements. This SBIR research proposes to dramatically reduce the
size of resonance based sidewall inspection tools based around standing wave
sensors. This work will address modeling of nonlinear resonators that are
scaleable for nano and micro metrology and a novel nanoautomation process to
enhance sensing characteristics for sensors targeted for metrology tools in the
MEMS industry. The phase II program is planned as a build out phase to develop
batch processes, work with early adopators in MEMS foundaries and construct a
metrology inspection machine through our industrial partner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
to provide high precision metrology tools to meet increasing challenges in the
MEMS and micromanufacturing production environments. Scientific advances are
underway in microscale manufacturing that will greatly improve our quality of
life in medical devices, fluidics, and the new generation of three dimensional
electronics to name a few. However, the progress will be significantly stifled
without the next advancement in quality control tools that are capable of
providing traceable multi-dimensional measurements at a nanoscale level. A tool
that is capable of probing inside features, measuring sidewalls and 3D
structures will enable the entire industry including MEMS to have better yield,
better insight and lower costs in the manufacturing process. The proposed
research aims to develop and commercialize such a tool.