* 1142781
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling High-Bandwidth Audio-Visual Connectivity to Vehicles with Public Safety Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Joshua Hare, WiRover, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project explores the design and
implementation of a robust and high-bandwidth audio-visual communication system
between vehicles (especially, emergency vehicles such as police cars,
firetrucks, and ambulances) and command and control centers. The core innovation
in this system, called Virtuoso, lies in specific algorithmic design that uses
network diversity efficiently where media traffic from individual flows are
robustly striped across multiple wireless networks simultaneously. Virtuosois
designed from the ground-up to meet commercial and societal needs in
facilitating new public safety applications not possible before.For example, by
establishing an audio-visual link between patients in ambulances and emergency
room doctors, it enables hospital systems to provide new and improved urgent
care services. The intellectual merit of the project lies in its specific design
that enables these new applications and improvements. This design includes
specific multi-path striping techniques and a cloud-based management service
that allow the system to scale to a large number of vehicles.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in improving the
quality of public safety and emergency services possible. For example, this
system enables a new, real-time, high-bandwidth audio-visual link between
medical ambulances and hospitals. Preliminary talks with multiple Emergency
Medical Systems in the Madison area indicate the life-saving potential of these
applications. The commercial potential of this technology stems from growing
needs in the vehicular space. Longer term commercialization opportunities exist
and are being discussed with various emergency medical services organizations
(including the Dane County EMS) and public bus operators (Madison Metro Transit
and Van Galder Bus, a subsidiary of Coach USA) where significant deployment
based trials are ongoing for more than 1 year.