* 1142905
* EAGER: PXFS - A Persistent Storage Model for Extreme Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Walter Ligon, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2014
* USD 299,796.00

The challenges of Exascale computing suggest that a new model of computation is
needed upon which a new framework for mass storage may be built. Such a model
currently under development is the ParalleX model. ParalleX addresses Exascale
parallelism by removing most (if not all) global synchronization and providing a
natural means for programs to manage local dependencies that maintain
consistency. In a similar manner, we propose to develop a model of parallel
storage that achieves the desired semantics without global synchronization. At
the same time, the model will adopt a new programmer interface that reflects
this approach. This I/O model is named PXFS and is intended to be integrated
with the ParalleX model of computation, both by providing an I/O model for
ParalleX and by being defined in terms of ParalleX. The goals of the proposed
research are to derive a new model of persistent mass storage that unifies it
with active in-memory data and develop PXFS, a proof-of-concept file system to
enable effective and scalable Exascale computing. The objectives of the proposed
project are to describe the PXFS model in complete terms, develop an initial
reference implementation integrated with the HPX implementation of ParalleX, and
evaluate the model via the reference implementation.