* 1142829
* SBIR Phase I:  Interactive 3-D Technical Illustrations for Science and Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Holroyd, Arqball LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 172,053.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
commercialize tools for creating and displaying interactive 3-D technical
illustrations for STEM-related topics. This project takes a new approach to the
problem by applying Image-Based Modeling and Rendering (IBMR) techniques which
enable the creation of highly realistic digital 3-D scenes by processing and
resampling images captured with a camera. In particular, the technology
developed through this effort will enable a wide range of interactive 3-D
visualizations that are currently poorly served by available video compression
algorithms and 2-D vector-based animation tools. The first goal of the proposal
is to develop methods and algorithms for capturing, compressing, and displaying
these types of datasets. The second goal is to develop a prototype digital
textbook chapter that will supplement a physics class on Optics. This chapter
will include interactive modules explaining the basic theory of refraction,
reflection, dispersion and diffraction, followed by applied lessons on how light
is manipulated and measured by a modern camera and how the geometric and
material properties of gemstones give rise to their rich appearance.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop technology
that will transform the ~$8.7B market for education textbooks by replacing paper
textbooks with digital versions. This transition is currently stalled because
the majority of digital textbook providers are simply scanning the pages of
existing textbooks. Although these "books beneath glass" are more portable and
less expensive than their physical counterparts, they neglect the promising
opportunity for truly interactive material. We believe this is largely due to
the current lack of tools for creating and rendering the type of 3-D content
that mobile devices have only recently become capable of processing. The
technology developed through this project will generate business opportunities
in direct content creation, consulting services, and licensing fees. The core
technology will also have applications in the areas of cultural heritage,
consumer marketing, and advertising.