* 1142069
* Collaborative Research:  Developing an Antarctic Tephra Database for Interdisciplinary Paleoclimate Research (AntT)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Nelia Dunbar, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 163,260.00

Many key questions in climate research (e.g. relative timing of climate events
in different geographic areas, climate-forcing mechanisms, natural threshold
levels in the climate system) are dependent on accurate reconstructions of the
temporal and spatial distribution of past rapid climate change events in
continental, atmospheric, marine and polar realms. This collaborative
interdisciplinary research project aims to consolidate, into a single user-
friendly database, information about volcanic products detected in Antarctica.
By consolidating information about volcanic sources, and physical and
geochemical characteristics of volcanic products, this systematic data
collection approach will improve the ability of researchers to identify volcanic
ash, or tephra, from specific volcanic eruptions that may be spread over large
areas in a geologically instantaneous amount of time. Development of this
database will assist in the identification and cross-correlation of time
intervals in various paleoclimate archives that contain volcanic layers from
often unknown sources. The AntT project relies on a cyberinfrastructure
framework developed in house through NSF funded CDI-Type I: CiiWork for data
assimilation, interpretation and open distribution model. In addition to
collection and integration of existing information about volcanic products, this
project will focus on filling the information gaps about unique physico-chemical
characteristics of very fine (&lt;3 micrometer) volcanic particles
(cryptotephra) that are present in Antarctic ice cores. This component of
research will involve improving analytical methodology for detecting
cryptotephra layers in ice, and will train a new generation of scientists to
apply an array of modern state?of?the-art instrumentation available to the
project team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recognized importance of tephra in
establishing a chronological framework for volcanic and sedimentary successions
has already resulted in the development of robust regional tephrochronological
frameworks (e.g. Europe, Kamchatka, New Zealand, Western North America). The
AntT project will provide this framework for Antarctic tephrochronology, as
needed for precise correlation records between Antarctic ice cores (e.g. WAIS
Divide, RICE, ITASE) and global paleoclimate archives. The results of AntT will
be of particular significance to climatologists, paleoclimatologists,
atmospheric chemists, geochemists, climate modelers, solar-terrestrial
physicists, environmental statisticians, and policy makers for designing
solutions to mitigate or cope with likely future impacts of climate change
events on modern society.