* 1142550
* SBIR Phase I:  No Heat Spray Drying Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Charles Beetz, ZoomEssence, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to eliminate
the use of heat during the process of spray drying liquid emulsions into
powders. Typically, a liquid emulsion consists of a high-value liquid ingredient
emulsified with a carrier system that when dried captures the liquid ingredient
in a powdered form. Traditional spray drying employs air heated up to 400
degrees Fahrenheit to dry the liquids into powders. However, exposing sensitive,
volatile liquid ingredients to high temperatures causes molecular degradation
that negatively impacts performance. By eliminating the use of heat, it is
expected that the quality, solubility, stability and overall performance of
powders will be significantly improved. This project will focus on designing
novel drying equipment, formulating emulsions, and reducing moisture content in
the finished powders.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to provide
an innovative, commercially viable no-heat spray drying technology with the
ability to manufacture significant amounts of powdered products for applications
in foods, chemicals, probiotics and pharmaceuticals where the production of a
free-flowing powder is required. This no-heat spray drying process is
anticipated to improve shelf life, create better solubility, reduce costs and
deliver a more efficacious product, enabling liquid quality flavors and
ingredients in a powder form.