* 1142009
* What Controls the Variability of the Southern Ocean Productivity and Carbon Uptake?
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Takamitsu Ito, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2016
* USD 358,196.00

The variability of the biological productivity and correspondingly the carbon
uptake, including fossil fuel CO2, of the Southern Ocean are hampered by our
incomplete understanding of the responses of the marine ecosystems to physical
forcings, oceanic transport and climate change. This modeling study will address
three main questions: i) what are the mechanism that link climate dynamics and
biological production? ii) what are the mechanisms for micronutrient iron
limitation and the relative importance of different iron sources? and iii) what
are the roles of mesoscale eddies on regional carbon and iron budgets?

Based on the MIT ocean general circulation model (MITgcm), eddy permitting (1/60
x 1/60 lat lon; 42 depth levels) physical circulation fields from the Southern
Ocean State Estimate will be constrained by a very large observational data set
of Southern ocean properties. Model simulations, with improved representations
of iron sources from continental shelves, and including the interplay between
increasing partial pressure (pCO2) in the atmosphere and upwelling of cold CO2
rich waters, will be tested against the observed variability of surface
chlorophyll and biogeochemical tracers. This research should yield a more
authentic estimate of the carbon, and iron budgets for recent and future years.
Educational aspect of the project will train a graduate student and
undergraduate student interns in earth-system modeling at Georgia Institute of
Technology.