* 1142495
* Collaborative Research: Life in a Volcanic Landscape:  Early Jurassic Paleoenvironments and Paleobotany
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Edith Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 05/31/2017
* USD 475,073.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Although fossil floras are known from the
Antarctic Peninsula region, the record of Jurassic plant life in continental
Antarctica is sparse, possibly due to tectonic and magmatic activity associated
with the breakup of Gondwana and the emplacement of the Ferrar Large Igneous
Province. The PIs propose to examine Early Jurassic floras and paleoenvironments
in southern Victoria Land, where pyroclastic rocks of the Mawson Formation
contain sedimentary interbeds of fossiliferous mudstones and cherts deposited in
a freshwater lake environment. They will collect plant megafossils,
palynomorphs, charcoalified and petrified wood, and geochemical data constrained
by detailed stratigraphy and sedimentology to provide baseline data on the
composition of the floras at this time, their depositional environments, and the
environment of growth. These data will contribute to understanding plant life
and paleoenvironments in Antarctica during a time of increasing volcanism and
will provide floral information that can be compared to other, better-known
floras elsewhere in Gondwana. The presence of this high-latitude terrestrial
vegetation in the Ferrar Group will allow the PIs to test the theory of rapid
greenhouse warming in the Jurassic, a situation similar to that predicted for
the next century in the modern world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will expand on successful education and human
development activities including: outreach, teaching, and mentoring of women and
under-represented students in paleobiology; mentoring graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars; continuing support for workshops for middle school girls
in science via the Expanding Your Horizons Program and Si! Se Puede Hacer
Ciencias y Matematicas at Emporia State University, the KU Discover Technology
TRIO Program, and the KU Natural History Museum. Communication to the public
will be enhanced through widely disseminated publications and presentations in
multiple media venues, as well as through the availability of archived digital
and specimen data.