* 1142828
* SBIR Phase I:  A Microbially-Based Process to Produce a High-Quality Soy Protein Concentrate for Complete Fish-Meal Replacement in Aquaculture Diets
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Kamal Mjoun, DAST, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
process to produce high quality soy protein concentrate (HQSPC) as a fish meal
replacement in aquaculture feeds, while providing a binding agent for extrusion
and an immunostimulant for disease control. The proposed innovation is a
microbially-based process to economically produce HQSPC by converting soybean
carbohydrates into protein, yielding the exopolysaccharide for pellet binding
and the immunoprophylactic for enhanced health. Our preliminary data indicates
that the proposed microbe will metabolize individual carbohydrates in soybeans.
To demonstrate technical and commercial feasibility, extrusion and enzymatic
saccharification will be used to solubilize carbohydrates in soybean white
flake, followed by incubation with the gum-producing microbe and recovery of
solids for use in yellow perch feeding trials.

The broader commercial impacts of this research include the development of a
plant-based protein source to replace fishmeal in aquaculture production
systems. Increased demand for fish protein and reduced wild-captured fish has
facilitated rapid growth of the aquaculture industry. This growth has
dramatically increased the demand for fish meal, the primary component in
aquaculture feeds, causing overexploitation of this resource and rapidly
escalating prices up to $1,800/ton. There is a considerable market opportunity
for a high quality, economical plant derived protein concentrate to completely
replace fish meal in aquaculture feeds, thus providing broad impact. Successful
development and testing of HQSPC that provides desirable growth rates and
conversion efficiencies will be of commercial interest to international
aquaculture feed manufacturers, as well as commercial aquaculture production
facilities.