* 1142201
* EAGER: Testing genotype-hormone associations in circumpolar ancestral and descendant populations
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Gregory Demas, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2016
* USD 299,994.00

This is an EAGER proposal to establish the foundation for subsequent research on
the environmental, behavioral, and genetic determinants of reproductive hormone
levels in indigenous arctic women. There is strong scientific evidence that
concentrations of the steroid hormones investigated in this project influence
the capacity to conceive and are significant risk factors for several diseases
(e.g., breast and other cancers, cardiovascular disease), yet very little is
known about the variation of these hormones among pre-menopausal women in the
arctic. This EAGER project is an experimental project designed to evaluate
whether genetic variation at specific loci contribute to hormonal variation in
circumpolar ancestral (Central Asian) and descendant (indigenous South American)
populations. The researchers expect this project to provide 1) validated field,
laboratory and statistical approaches to hormone concentrations in women, and 2)
valuable and novel data for the anticipated future study of circumpolar
populations. In addition, the PI will be actively involved in community outreach
in Alaska, Canada, and Greenland in order to inform indigenous communities of
the findings from the EAGER research and solicit community interest and
collaboration in a broader circumpolar study. This project is potentially
transformative in both the scientific potential to define a specific genome
related to steroid hormones and in the broader impacts of creating a community
collaborative project that has the potential to gain deeper insight into fatal
diseases affecting these communities.