* 1142277
* SBIR Phase I:  Haptic Robotics for Kitting Powertrain Components
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Tomonori Yamamoto, SynTouch LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 148,952.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes that
haptic robots offer effective and&lt;br/&gt;attractive solutions to the common
tasks of Bin-Picking and Kitting, which currently require human workers.
A&lt;br/&gt;popular application area is programming an industrial robot to work
with specific powertrain parts. The&lt;br/&gt;Problem: Bin-picking robots can
only manipulate strong parts with simple geometries in structured or
semistructured&lt;br/&gt;configurations; machine vision deals poorly with
overlapping objects and unstable and unpredictable&lt;br/&gt;loads or grips. The
Opportunity: Haptic systems can compliment machine vision systems using tactile
sensory&lt;br/&gt;data to cope with overlapping objects and unstable grip
conditions. The Solution: A robotic hand/arm&lt;br/&gt;equipped with unique
biomimetic tactile sensors to make a platform for developing grip algorithms for
parts&lt;br/&gt;picking and kitting. Innovations include develop algorithms for
slip-detection and force-cone grip adjustment;&lt;br/&gt;developing adaptive
algorithms using tactile feedback to improve grip pre-shaping; validating
algorithms with&lt;br/&gt;physical powertrain parts; and challenging algorithms
with real-world uncertainties that are difficult to detect&lt;br/&gt;using
machine vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will result in robots that have more humanlike
haptic&lt;br/&gt;capabilities. Currently robots lack tactile sensing and rely on
specialized component feeders and gripping tools&lt;br/&gt;to handle individual
objects with predetermined gripping features. These items add cost, occupy
space, and&lt;br/&gt;consume time, especially when many different objects must
be handled. This puts robots at a significant&lt;br/&gt;disadvantage to human
workers who use their hands dexterously to handle an unlimited variety of
objects.&lt;br/&gt;Nevertheless, robots are best suited to handle tasks that are
highly repetitive or dangerous to humans. When&lt;br/&gt;robots handle hazardous
materials or manufacturing tasks, they relieve humans of these burdens while
often&lt;br/&gt;yielding increased productivity and cost-savings. At the end of
Phase I we will have developed a proof of&lt;br/&gt;concept so that our Phase II
research can integrate the system into an industrial environment. By addressing
the&lt;br/&gt;picking of objects with errors in object pose, position and part-
to-part interaction, haptic robots will transform&lt;br/&gt;this important part
of the manufacturing process. Such technology will have widespread impact on
many&lt;br/&gt;aspects of manufacturing and automation.