* 1142771
* SBIR Phase I:  Selective Catalytic Oxidation of Ammonia to Nitrogen for Hot Exhaust Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Richard Long, NEXTECH MATERIALS LTD
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 153,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
a new family of low-cost non-precious metal ammonia selective oxidation
catalysts for use in selective catalytic reduction (SCR) systems. The selective
catalytic reduction of NO with ammonia/urea is widely applied to combustion
exhaust treatment for abating NOx emissions in power plants and diesel engine
vehicles. A common problem of using the SCR technology is ammonia slip. Under
conditions of incomplete NO conversion or exhaust temperature upswings, NH3 will
slip into the exhaust, resulting in a number of environmental problems. This
selective catalytic oxidation (SCO) technology can convert the toxic ammonia to
nitrogen and water without introducing other reactants into the gas mixture. In
this project, powder catalysts will be synthesized and tested at NexTech under
simulated diesel engine exhaust atmospheres and characterized by physical and
chemical methods. The broader/commercial impacts of this research are to solve
the NH3 slip problem existing in the diesel engine SCR system with low cost, and
to help reduce NOX emissions by greater than 90% in power plants when
stoichiometric or excess amount of ammonia is used in the SCR process. The
generated information can also provide new insights into understanding
activation process of small molecules, such as NH3, NO, NO2 and O2, on the non-
precious metal catalyst surface with acid and redox sites, enabling development
of better catalysts for further emission reduction in the future.