* 1142164
* Multi-parameter Selection Curves for Machine-assisted Annual Layer Interpretations of the WAIS-Divide Core
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Kenneth McGwire, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,392.00

McGwire/1142164

This award supports a project to extend a novel "selection curve" method that
was developed to interpret annual layers in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS)
Divide ice core based on dielectric properties (DEP) to the analysis of ice core
chemical measurements. The selection curve algorithm uses a spline curve whose
shape selects successive annual peaks in plots of ice core parameters. Using 50
meters of manually interpreted calibration data, the selection curve method
matched a manual interpretation throughout a 1200 m dataset to within 1% of the
total count and 2% root-mean square error (RMSE). In this project the selection
curve method will be enhanced to incorporate multiple chemical measurements
derived from high-resolution continuous flow analysis (CFA) measurements of the
WAIS Divide ice core and will include a number of indicators for the quality of
annual peak selections. The intellectual merit of this project is that it will
provide an objective, repeatable method for multi-parameter counting to support
the development of the final WAIS Divide annually resolved timescale. This
capability will improve the speed and end-to-end consistency of timescale
development at WAIS Divide and in future studies. The ability to extract ice
core information at sub-annual scales has the potential to greatly enrich the
understanding of past climate regimes. This work will have broader impacts that
benefit society because ice core science addresses critically important
questions related to global warming, abrupt climate change, and biogeochemical
cycling that will help to inform policy makers. By integrating an objective,
repeatable multi-parameter counting tool into the final timescale development
strategy at WAIS Divide, the proposed effort would reduce potential undue
criticism of subjectivity in ice core interpretations and climate change
science. The proposed analytical software will be made available to the broad
community, improving scientific infrastructure, and could be used for non- ice
core applications as well. This project does not require field-work in the
Antarctic.