* 1142102
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Ecological Investigation of McMurdo Dry Valley's Active Soil Microbial Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Cristina Takacs-Vesbach, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 435,197.00

The McMurdo Dry Valleys in Antarctica are among the coldest, driest habitats on
the planet. Previous research has documented the presence of surprisingly
diverse microbial communities in the soils of the Dry Valleys despite these
extreme conditions. However, the degree to which these organisms are active is
unknown; it is possible that much of this diversity reflects microbes that have
blown into this environment that are subsequently preserved in these cold, dry
conditions. This research will use modern molecular techniques to answer a
fundamental question regarding these communities: which organisms are active and
how do they live in such extreme conditions? The research will include
manipulations to explore how changes in water, salt and carbon affect the
microbial community, to address the role that these organisms play in nutrient
cycling in this environment. The results of this work will provide a broader
understanding of how life adapts to such extreme conditions as well as the role
of dormancy in the life history of microorganisms. Results will be widely
disseminated through publications as well as through presentations at national
and international meetings; raw data will be made available through a high-
profile web-based portal. The research will support two graduate students, two
undergraduate research assistants and a postdoctoral fellow. The results will be
incorporated into a webinar targeted to secondary and post-secondary educators
and a complimentary hands-on class activity kit will be developed and made
available to various teacher and outreach organizations.