* 1142295
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Value of Reciprocity: Copper, Exchange, and Social Interaction in the Middle Atlantic Region of the Eastern Woodlands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Richard Stewart, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,220.00

Native Americans living in the Eastern Woodlands participated in extensive trade
networks beginning over 4,500 years ago. These networks formed an important part
of the social systems of these ancient populations. There is evidence for
widespread trade in exotic resources like copper, though little is known about
its origin and extent particularly in the Middle Atlantic region. Under the
guidance of Dr. R. Michael Stewart, Gregory Lattanzi will study the chemical
make-up of copper artifacts dating from the Early and Middle Woodland periods
(600 BC to AD 800) in order to learn more about prehistoric social organization
in a region that has previously been poorly studied. The work can be generalized
provide basic insight into the mechanisms which function to promote social order
and integration in societies at a simple level of technological organization.

The Early and Middle Woodland periods are characterized by increasing group
interactions and social complexity, as evidenced by ritualized burials and
exotic artifacts such as copper. Mr. Lattanzi use a state-of-the-art technique,
Laser ablation multi-collector inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-
MC-ICP-MS), to elementally characterize copper artifacts from several
significant sites from this time period including the Abbott Farm National
Historic Landmark and the Rosenkrans Ferry site in New Jersey, the Nassawango
site in Maryland, and Burial Ridge in New York. By chemically analyzing copper
artifacts found at these sites, and comparing them to various geological sources
of copper located throughout the Middle Atlantic, Mr. Lattanzi aims to
demonstrate the origin of copper used by ancient populations, thus providing
information about the type and extent of the trade network that existed.
Further, by comparing the chemical makeup of individual artifacts found at a
single location (cache) he will determine if one or multiple trade networks were
in operation and if those networks changed over time.

The project directly assist in Mr. Lattanzi's graduate student education. It
will also more broadly promote collaboration with public and private museums and
universities. This will create new opportunities for incorporating research into
education, and public dissemination. The results of this study will be
disseminated via peer-reviewed publications, and raw data will be freely
available on the Internet for public use. The use of LA-MC-ICP-MS facilities at
the Archaeometry Laboratory at the University of Missouri Research Reactor helps
to fulfill this institution's mission to contribute to scientific research and
training students in cutting-edge analytic technology.