* 1142438
* EAGER: Muscle Adaptation Induced by the Physical Interaction with an Exoskeleton and its Application to Motor-Task Planning for Neurorehabilitation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Jun Ueda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 12/31/2013
* USD 49,863.00

The project provides a systematic means to modify the activity in a specific
group of muscles by using a robot, which is expected to lead to wider diagnosis
and treatment options for patients than conventional approaches which rely
solely on therapists' knowledge and experience. This EAGER project tests this
potentially transformative concept in a collaboration between Georgia Institute
of Technology (GT) and two institutions in Japan, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology (NAIST) and the University of Tokyo Hospital (U-Tokyo) through the
support of NSF-JST (Japan Science and Technology Agency) Strategic International
Cooperative Program. The primary objective of the US-Japan collaborative
research is to develop methodologies to computationally plan and execute various
motor-tasks for neuromuscular function test by using an exoskeleton-type robot
and quantitatively evaluate the efficacy by measuring various
biosignals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project produces results that are useful in
rehabilitation science, robotics, physical therapy, neuro-muscular science, and
athletic training. In addition, international collaboration with Japanese
researchers exposes graduate students and faculty to the global research
opportunities and capabilities. Moreover, results have the potential to
significantly lower health care costs in these domains, which occur quite
frequently in the aging population.