* 1142664
* SBIR Phase I:  Induction of therapeutic hypothermia with an esophageal cooling device
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Erik Kulstad, Advanced Cooling Therapy, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
demonstrate the feasibility and safety of inducing mild therapeutic hypothermia
with an innovative esophageal cooling device. The use of mild therapeutic
hypothermia to treat patients after resuscitation from cardiac arrest nearly
doubles their chance of survival, but the difficulties associated with the use
of existing methods for inducing hypothermia result in less than 10% of eligible
patients actually receiving this treatment. The esophageal cooling device
induces hypothermia through the esophagus and solves the problems of
inefficiency and risk associated with existing approaches. This innovation
provides high-efficiency heat transfer at the patient's core while maintaining
gastric access to allow decompression, ensuring maintenance of mucosal contact
and attainment of optimum heat transfer. The research objectives of the proposed
activity are to demonstrate the feasibility and safety of this transformative
approach in a swine model prior to developing a beta-prototype in a Phase II
project. Swine will be treated with mild therapeutic hypothermia utilizing an
alpha prototype device, after which histopathological analysis of the esophagus
by a certified veterinarian will be undertaken to identify any adverse effects.
It is anticipated that hypothermia will be induced successfully, with no adverse
effects identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project will be the lives saved in patients suffering cardiac arrest.
The commercial potential of this technology is large because up to 1 million
individuals in North America suffer cardiac arrest annually, and another 3
million suffer illnesses that appear to benefit from treatment with hypothermia.
Successful commercialization of this transformative technology will result in an
effective new tool to enhance the scientific and technological understanding of
the benefits of hypothermia in stroke, trauma, and spinal cord injury, among
other indications. The device's manufacturing cost is 12 times less than
competitors' devices, allowing a margin that will compete effectively in the $1
billion annual market in patient temperature control while providing significant
practical advantages to physicians. Because the device is more efficient than
surface devices, does not obstruct access to the patient, replaces the standard
nasogastric tube, is quick and easy to place, and eliminates the risks of
infections, blood clots, and needlestick injuries, adoption will be widespread,
resulting in significant societal impact by improving outcomes of cardiac arrest
worldwide.