* 1142810
* SBIR Phase I:  40-100 Gbps VCSEL with Push-Pull Modulation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Mary Hibbs-Brenner, Mytek, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to demonstrate
a Composite Resonator VCSEL (CRVCL) which will achieve a 40-100Gbps data
transmission rate. For more than a decade VCSELs have been the engine driving
bandwidth increases at shorter distances (<300 meters) between cabinets in high
performance computers, in local area networks (LANs) and storage area networks
(SANs), but it appears that conventional VCSEL technology may be running out of
steam somewhere between 20 and 30Gbps. The proposed approach is unique in that
it avoids the relaxation oscillation limitations on modulation speed through the
use of a dual cavity VCSEL operated in a push-pull configuration. The concept
dramatically increases the data rate by keeping the current density constant
while modulating the light to be emitted from the surface or directed to the
substrate. The goals of the Phase I project are to fabricate a CRVCL,
demonstrate the push-pull nature of the modulation to a minimum of 20GHz, and
demonstrate the elimination or dramatic reduction in relaxation oscillations. If
successful, the demonstration of the 40-100Gbps large signal modulation will be
proposed for a Phase II project.

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this project is to enable the
continued expansion of bandwidth within LANs, SANs and between cabinets of high
performance computers. In addition, a 40Gbps+ VCSEL will be a breakthrough
technology for overcoming the interconnect bottlenecks between boards within a
cabinet, and within a board. Copper based interconnects are increasingly the
limiting factor in system performance due to their size and power consumption,
but the replacement by optical interconnects will require high speed per channel
(40Gbps), very low power, high reliability, and low cost. This project concept
addresses all four considerations. Higher speed devices feed the bandwidth
expansion allowing the continued improvements in business productivity,
management of medical information, and entertainment options we have come to
expect, and helps maintain the U.S. competitiveness and employment in the
networking market. The reduction in power consumption helps achieve the industry
and government goals for reducing the power consumption of data centers. The
successful development of this technological enhancement will help the U.S.
maintain its leading position in the computing and networking industries.