* 1142411
* SBIR Phase I:  Combining Fungal Metabolites and Fungal Insect Pathogens for Cost Effective Control of Bark Beetles in Forestry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Clifford Bradley, Montana Microbial Products
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,640.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will establish
proof of concept for enhancing fungal bioinsecticide to control bark beetles,
important forestry pests. Although research shows potential of fungal insect
pathogens as bark beetle bioinsecticides, no commercial products have been
developed. The short exposure time of adults, inaccessibility of larvae, and
limited time to kill before irreversible tree damage makes control difficult.
Innovation to overcome these barriers comes from understanding complex
interactions between beetles and fungi. Phase 1 will establish technical,
economic, and regulatory feasibility of combining fungal pathogens with fungal
metabolites that inhibit beetle boring behavior. Inhibiting boring would
increase efficacy by increasing exposure time of beetles to fungal pathogen
spores. Research will define baseline efficacy of the fungal pathogen; identify
fungal metabolites that act as boring deterrents; determine commercially
scalable production process for selected metabolites; and assess regulatory
requirements.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are a cost effective, safe and
environmentally benign bio-insecticide with substantial commercial potential to
replace chemical insecticides now used to protect high value trees and to expand
control strategies where chemical insecticides are too expensive or limited by
environmental impact. A climate change exacerbated outbreak of mountain pine
beetle (MPB) is devastating western United States and Canadian pine forests,
severely impacting to economic and recreational value. The time and cost
required to develop a commercial product is favorable as MMP will combine boring
inhibitors with an EPA approved, commercially available fungal strain with
demonstrated pathogenicity to MPB.