* 1142560
* SBIR Phase I:  CoPilot - An Active Wheelchair Driving Aid for Independent Living
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Thomas Panzarella, Love Park Robotics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2012
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research project proposes to develop and
commercialize an active driving&lt;br/&gt;aid to enable semi-autonomous,
cooperative navigation of an electric power wheelchair (EPW)
both&lt;br/&gt;indoors and in dynamic, outdoor environments. The device is
called CoPilot and is intended to be used&lt;br/&gt;by EPW users who suffer from
deteriorating cognitive, perceptive, or motor function. CoPilot is an
intelligent&lt;br/&gt;sensor and semi-autonomous drive control system that works
in cooperation with the driver to aid&lt;br/&gt;in negotiating changing terrain,
avoiding obstacles/collisions, and maintaining a straight path. The goal
is&lt;br/&gt;to prolong independent living and safety for seniors in their
homes. The basis for the innovation is that as&lt;br/&gt;an elder person begins
to lose perceptive or motor function, CoPilot can augment that loss because it
can&lt;br/&gt;interpret the user?s intent and it can see out into the
environment on their behalf. This project will leverage&lt;br/&gt;the latest in
3D LIDAR technology for robust perception, exploit the team?s experience in
commercializing&lt;br/&gt;the smart wheelchair of the Automated Transport and
Retrieval System (including acquiring FDA approval),&lt;br/&gt;and will apply
the knowledge the team has gained in developing autonomous driving solutions
through their&lt;br/&gt;participation in the DARPA Urban
Challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to enable prolonged independent living and safety&lt;br/&gt;for
seniors in their homes while also providing significant economic relief to the
U.S. healthcare system. The&lt;br/&gt;U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services reports that the number of people over the age of 65
will&lt;br/&gt;increase from 38.9 million people in 2008 to over 70 million by
2030. This rapid growth in the U.S. elder&lt;br/&gt;population will also
increase the number of people with age-related symptoms that hamper their
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;Such common symptoms include visual impairment, dementia,
and Alzheimer?s disease. A second, more&lt;br/&gt;serious side effect of this
aging population is that it will place unprecedented strains on the U.S.
healthcare&lt;br/&gt;system. This impact can be moderated in part by enabling
individuals to maintain their independence and&lt;br/&gt;safety while living at
home longer. It is estimated that adding a single month of independence and
health to&lt;br/&gt;America?s elder population would save $5 billion, while
decreasing hospitalization and institutionalization&lt;br/&gt;10% would save $50
billion annually. As a result, technology for home-centered approaches to
healthcare,&lt;br/&gt;such as CoPilot, are necessary.