* 1142321
* Support For Future INTERNET Workshop June 9-10th AT University of Pennsylvania
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Jonathan Smith, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This project covers travel and lodging support for graduate students to attend
the workshop on Future Internet Architectures. The Future Internet Workshop
(FIW) is focused on presentations from students on their new work on questions
of Future Internet Architecture, providing an opportunity for students to
interact with both other students and with senior people from the
telecommunications industry (e.g., Cisco, Deutsche Telekom, Comcast, etc.). The
workshop to be held on June 9th and 10th at the University of Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia, PA hosts 22 students.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Twelve of the students attending are presenting talks
exploring various technical approaches to architecture of a future internet,
including fault&#1049458;tolerance, malware detection, new forms of multicast,
and new approaches to debugging distributed software systems.

BROADER IMPACT: The Internet has impacts far beyond the technologies, and the
values inherent in the design of a Future Internet will strongly affect the uses
and applications of that Internet. An example would be healthcare data, a kind
of information that many people are uncomfortable putting on the Internet today,
and may be even less comfortable with in a cloud-based future Internet.
Approaches to security and availability and other technical issues must be
consistent with societal, governing and economic issues. The workshop has
technology leaders from the Internet service providers as invited speakers and
provides students (a population from which future technology leaders will be
drawn) with an opportunity to hear these speakers and interact with them to
understand issues beyond the technology.