* 1142084
* Applying High-resolution GPS Tracking to Characterize Sensory Foraging Strategies of the Black-browed Albatross, a Top Predator of the Southern Ocean Ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Gabrielle Nevitt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 395,537.00

With 70% of the Earth's surface being covered by oceans, a longstanding question
of interest to the ecology of migratory seabirds is how they locate their prey
across such vast distances. The project seeks to investigate the sensory
strategies used in the foraging behavior of procellariiform seabirds, such as
petrels, albatrosses and shearwaters. These birds routinely travel over
thousands of kilometers of open ocean, apparently using their pronounced
olfactory abilities (known to be up to a million times more sensitive than other
birds) to identify productive marine areas or locate prey. High resolution
tracking, such as provided by miniaturized GPS data loggers (+/- 5m; 10 second
sampling), are needed to gain insight into some of the questions as to the
sensory mechanisms birds use to locate their prey. Combining these tracking and
positioning devices along with stomach temperature recorders capable of
indicating prey ingestion, will provide a wealth of new behavioral information.
Species specific foraging based on prey specific odors (e.g. krill vs fisheries
vs. squid), and mixed strategies using olfaction and visual cues appear to be
different for these different marine predators.

Albatrosses are increasingly an endangered species globally, and additional
information as to their foraging strategies might lead to better conservation
measures such as the avoidance of by-catch by long-line fisheries. Intimate
details of each species foraging activity patterns during the day and night and
insight into the conservation of these top predators in pelagic Southern Ocean
ecosystems are a few of the research directions these novel fine scale
resolution approaches are yielding.