* 1142115
* Tephrochronology of the WAIS Divide Ice Core:  Linking Ice Cores through Volcanic Records
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Nelia Dunbar, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 167,539.00

Dunbar/1142115&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to investigate
the extremely rich volcanic record in the WAIS Divide ice core as part of this
ongoing tephrochronology research in Antarctica. Ice cores in Polar Regions
offer unparalleled records of earth's climate over the past 500,000 years.
Accurate chronology of individual ice cores and chronological correlations
between different ice cores is critically important to the interpretation of the
climate record. The field of Antarctic tephrochronology has been progressing
steadily, and is on the cusp of having a fully integrated tephra framework for
large parts of the continent. Major advances in this field have been made due to
the acquisition of a number of ice cores with strong volcanic records,
improvement of analytical techniques and better characterization of source
eruptions due in part to through studies of englacial tephra from several major
blue ice areas. The intellectual merit of this work is that the
tephrochonological studies will provide independently dated time-stratigraphic
markers in the ice core, particularly for the deepest ice, linking tephra layers
between the WAIS Divide core and the Siple Dome core which will allow detailed
comparisons to be made of coastal and inland climate. It will also contribute to
a better understanding of eruption magnitude, dispersal patterns and geochemical
evolution of West Antarctic volcanoes. The work will also contribute to a new
tephra dataset to the literature for use in future ice core studies. The broader
impacts of this project fall into the areas of education, outreach and
international cooperation. This project will employ one New Mexico Tech graduate
student, but will also be featured in outreach programs for NMT undergraduates,
as well as teacher and student groups and outreach for the general public in New
Mexico. NMT is an Hispanic serving institution (25% Hispanic students) and also
found by NSF to rank 15th nationwide in "baccalaureate-origin" institutions for
doctoral recipients in science and engineering, thereby having a
disproportionately large effect on producing Hispanic scientists and engineers.
However, probably the most significant broader impact of this project will be
the continued efforts of the PI in fostering and promoting of international
cooperation in the tephra-in-ice community. Dunbar has been collaborating with
European tephra researchers for a number of years, sharing data and working
collaboratively on tephra correlations, and these activities have lead to, and
will continue to promote, forward progress in integrating the Antarctic
tephrochronology record. This proposal does not require field work in the
Antarctic.