* 1142328
* WORKSHOP: AMIA Doctoral Consortium 2011
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Madhu Reddy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 20,060.00

This is funding to support a workshop of approximately 12 promising doctoral
students, along with 5 distinguished research faculty. The event, the 5th annual
doctoral consortium on Sociotechnical Issues in Medical Informatics, will take
place in conjunction with the 2011 Annual Symposium of the American Medical
Informatics Association (AMIA) in Washington DC on October 22-26. The AMIA
Symposium, held every fall, is the world's most comprehensive annual meeting and
premier forum on biomedical and health informatics, attracting over 2,000
researchers, professionals and students from an array of occupational settings
who are interested in all aspects of health information technologies. More
information about the conference may be found at https://www.amia.org/amia2011.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One issue that is of particular importance within medical
informatics is the need to design/deploy systems with an understanding of how
these systems fit into organizational and social contexts. The term
sociotechnical denotes the importance of considering technical and
organizational/social issues together rather than in isolation. For instance,
the medical informatics community has long been interested in the technical
features of the Electronic Medical Record (EMR), but less attention has been
paid to how the design of the EMR will be affected by who the primary users of
the system are, what context it is used in, and what interactions it should
support. Yet, to design effective EMR systems, we need to understand how these
different issues impact each other. The growing need for integrating research
across disciplines (e.g., HCI and Medical Informatics) is the primary motivation
for this doctoral consortium. Therefore, student participants will span a broad
range of disciplines and approaches that inform medical informatics, including
computer science, information science, engineering, clinical sciences, law,
management and related fields. The doctoral consortium will take place on the
weekend prior to the AMIA Symposium so the students can also participate in the
conference, which will introduce them to the exciting breadth of research topics
within the medical informatics community. Conversely, bringing a new generation
of scholars from different disciplines into the medical informatics community
will broaden that community's understanding of what other research disciplines
can offer medical informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The consortium will provide
a forum for doctoral students to share their work and also network with other
doctoral students and researchers. Student participants will give short
presentations during the consortium and will receive constructive remarks and
feedback on their research from prominent researchers as well as through
interaction with other students. The feedback is designed to help students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to related
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Thus, the consortium
will help shape both these ongoing and future inter- and multi-disciplinary
research projects focusing on organizational and social issues surrounding
health-related technologies. The names and abstracts of the accepted
participants will be printed in the AMIA program guide, and will also be made
available to the public on a special website to be developed by the
organizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The doctoral consortium will
bring together people from different disciplines who might not otherwise engage
with one another and will expose them to different scientific research
approaches and questions. It will foster a sense of community among the young
researchers by allowing them to create a supportive mentoring and social network
both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development. The organizers will make a concerted and proactive
effort to ensure a diverse pool of student participants including both strong
international participation and members of under-represented groups in the STEM
disciplines; this, in turn, will broaden the students' horizons to the future
benefit of the field.