* 1142525
* SBIR Phase I:  A Perfusable, Revascularized, Cardiac-Derived Patch for the Treatment of Heart Disease
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Jeffrey Ross, Miromatrix Medical Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovations Research (SBIR) Phase I proposal is to
demonstrate the feasibility of using Miromatrix' perfusion decellularization
technology to create a fully revascularized cardiac patch for the treatment of
ischemic heart disease and congenital heart repair. While medical advancements
have decreased the overall mortality rate for acute myocardial infarction (MI)
patients, therapeutic options are lacking to address the underlying loss of
myocardial tissue, resulting in a mortality rate greater than 33% at five years.
For congenital repair, current surgical approaches for cardiac reconstruction
utilize synthetic materials that do not have the ability to grow and remodel
with the patient. The proposed cardiac-derived revascularized cardiac patch may
promote faster reconstruction of functional tissue by providing a fully
perfusable scaffold with a composition and architecture similar to native
cardiac tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this
research are the development of a revascularized cardiac patch to treat ischemic
heart failure and congenital repair. Inhibiting the onset or delaying the
severity of heart failure will have a significant effect on reducing the
treatment cost of heart failure, which currently is estimated at over $37
billion. This product with have significant advantages over existing
technologies, including: 1) full thickness, biological, cardiac-derived matrix
material; 2) vascular supply to support migrating cells and remodeling; 3)
superior mechanical properties; and, 4) no need for immunosuppressive therapies.
Moreover, this will be the first cardiac-derived, revascularized patch available
for treating ischemic areas of the heart.