* 1142327
* SBIR Phase I:  Composites Based on High Bio-content, Low Toxicity, Green Matrix Resins
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Paula Watt, Premix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will establish the
feasibility of 90% plant-based polymer systems as matrices for composite
materials. These composites will displace petroleum-based thermoset chemistries
including polyester, vinylester, epoxy, and urethanes. Although commercial bio-
content resins exist currently, they are still 50 to 75% petroleum-based,
whereas the renewable bio-base content of the proposed systems will be as high
as 90%. The research objectives of the Phase I project will be 1) synthesis of
small quantities of these resins, 2) composite sample preparation and testing,
and 3) evaluation of alternative synthetic routes for improved performance. The
University of Akron, well known for macromolecular engineering of novel
polymeric materials, will be subcontracted to formulate resins at up to 10 L
scale and to develop synthetic routes to impart additional reactivity and
specific performance attributes to the polymers. We will prepare composite
material test specimens and evaluate manufacturability along with projected
cost. Materials testing will be done to establish performance levels and
identify areas of needed improvement. These efforts will provide the data
required to establish performance, manufacturability, cost and market viability
of the matrix systems and composites.

The broader impact and commercial potential of this project encompass all
products that currently utilize petroleum-based thermoset resins, which include
chemicals of significant environmental health and safety (EH&S) concern, such as
styrene, bisphenol A, and isocyanate. A rapidly renewable alternative would not
only provide safer chemistries, it would mitigate the growing domestic
insecurity due to depleting oil reserves and dependence on foreign oil from
unstable regions of the world. In recent years, market demands have been
accelerating in terms of environmental health and safety. Increasingly,
businesses are compelled by the market pull for green products and operations,
as well as regulatory considerations, to consider issues surrounding limited
resources and the sustainability of our ecosystems, workplaces, and homes.
Manufacturers of polymer-based reinforced composites have been scrambling to
meet these expectations through incremental improvements of conventional
technologies. This proposal is a shift from this paradigm to integration of a
new chemistry for polymer matrices for reinforced composites. These resins will
have a competitive advantage, due to their domestic and predictable raw material
feed stream, increased green content, reduced carbon footprint, and lower
toxicity.