* 1142379
* CAREER: Building Occupant Network Dynamics (BOND) - Multi-scale Experimentation and Simulation in the Built Environment to Achieve Sustained Energy Conservation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* John Taylor, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program
award is to understand, improve and predict the dynamics that occur in networks
of building occupants when individuals in these networks can view energy
utilization of their peers. In pursuing this objective, this research aims to
address the grand challenge of reducing building energy consumption and
associated greenhouse gas emissions. Four energy utilization experiments in
residential and administrative buildings will be performed to empirically assess
and model the complex inter-relationships between occupants and occupant
networks in influencing energy use decisions. These experimental results will be
integrated into an agent-based simulation model to predict the impact of
building occupant network dynamics on achieving sustained energy conservation in
and across buildings. The pedagogical objective of this CAREER program award is
to combine in-class experiments and pedagogical simulations to achieve critical
thinking and higher order learning that fosters the dynamic engineer of the
future called for by the National Academy of Engineering and the American
Society of Civil Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will enhance our understanding of energy efficiency in buildings
by establishing the critical influence of social and physical networks on
achieving sustained energy conservation in buildings. The research will
contribute simultaneously to the meeting of ambitious greenhouse gas emission
targets set by our local and national governments and to the creation of
fundamental knowledge on network dynamics. The research will contribute a new
perspective on networks within which building occupants associate themselves
with energy conservation practices and the diffusion of those practices within
building occupant networks that will be measured and explained. The findings and
the resulting simulation will be integrated into university and K-12 teaching
and community outreach.