* 1142369
* Dynamics and Stable Structures in Some Nonlinear PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Marta Lewicka, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 32,619.00

The goal of this project is to study four stable structures arising in various
physical phenomena, modeled by nonlinear partial differential
equations:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Traveling waves in the Boussinesq model of
reactive flows: The Boussinesq system is the simplest system of equations
exhibiting behavior of premixed flames in a gravitationally stratified
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Attractors to Navier-Stokes equations in thin
three-dimensional domains: The working condition of previous research in the
area has been that the limiting geometry, as the thickness of the domain
vanishes, is flat. This project will investigate the technically more involved
case of non-flat limit geometries. This investigation is partially motivated by
adapting the model to applications, e.g. in
oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Self-similar, singular solutions to the
complex Ginzburg-Landau equation: This equation describes a variety of
phenomena, from nonlinear waves to second-order phase transitions. Interest also
stems from analogies with the three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equation and the
three-dimensional supercritical nonlinear Schrodinger
equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iv) Rarefaction wave solutions to strictly
hyperbolic systems of conservation laws with large data (following on results of
NSF grant DMS-0306201).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stability of
patterns arising as solutions to equations of mathematical physics, notably
related to fluid or gas dynamics, is of central interest to scientists and
engineers. The stable patterns are those expected to be observed in experiments.
They may be continuous waves, jumps (for example in the density of the studied
quantities), or other singularities. Analysis of unstable patterns, solutions of
the equations that are non-observable physically, gives important insight into
the time evolution of the observed ones. This project analyzes patterns in
solutions of several important systems of equations. The applications range from
meteorology, blood circulation, lubrication, and combustion in gases, to studies
of phase transition phenomena such as super-conductivity, super-fluidity, and
liquid crystals.&lt;br/&gt;