* 1142381
* SBIR Phase I:  SmartNet Applications for Mobility and Safety (SAMS)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Pravin Varaiya, Sensys Networks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 10/31/2012
* USD 146,237.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will pursue an
innovation that can dramatically improve traffic mobility and safety. This study
is based on an open wireless sensor network platform that supports many sensing
modes, and time-stamps all measurements. The sensing modalities include magnetic
sensors that detect vehicles; new micro-radar sensors that detect bicycles,
pedestrians and parked vehicles; GPS-based sensors that locate vehicles;
conflict monitoring cards that measure traffic signal phase; and environmental
sensors that can be added as they become cheaper. The proposed concept can be
incrementally deployed to augment sensing capability and coverage area; it can
be deployed over all major arterials in a city within one month. Being time-
synchronous, different data sources can be combined to develop innovative
applications about intersection safety, arterial delay and emissions, signal
coordination, transit priority, vehicle location, and parking availability.
Today, this information is unavailable (e.g. intersection safety) or needs
special purpose systems (e.g. pedestrian presence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will benefit city
administrations. Poor intersection control causes 5 to 10 percent of traffic
delay on major roads. Congestion costs the peak-period traveler 38 hours of
travel time and 26 gallons of fuel annually. 36 percent of crashes are
intersection-related. Faced with this high cost of poor road management, city
administrations are looking to analyze data to efficiently deliver
transportation services. This "analytics" approach brings rich dividends through
improved mobility and safety. However, collecting the data to implement this
approach today is prohibitively expensive. Existing intersection safety products
are primarily Red Light Enforcement (RLE) cameras. RLE is controversial. An
Insurance Institute of Highway Safety (IIHS) report states: More than 25 percent
of drivers oppose red light cameras; they believe that cameras can make
mistakes, are used to generate revenue for governments rather than for safety;
lead to more crashes because drivers speed up to beat the red light or stop
suddenly and are rear-ended; or invade privacy.