* 1142183
* Earthquake mechanics on faults that operate at low average levels of prestress
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Nadia Lapusta, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2016
* USD 411,527.00

Accumulating observational evidence suggests that major mature faults, which
tend to produce large, destructive earthquakes, are "weak", i.e. produce
earthquakes at average stress levels much lower than expected based on typical
static friction coefficients of 0.6 to 0.8 and fault-normal stresses of the
order of overburden minus hydrostatic pore pressure. Two classes of models have
been proposed to explain such low-stress behavior: (I) chronically weak faults,
both during slow (quasi-static) and fast (seismic) slip, and (II) quasi-
statically strong but co-seismically weak faults, for which static resistance is
high on average, but weakens substantially at seismic slip rates. In this
project, the investigator proposes to build fault models representative of the
two classes of low-stressed faults, simulate long-term slip histories on such
faults that include sequences of earthquakes, and explore similarities and
differences in both seismic and aseismic behavior between the two classes of
models, and between the models and natural faults. The project aims to determine
the set of models that can reproduce a range of robust observations about mature
faults in various settings. As a part of the study, they plan to investigate the
role of earthquake nucleation in overall fault behavior, explore the relation
between seismic and long-term behavior, and test the ability of simplified,
quasi-dynamic, methods of earthquake simulation to capture the results of the
fully dynamic models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to better
understanding of potential earthquake scenarios on mature faults, including the
role of nucleation and heterogeneity. Such understanding would contribute to
developing algorithms for early warning and formulating suites of scenario
earthquakes for use in earthquake engineering. Combined with codes for wave
propagation and site and building response, the methodology for simulating
earthquake sequences can become a vital ingredient of physics-based simulation
capability for seismic hazard analysis in densely populated areas.