* 1142196
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: An Analysis of Prehistoric Greek Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Daniel Pullen, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Under the instruction and supervision of Dr. Daniel Pullen, Debra Trusty will
study changes in prehistoric ceramic cooking vessels from five important sites
in Greece: the Petsas House at Mycenae, the Potter's Shop at Zygouries, the East
Alley at Korakou, and the newly-discovered sites of Stiri and Kalamianos.
Mycenae, located in the northeast Peloponnese of Greece, was such an influential
citadel and developed such remarkable innovations that it gave its name to the
culture of the prehistoric Greek mainland during the Late Bronze Age, known as
the Mycenaean period (1,600-1,200 BC). The other four sites incorporated into
this study have varying connections to Mycenae which changed over time depending
upon their access to raw materials and trade routes. This study focuses on
identifying how Mycenae gained political control in the northeast Peloponnese,
especially in areas previously thought to be outside of Mycenae's influence. Ms.
Trusty will conduct specific archaeological techniques, including petrographic
microscopy and Neutron Activation analysis, on ceramic cooking vessels to
determine if and how Mycenae was able to manufacture and trade such items to
peripheral sites by Mycenae for economic and social
gain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant because it provides
insight into the dynamics which allow traditional societies to function and to
expand over time. Because archaeology can document "slow" changes which often
take place on a millennial time scale it provides a unique window into the
processes which lead to societal transformation. This research provides a case
in point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cooking pots are important elements of daily life
in all cultures as they bridge the gap between elite and lower classes through
the common need for nourishment and are frequently found in large numbers in
archaeological excavations. Such vessels can be tested using different ceramic
analyses that can identify the sources of raw materials, uses of vessels, and
production methods distinctive of individual potters or workshops. Nevertheless,
cooking pots are an understudied and misunderstood element of Mycenaean culture.
Ms. Trusty seeks to correct this imbalance by analyzing changes in stylistic
features of cookware vessels, examining production techniques, determining the
origin of minerals within clays through use of a petrographic microscope, and
studying distribution patterns through Neutron Activation Analysis conducted on
clay types. By accomplishing this four-step methodology it is argued that a
"changing of the guard" can be identified at peripheral sites, where the area
initially had strong trading contact with various cities in Greece until Mycenae
achieved dominance over long-distance trade by the beginning of the Mycenaean
period. These results will aid in identifying specific measures taken by the
elite in Mycenae in order to gain and maintain control over territories and
trade routes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to have a broader impact
as it is strongly dependent upon international collaboration and contributes to
projects directed by scholars in the United States. Research will be conducted
in Greece using laboratories and equipment from the American School of Classical
Studies in Athens, the British School in Athens, and the National Center for
Scientific Research in Athens. The conclusions reached for this project will
result in a published dissertation and smaller articles and presentations, which
will be submitted to international and national journals and conferences. Such
endeavors aim to contribute to the general understanding of science,
archaeology, ancient economies, and ceramic studies.