* 1142002
* Terrestrial Geological Context for Glacier Change in the Northeast Antarctica Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Michael Kaplan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 424,700.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to investigate last glacial
maximum through Holocene glacial change on the northeastern Antarctic Peninsula,
an area distinguished by dramatic ice shelf collapses and retreat of upstream
glaciers. However, there is a lack of long-term context to know the relative
significance of recent events over longer time scales. The PIs will obtain data
on former ice margin positions, ice thicknesses, glacier retreat and thinning
rates, and Holocene glacier change in the James Ross Island Archipelago and
areas near the former Larsen-A ice shelf. These data include maximum- and
minimum-limiting 14C and cosmogenic-nuclide exposure dates integrated with
geomorphology and stratigraphy. Understanding the extent, nature, and history of
glacial events is important for placing current changes in glacial extent into a
long-term context. This research will also contribute to understanding the
sensitivity of ice shelves and glaciers in this region to climate change.
Records of changes in land-terminating glaciers will also address outstanding
questions related to climate change since the LGM and through the Holocene. The
PIs will collect samples during cooperative field projects with scientists of
the Instituto Anta&amp;#769;rtico Argentino and the Korea Polar Research
Institute planned as part of existing, larger, research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
includes collaborations with Argentina and Korea. The PIs are currently involved
in or are initiating education and outreach activities that will be incorporated
into this project. These include interactions with the American Museum of
Natural History, the United States Military Academy at West Point, and
undergraduate involvement in their laboratories. This project provides a
significant opportunity to engage the public as it focuses on an area where
environmental changes are the object of attention in the popular media.