* 1142455
* SBIR Phase I:  Economically Viable High-Performance Concrete Nanocomposites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jue Lu, Metna Co.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will make complementary
use of relatively low-cost graphite nanomaterials and conventional microfibers
to realize balanced gains in diverse engineering properties of high-performance
concrete. The targeted nanomaterials offer most of the geometric and performance
advantages of carbon nanotubes at substantially reduced cost; they also provide
a relatively high concentration of surface functional groups, which facilitate
their dispersion and interfacial interactions in concrete. The peculiarities of
concrete structure and construction practices impose unique challenges for the
effective use of nano-scale reinforcement. These challenges will be addressed
through refinement of the particle size distribution of cementitious materials,
reduction of the capillary pore size and content, lowering the presence of
micro-scale crystalline products among cement hydrates, and modification of
nanomaterial surfaces using polyelectrolytes and high-molecular-weight
surfactants. These measures employ economically viable materials and methods
commonly used with high-performance concrete and nanomaterials. The proposed
project will: (i) identify complementary selections, surface modification
conditions and dosages of nano- and micro-scale reinforcement, and concrete mix
designs which are cost-effective; (ii) develop a theoretical framework to
explain the reinforcing action of nanomaterials in concrete; and (iii) assess
the commercial merits and priority applications of high-performance concrete
nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project draws upon major gains in the safety (under explosion, fire and
earthquake), structural performance and durability (weathering and
abrasion/erosion resistance, and fatigue life) of the concrete-based
infrastructure resulting from the use of economically viable nano-scale and
hybrid reinforcement systems. The benefits rendered to concrete by the new
reinforcement system far surpass those of conventional (micro-scale) fibers in
terms of both the extent of improvements and the range of properties impacted.
The high reinforcement efficiency and the relatively low cost and industrial-
scale availability of the selected nanomaterials make them highly cost-
competitive against conventional fibers. The new hybrid reinforcement offers
pronounced gains in a wide range of qualities, and performance-to-cost ratios
surpassing those rendered by each reinforcement system alone. The unprecedented
balance of qualities provided by high-performance concrete materials with hybrid
reinforcement helps expand their markets beyond those of conventional fibers,
impacting broader markets for concrete admixtures (including fibers). Examples
of priority applications for high-performance concrete nanocomposites include
mission-critical infrastructure systems (protective shelters, hazardous/nuclear
waste containment systems, nuclear power plants), key components of the
transportation infrastructure (bridges, tunnels), and critical elements of the
hydraulic and sewer infrastructure.