* 1142241
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Conformational Screen for Rapidly Identifying Kinase Inhibitor Type Using SHG
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project builds on the
rapid FDA approval success of recent cancer therapeutics that act on a specific
conformation state of their target protein. Biodesy has developed a new optical
technique, Second Harmonic Generation that measures protein conformation in real
time and addresses the challenge of rapidly identifying and discriminating
ligands that bind to or induce different protein conformations. They are
applying this technique to understanding the critical protein conformations that
distinguish the different classes of inhibitors against protein kinases. Biodesy
plan to use site-specific mutations of cysteines within Abl kinase to identify
and measure conformation changes at discrete areas within the protein and study
how these are modified in the presence and absence of different classes of
inhibitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial implications of this
research are to provide a comprehensive, high throughput platform that will
enable the rapid identification of novel therapeutics. The FDA recently provided
accelerated approval to a structure-specific inhibitor of BRaf, Vemurafenib,
which functions by holding its targeted protein in an inactive conformation
state. Gleevec (revenue in excess of $4B), functions in a similar fashion.
Interest in techniques that can identify this mechanism of action has grown
markedly. Biodesy?s platform has the potential to greatly accelerate
identification and development of similar therapeutics. There are more than 500
kinases in the kinome so the commercial potential of the approach is
significant. Furthermore, its broader impact is to provide a general method for
identifying conformation-specific drugs across all target classes.