* 1142767
* SBIR Phase I:  Sulfur-infused carbon nanostructures for High Energy Density Secondary Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Navaneedhakrish Jayaprakash, NOHMS Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 179,826.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
nano-scale process for synthesizing sulfur infused carbon composite cathode
materials to produce high-energy density lithium-sulfur (Li-S) secondary
batteries with a high rate of charge/discharge and extraordinarily long cycle
life. Phase I research objectives include, (1) develop a process suitable for
making large quantities of material, (2) design and fabricate prototype reactor
for synthesis process, (3) material characterization, and (4) fabricate battery
prototypes. This research will result in continued improvement in properties of
Li-S composite material, identification of critical processing characteristics,
and will identify challenges to increasing scale. State-of-the-art lithium-ion
electrode materials used in laptop computers and mobile devices are limited to a
maximum power density of 0.28-0.6 kWh/kg, while Li-S offers the highest
theoretical energy densities (2.3kW/kg). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project show that lithium-sulfur
batteries with a long cycle-life (&gt;300) are a potentially disruptive
technology in the $11-$13 billion lithium-ion battery market because of their
3-4x energy density advantage over existing chemistry platforms. Lithium-ion
batteries exist in a range of consumer products, such as laptops, smart phones,
and electric vehicles (EV), for which size, weight, and battery life are
critical to customer satisfaction. Additionally, energy storage is becoming a
more important issue for the US electric grid, as wind and solar renewable
energies continue to expand their role in electricity supply. Better batteries
are of value to consumers, who are able to get more operating time from lighter
mobile devices or EVs, and to product manufacturers, who are given the
opportunity to differentiate from competitors with lighter and less expensive
devices and vehicles. Enhanced energy storage technology also increases
efficiency in the wind and solar electricity sector by matching power generation
with consumer demand. This proposal also allows for further development of a
nano-composite synthesis, which has a broader scientific and technological
impact in similarly structured materials for energy storage, water purification
membranes, carbon capture, and photovoltaics platforms.