* 1142976
* SBIR Phase I:  Design of a Novel Unitized Regenerative Fuel Cell System Using Advanced Materials for Efficiency Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Kathy Ayers, Proton Energy Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 152,934.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses global
energy concerns by enabling reduced dependence on energy derived from fossil
fuels. A major limitation of many renewable energy sources is the intermittent
nature of the source, such as solar or wind. As the percentage of energy applied
to the grid from these sources grows, energy storage systems must be developed
to store energy during peak generation periods, and provide power during lower
generation periods. Hydrogen-based regenerative fuel cells are an ideal
candidate for these applications due to their high energy density, fast response
times, and carbon-free footprint when the hydrogen is generated by electrolysis
using the renewable power source. However, materials for the electrolysis and
fuel cell stacks are still too expensive to make this solution cost effective.
The goal of this project is to develop bifunctional electrodes for operation in
both fuel cell and electrolysis mode, enabling a single stack to serve the
function of both the electrolyzer and fuel cell and eliminating significant
cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this research are
applicable to consumer, industrial, and military customers. All of the United
States armed services branches have identified energy storage as a critical need
for assuring troop safety and operational energy security. Higher energy density
for longer unmanned missions, reduction in fuel needs for forward operating
bases, and reduced power signatures are key concerns to be addressed. The
proposed energy storage system can provide power for military surveillance
vehicles, forward operating bases, and consumer homes. Japan is already leading
the effort in distributed energy generation and has deployed thousands of
residential energy storage systems. However, most of the current systems are
based on natural gas, which still relies on fossil fuel sources and contributes
to the problem of increasing global carbon dioxide levels. Hydrogen-based
systems enable a fully reversible chemical cycle of hydrogen and oxygen to water
and back. Advances in these areas will find immediate commercial interest, and
will address a specific capability that enables clean, sustainable energy
solutions.