* 1142566
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Biodegradable Biopolymer from Waste Methane Gas
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Molly Morse, Mango Materials
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will use waste methane
gas&lt;br/&gt;(biogas) as a feedstock to produce pellets of polyhydroxyalkanoate
(PHA), a valuable&lt;br/&gt;polymer that is converted into a variety of eco-
friendly plastic products such as&lt;br/&gt;children?s toys, electronic casings,
water bottles, and food packaging. The current&lt;br/&gt;plastics market is
dominated by traditional petroleum-derived, non-biodegradable,&lt;br/&gt;energy-
intensive plastics. Alternative plastics are derived from rapidly
renewable&lt;br/&gt;biological resources (biobased) and consumed by microbes
when no longer needed&lt;br/&gt;(biodegradable). Unfortunately, these
alternative plastics are often costly and energyintensive&lt;br/&gt;to produce.
The company has a novel, energy-efficient method to produce
a&lt;br/&gt;biodegradable, biobased plastic at a cost competitive with
petroleum-based plastics.&lt;br/&gt;Phase I will assess the feasibility of this
novel process for full-scale commercial&lt;br/&gt;production using biogas from a
wastewater treatment plant. The main objective is to&lt;br/&gt;achieve stable-
operation and increased bioplastic production through optimization
of&lt;br/&gt;parameters including biological yields, rates, and costs at the
Phase I scale. This&lt;br/&gt;optimization will result in the production of
bioplastic from waste biogas at a price&lt;br/&gt;competitive with petroleum-
based plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will ultimately be the widespread&lt;br/&gt;production
of low-cost bioplastics from waste biogas and the eventual displacement
of&lt;br/&gt;petroleum-based plastics. Bioplastics have the potential to capture
an increasing&lt;br/&gt;fraction of the plastics market, thereby giving
consumers the choice to purchase&lt;br/&gt;affordable, environmentally friendly,
bioplastic-based products. When bioplastic&lt;br/&gt;products produced by the
company are disposed in modern wastewater treatment&lt;br/&gt;plants or
landfills, they biodegrade anaerobically (without oxygen) to methane.
This&lt;br/&gt;methane can be cycled back and reenter the process as feedstock
to produce more&lt;br/&gt;PHA. Thus, the life cycle may be closed, creating a
?cradle to cradle? system. This use&lt;br/&gt;of biogas will provide a strong
economic incentive for facilities to capture their methane,&lt;br/&gt;rather
than releasing or flaring it, which will reduce greenhouse-gas emissions
and&lt;br/&gt;reduce corresponding impacts on global warming. The innovation
will enhance scientific&lt;br/&gt;understanding by studying the production of
bioplastic from waste biogas and by&lt;br/&gt;characterizing the microbial
species responsible for this conversion. This project&lt;br/&gt;represents one
of the first times that waste biogas will be used commercially to feed
a&lt;br/&gt;community of bacteria to produce a valuable product.