* 1142284
* EAGER: Raman Analysis of Thermophoretically Sampled Soot Particulate
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* J. Houston Miller, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 99,050.00

1142284&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Soot is the term given to small particles that are mostly composed of
carbon, and that result from incomplete combustion processes. Soot formation
plays both positive roles (radiation from hot particles is the dominant
mechanism for heat transfer in boilers) and negative (in the same boilers, soot
may coat furnace walls and soot particle impingement on the turbine blades of a
commercial airline engine leads to wear) in energy generation. Soot is also
important in the environment as it increases mortality in urban areas and
contributes to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the laboratory, what we
understand about soot formation comes from measurements near the beginning
(through the measurements of concentrations of small precursor molecules) and
near the end (through optical measurements in flames and/or microscopic analysis
of collected particulate matter) of the process. As a consequence, there are
several fundamental questions that have gone unanswered: What is the mechanism
for the transition from flat, planar molecules to three-dimensional particles?
What is the nature of the carbon bonding in the youngest particles?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to answer these questions
through a study of particles sampled from several types of flames. By
understanding the detailed chemistry and physics of soot formation and
destruction in flames, we enable combustion system engineering that can enhance
the positive effects of soot in flames (heat transfer) and while minimizing
deleterious heath effects and environmental impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's principal investigator has been a leader in the science of soot
formation for more than 20 years. In the 1980s, he proposed that soot particles
are composed of aggregates of flat, and extremely stable, molecules known as
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). His calculations suggest that the
binding energy that holds clusters of PAH together is strong enough for them to
survive even at flame temperatures. To prove this hypotheses, in this project
particles are studied using Raman spectroscopy, in which laser light is
"scattered" from the carbon particles, providing information about the optical
and electronic properties of the particles, which can then be used to infer
structure and morphology. Analysis is performed on particles that are rapidly
extracted from laboratory flames that mimic a wide range of conditions found in
practical combustion devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the technical motivation for the project described
above, an additional outcome of this award will be the education of a doctoral
student in the Chemistry Department of GWU. The GWU Ph.D. program is smaller
than most US doctoral chemistry programs. However, its size has been an
attribute in attracting top-quality students who are looking for the type of
individual attention that is available there. Its small size has catalyzed
interdisciplinary research that links the chemistry program with scientists and
engineers with mutual interests at GW, at other US academic campuses and
laboratories, and at partner institutions throughout the world. This strategy
has been a successful recipe in insuring that their graduates find employment in
both the public and private sectors. George Washington University is ranked
among the top few universities in the country in the population of women in
science and engineering graduate programs. In line with this fact, the chemistry
department's graduate program and the PI's lab have majority female populations.