* 1142035
* Collaborative Research: VeLveT Ice - eVoLution of Fabric and Texture in Ice at WAIS Divide, West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Rachel Obbard, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 265,354.00

1142167/Pettit

This award supports a project to develop a better understanding of the relation
between ice microstructure, impurities, and ice flow and their connection to
climate history for the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) ice core site. This work
builds on several ongoing studies at Siple Dome in West Antarctica and Dome C in
East Antarctica. It is well known that the microstructure of ice evolves with
depth and time in an ice sheet. This evolution of microstructure depends on the
ice flow field, temperature, and impurity content. The ice flow field, in turn,
depends on microstructure, leading to feedbacks that create layered variation in
microstructure that relates to climate and flow history. The research proposed
here focuses on developing a better understanding of: 1) how ice microstructure
evolves with time and stress in an ice sheet and how that relates to impurity
content, temperature, and strain rate; 2) how variations in ice microstructure
and impurity content affect ice flow patterns near ice divides (on both small
(1cm to 1m) and large (1m to 100km) scales); and 3) in what ways is the spatial
variability of ice microstructure and its effect on ice flow important for
interpretation of climate history in the WAIS Divide ice core. The study will
integrate existing ice core and borehole data with a detailed study of ice
microstructure using Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) techniques and
measurements of borehole deformation through time using Acoustic Televiewers.
This will be the first study to combine these two novel techniques for studying
the relation between microstructure and deformation and it will build on other
data being collected as part of other WAIS Divide borehole logging projects
(e.g. sonic velocity, optical dust logging, temperature and other measurements
on the ice core including fabric measurements from thin section analyses as well
as studies of ice chemistry and stable isotopes. The intellectual merit of the
work is that it will improve interpretation of ice core data (especially
information on past accumulation) and overall understanding of ice flow. The
broader impacts are that the work will ultimately contribute to a better
interpretation of ice core records for both paleoclimate studies and for ice
flow history, both of which connect to the broader questions of the role of ice
in the climate system. The work will also advance the careers of two early-
career female scientists, including one with a hearing impairment disability.
This project will support a PhD student at the UAF and provide research and
field experience for two or three undergraduates at Dartmouth. The PIs plan to
include a teacher on their field team and collaborate with UAF's "From STEM to
STEAM" toward enhancing the connection between art and science.