* 1142640
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Selectively Reinforced Aluminum Composite Brake Rotor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Josh Loukus, REL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 179,818.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on developing
a one-piece functionally graded hybrid (fiber/particle) reinforced aluminum
alloy matrix automobile brake rotor. Composite brake rotors have substantial
weight savings potential, but costs and performance have limited their adoption.
In this project we will explore the concept of a one-piece, hybrid reinforced
rotor. The new rotor will have significantly better properties and lifespan
compared to conventional materials due to the functional reinforcement gradient
(FRG) across the braking surface and the tailored macro-interfaces. While the
project will benefit from our experience with FRG motorcycle brake rotors, the
proposed work is not a direct extension because of unique challenges associated
with it. A brake rotor has three functional zones: a) friction interface
(heating zone), b) venting (cooling zone) and c) mounting hub (torque transfer
zone). Each of these zones must have specific material attributes for the rotor
to function properly. The development of the FRG transition interfaces between
these zones is the focus of the Phase I effort. This work will address
challenges related to the development of the squeeze casting process, die and
preform design, and the control of the microstructure and properties of the
aforementioned zones and interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project includes weight savings in
automobiles, increased fuel efficiency, and reduced emissions. This technology
will also help in reducing weight in military vehicles, which will increase
their loading capacity, reduce fuel consumption, and increase mission lengths.
It is also expected that the longer life of the proposed brake rotors will
reduce the related maintenance requirements. The company has partnered with the
Polytechnic Institute of New York University, which will allow students to gain
hands-on training. This functionally-graded one piece rotor will be a first-of-
its-kind product in this market segment, which is expected to create a strong
competitive position for our team. The deployment of this technology may also
help to spur the development of other lightweight automobile components.
Finally, successful development of this product, and the subsequent commercial
transition in Phase II will result in the creation of high-paying jobs in the
domestic economy.