* 1142022
* Joint EPSRC/NSF Workshop on Software Development for Grand Challenges in the Chemical Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Todd Martinez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 39,300.00

Computation and simulation has become a major tool in chemistry and related
disciplines. Yet the infrastructure needed to fully exploit this tool remains
underdeveloped. Major advances are both possible and sorely needed in algorithms
that exploit the newest computer architectures and paradigms, interoperability
of both new and existing software, and in defining the paradigm in which
simulation interacts with experiment and/or practical applications. Some of the
major development activities in this regard are occurring in the US and UK, and
it is clear that some combination and coordination of these efforts would
accelerate progress and help ensure software
interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together some of
the leading experts in theoretical chemistry, cyberinfrastructure, computer
science and mathematics from the US and UK in order to explore potential
opportunities for increased collaboration and joint approaches that leverage
computation and simulation to solve grand challenge problems in chemistry. Areas
such as software interoperability, algorithms for electronic structure and first
principles dynamics, techniques for long time and rare event simulation, and the
potential for development of disruptive algorithms which map more effectively
onto modern computer architectures will be covered.