* 1142493
* SBIR Phase I:  Through-Building Device-free Localization for Emergency and Tactical Operations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Joey Wilson, Xandem Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the rapid deployment of wireless networks for the purpose of device-free
localization (DFL) in tactical through-building surveillance applications. DFL
locates people inside of a building using only simple radio devices deployed on
the outside of the building. In a police or military operation, these devices
are thrown or launched around the building, and then measure the received signal
strength (RSS) between many pairs of devices. Within seconds of deployment, the
DFL system shows a map tracking people and objects within the building. Such a
system requires rapid deployment techniques and real-time operator-free network
configuration. This project will advance the state-of-the-art in self-
configuring and adaptive wireless networks. Methods for using reconfigurable
antennas to direct the antenna pattern through the building regardless of how a
sensor lands will be developed. For operator-free deployment, the network will
have devices which self-localize, and learn the statistics of the particular
radio channels to be measured. The combined results will show that tactically
deployed wireless devices can be used to rapidly obtain intelligence regarding
occupants before entering a dangerous building.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project are significant, as
lives are lost every year because law enforcement officers do not know what is
happening on the other side of a wall. If successful, this project will enable a
product for police/SWAT and military special operations forces (SOF) which will
save lives by providing actionable intelligence prior to entering a dangerous
building. Existing radar technology for through-wall imaging is too expensive
($100k) for all but the most cost-insensitive applications. We plan a product
that, because of its low cost, small size, and ease of use, will be standard
equipment in police departments and in SOF teams. We will thus capture a portion
of an $78 billion surveillance equipment market, which is growing at a 10-13%
annual rate. Development of rapid deployment technologies for wireless networks
will benefit a wide range of environmental monitoring and "internet-of-things"
systems.