* 1142318
* SBIR Phase I:  Economic Feasibility of ABFX Process
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Dennis Burke, Environmental Energy & Engineering Co.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate a more
effective and economical process for extracting the chemical and energy
resources from lignocellulosic biomass. Existing lignocellulosic pretreatment
technologies use any of a variety of chemicals, heat, and mechanical energy to
separate the poorly hydrolyzed lignin from the cellulose, and hemicellulose for
enzymatic hydrolysis to sugars, and fermentation of sugars to alcohol, or in the
case of anaerobic digestion to biogas. The use of chemicals, or operation at
high temperatures and pressures dictate the cost of pretreatment. This research
will investigate a process that pretreats lignocellulosic biomass at low
temperature and pressure without the use of chemicals. The process operates with
very low energy inputs and may be driven by waste heat.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the adoption of
an economical process for the efficient extraction of energy and chemical
resources from biomass. The pretreatment process will be used for the production
of liquid and gaseous fuels from lignocellulosic biomass. The process will be
used to reduce waste residuals from biomass processing by increasing the
percentage of the biomass converted to renewable energy. Potential markets
include agricultural enterprises that produce liquid and gas fuels from energy
crops or crop residues, such as bio-refineries, farms with anaerobic digesters,
composting facilities, municipal and industrial solid waste facilities, confined
animal feeding operations (CAFOs) and bio-refineries for pre and post consumer
solid waste processing. The process is expected to lower the cost of bioenergy
production and thereby improve its use while reducing GHG emissions.