* 1142123
* Micro-Submersible Lake Exploration Device (MSLED) - Development of first generation propelled slim-hole device for subglacial lake (&amp; aquatic enviornments ) exploration
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Alberto Behar, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 352,684.00

This project is to develop, test and deploy a miniaturized submersible for
investigating subglacial lakes and other remote and hazardous aquatic
environments. The Micro-Submersible Lake Exploration Device (MSLED) will expand
the range of accessible environments by integrating a variety of hydrological
and vision sensors into a compact and modular robotic platform. The MSLED is
designed to minimally disturb the environment during in-situ measurements, and
will be equipped with appropriate in-situ chemical sensors and a high resolution
imaging system to determine the geological, hydrological and chemical
characteristics of its surroundings. The MSLED will accomplish the following
objectives: (1) Measure horizontal and vertical chemical, temperature and
pressure gradients to determine sources and sinks of subglacial water, and
describe biological habitability; (2) Provide the first visual characterization
of the nature of such sites and the novel ecosystems they might host; (3)
Acquire images and basic hydrographical and compositional data to aid in
understanding ice sheet interactions with water. After thorough testing in a
test site near McMurdo Station in Antarctica, the first field deployment for the
MSLED will be in Whillans Ice Stream located in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.
This field campaign will be conducted in collaboration with the WISSARD project
during the upcoming Austral summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
development and deployment of the MSLED will build on previous efforts by the PI
during an EaGER project, and is based on a currently existing version of the Jet
Propulsion Lab Antarctic borehole camera. The MSLED will be a remotely operated
vehicle during its initial deployment, but will be further developed into an
autonomous platform for use in future subglacial lake deployments. This research
platform will extend the previous observational capabilities by including
additional sensors and extending observable spatial range in subglacial water
bodies. This will enhance the scientific value of MSLED as compared to a simple
borehole probe. For simplicity and risk reduction, the MSLED will be coupled to
the Antarctic Ice Borehole Probe (AIBP). This probe will serve as the host
vehicle to the MSLED. The MSLED and AIBP will then descend through the borehole
to access the subglacial lakes. Once there, the MSLED will separate from its
host and autonomously navigate, collecting chemical and physical signatures
while recording and transmitting digital video images to the control station
through a fiber optic cable