* 1142929
* SBIR Phase I:  Reactive and Refractory Metal Processing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* S. Long, Arcast Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate an
improved method of producing advanced reactive and refractory metal alloys on a
medium to large scale. The proposed concept will offer a route to produce
alloys, castings and powder using clean melting techniques. Advanced titanium
alloys, for example, require special processes to maintain their material
properties. This process will allow the development of specialist alloys without
the cost and complexity of large and expensive foundry processes and rolling
mills. The process to be developed will take pure elemental material and produce
castings or powder in one direct cycle. The Phase I project will focus on the
design and construction of a furnace to accomplish these goals, and will also
develop the key processing routes for successful melting, alloying and melt
delivery. The concept rig to be developed will feature a hybrid of arc and
induction cold crucibles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be the creation of new methods for development of
specialist and advanced reactive and refractory alloys. Currently there is no
economically viable route for these alloys to move from small, lab-scale
experiments to use in large-scale commercial applications. This new process will
speed the process of transitioning these materials into emerging applications.
The overall objective of this project is to create a pilot-scale plant to
produce castings and powder of these specialist materials. Some selected
material systems where this new process will have a potential impact include
advance titanium-based shape memory alloys and intermetallics such as niobium-
silicide based compounds. These new materials will create value for customers
and users in the medical and aerospace industries, among others. The new process
will be commercialized via the sale of a toll production service for castings
and powder, and also via direct sales of the resulting equipment. Finally, the
ability to more cheaply and easily produce pilot-scale quantities of novel
alloys will enhance the scientific understanding of these materials.