* 1142107
* Collaborative Research:  Seasonal Trophic Roles of Euphausia Superba (STRES)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Edward Durbin, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,162,151.00

Krill, Euphausia superba, is a keystone species in the Antarctic ecosystem and
provides the trophic link between microscopic plankton and charismatic megafauna
such as penguins and whales. Recent evidence suggests krill may not be
exclusively planktonivorous, which introduces the potential of new pathways of
carbon flux through krill based ecosystems. A change in our view of krill from
one of being herbivores to omnivores opens up several
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate induced change in the extent, thickness
and duration of overlying sea ice coverage is expected to change the prey fields
available to krill, and to have subsequent effects on the suite of predators
supported by krill. The nature of this benthic prey?krill link, which may be
crucial in those parts of the seasonal cycle other than the well studied spring
bloom, is yet to be determined. DNA techniques will be used to identify and
quantify the prey organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will measure the
in situ feeding ecology and behavior of krill and, ultimately, the success of
this key species. An overall goal is&lt;br/&gt;to investigate seasonal changes
in Euphausia superba in-situ feeding and swimming behavior in the Wilhelmina Bay
region of the Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) area, known to be a region of
changing climate. Understanding the biological impacts of climate change is
important to societal and economic goals. The project scientists will
additionally team with a marine and environmental reporting group to design
presentations for an annual journalist meeting.