* 1142552
* SBIR Phase I:  A Nanofluidic Instrument for High-throughput Single-molecule Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Deborah Mahoney, Odyssey Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
commercial nanofluidic chip for the rapid identification of epigenetic marks on
individual molecules. The instrument will dramatically improve existing methods
of epigenomic analysis by removing two major limitations of the current
technology. The proposed device will enable automated quantification of multiple
epigenetic marks simultaneously using minute inputs of chromatin and high
throughput single molecule observations. The approach involves measuring
distinct fluorescent signals from antibodies bound specifically to epigenetic
marks on individual chromatin fragments that are electrophoretically transported
through lasers focused within a nanoscale fluidic channel. The objectives of
this proposal are to transform this laboratory setup into a prototype commercial
product by increasing the throughput using parallel fluidic channels and
transforming to a free space optical system. It is anticipated that this Phase I
proposal will result in the fabrication of devices containing 96 parallel
nanofluidic channels and the design of the free space optical system that will
facilitate this transformation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it will result
in commercially available products that overcome two key limitations of current
epigenomic technology. Current technology requires an abundant amount of input
material and can query only one epigenetic mark at a time. The proposed single
molecule analytical methods can overcome both of these limitations. It is
anticipated that this effort will yield a new disruptive epigenomics technology
to serve commercial, academic, and clinical needs. By developing an automated
instrument that can interrogate multiple epigenetic marks simultaneously on
single chromatin molecules extracted from very small inputs of cells, this
technology will enable epigenomic analyses that are far more information rich
and lower in cost than is currently possible.