* 1142058
* RAPID: Learning from Earthquakes - Performance and Resilience Data from the March 2011 Tohoku, Japan Earthquake on Bridges, Buildings, and Government and Community Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Jay Berger, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2013
* USD 45,000.00

The 11 March 2011 magnitude 9.0 Tohoku, Japan earthquake, with its ensuing
tsunami, surprised many in the research and practicing professions. An
earthquake of this size was not anticipated; the Japan Trench subduction zone
had been assumed capable of a magnitude 8.0 earthquake but not much greater.
Early reports indicate the constructed environment survived the ground shaking
reasonably well given the magnitude of the event. However, the tsunami
overpowered coastal defenses and caused wide-spread devastation along Japan's
northeast coast. This event is an important learning opportunity for U.S.
researchers due to (1) the many similarities between this event and a possible
Cascadia subduction zone earthquake and tsunami that could affect western U.S.
coastal communities and (2) the paucity of knowledge currently available on the
effects of a catastrophic disaster in a developed country with many engineered
structures designed or retrofitted for earthquake loads. The U.S. and Japan are
both highly industrialized and advanced economies with many commonalities in
their built infrastructure. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award builds on
the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute's (EERI) long-term relationships
with Japanese researchers and practicing engineers to organize the rapid
collection of perishable data and early field reconnaissance from this 2011
event as a fully collaborative effort. Researchers supported on this award will
team directly with respective Japanese colleagues to undertake field
investigations followed by jointly authored reports. The primary collaborating
organizations are the Architectural Institute of Japan, the Disaster Prevention
Research Institute at Kyoto University, and the Japan Association for Earthquake
Engineering. Three research themes have been identified for the rapid collection
of perishable data: transportation systems, particularly bridges; engineered
buildings, including the large inventory of retrofitted structures and use of
modern technologies such as base isolation; and government and community
response, in the areas of emergency response, social capital, institutional
frameworks, and rebuilding, for a disaster of this extraordinary scale and
complexity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data from this reconnaissance will be used
to advance knowledge in seismic bridge retrofit and design requirements; seismic
performance of structures with protective systems and concrete and steel
buildings; and resilience, response, and recovery for a catastrophic event.
Findings from the reconnaissance investigations will be shared widely with the
broader research and practicing earthquake engineering community through EERI's
clearinghouse web site, short research summaries posted on the clearinghouse and
in inserts to the EERI monthly newsletter, and a web cast.