* 1142432
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Throughput Multi-Analyte ChIP Assay Development
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* MaryAnne Jelinek, Active Motif, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a high-throughput, multi-analyte chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
system. ChIP is a widely used technique among life science and biomedical
researchers seeking map the specific DNA sequences that are bound by a DNA
binding protein. Its use ranges from single gene analysis through to genome-wide
applications that use next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies as readout.
As envisioned, the proposed technology will transform the lengthy and cumbersome
multi-day ChIP into a high throughput compatible single-day experiment. The
technology will result in the insertion of oligonucleotides containing NGS
platform-compatible tags and "bar-code" sequences into DNA fragments associated
with the immunoprecipitating antibodies. Each antibody will be associated with a
unique barcode that can also be used for direct DNA sequencing or PCR analysis.
Feasibility of this approach will be achieved by systematic identification of
optimal conditions for insertion of the bar-code containing oligonucleotides
into chromatin, and then, with antibody-coupled oligonucleotides. Final
validation will be performed at the genome scale using NGS to compare the
genomic representation of the library produced by the novel method with that of
traditional ChIP. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is far reaching. The life sciences research tools market is
currently estimated at $42 billion, with the epigenetic sector experiencing high
growth fueled by researchers purchasing commercial epigenetic products rather
than spending the time and effort to develop them in-house, and by advances in
NGS, which has accelerated genome-wide epigenetic analyses. Successful
development of the high-throughput, multi-analyte ChIP will have significant
impact scientifically and commercially in the life sciences and biomedical
research arenas. In less than five years post-launch, it is projected to replace
traditional ChIP, which represents 20-25% of the epigenetic research tools
market estimated at $175-245M in 2010. The development of this method will open
epigenetic analysis to virtually all researchers by eliminating technical
barriers, and by significantly reducing sample size requirements associated with
traditional ChIP, including a potential for single cell analysis. Development of
this technology will spur the creation of additional novel technologies such as
homogeneous ChIP for high throughput screening, multi-analyte ChIP, and open the
door for environmental, nutrition, and toxicology disciplines to study the
epigenetic profiles of any eukaryotic organism on a genome wide scale.