* 1142839
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost High Performance Cold Plate for Power Electronics Thermal Management
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* James Connell, ADVANCED THERMAL TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on the
development of a novel, low-cost cold plate for power module thermal management.
This cold plate is enabled by a unique integrated package and heat sink assembly
technology. The target application for the integrated package and heat sink
assembly is high-temperature silicon carbide (SiC) power modules. SiC power
modules offer significant improvements over conventional silicon power modules
to include up to a 10 fold increase in power density, a 10 fold higher breakdown
voltage and 90% lower switching losses. Currently, packaging technology to
support SiC power module operation at temperatures of 250 oC and higher does not
exist. The proposed integrated package and heat sink assembly is comprised of a
ceramic-graphite-copper substrate joined to a unique, low-cost highly effective
compact heat exchange surface. This integrated assembly provides for electrical
isolation of the power module?s electronic components and circuitry, and
minimizes the thermal resistance between the SiC devices and the heat sink
coolant. Further, the assembly provides for the minimization of the coefficient
of thermal expansion (CTE) mismatch between the different material layers of the
assembly in order to minimize thermal stresses resulting from cyclic power and
temperature operation ? key to achieving a reliable product with a long life.
The primary research objectives of this project are the development of a low-
cost unique integrated package and heat sink assembly and the establishment of
the fabrication processes required to support its manufacture. There is a
critical need for advanced packaging and active cooling solutions capable of
meeting the thermal management requirements of emerging SiC power module
applications which include: (1) hybrid electric vehicle (HEV) power inverters
and converters; (2) power converters for renewable energy systems (e.g., solar
arrays, wind generators); and (3) power supplies for a wide variety of
electronic systems (DC power supplies and inverters).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of
technology that will enable lower cost SiC power modules. Advances in
semiconductor technology have led to smaller devices operating at higher power
and the trend toward higher power semiconductor devices is forecast to continue.
This trend is driving the demand for packaging materials that are closely
matched to the CTE of semiconductor devices while lowering package overall
thermal resistance. The proposed project will develop a cold plate based upon
the integration of unique package and heat sink technologies for use in power
modules. This integrated package and heat sink will minimize device/package CTE
mismatch while reducing module overall thermal resistance by 60% to 70% compared
to current packaging technology. This technology will enable power modules with
higher packaging density and improved reliability and life. These improvements
will lead directly to a power module cost reduction of 30% to 40% and will be
key to driving the demand for SiC power module technology. The project research
will produce the key knowledge required to enable the design and low-cost
manufacture of reliable, highly effective integrated package and heat sink
products for use in a range of power electronic systems. The target application
for the technology is a SiC power module for use in an HEV application. This
technology development will benefit a range of end user to include consumers and
businesses. Further, considering the broad range of power module applications,
the technology will benefit a spectrum of commercial, industrial, and military
high power electronic systems end users. The annual commercial product sales
based upon the technology is estimated to grow to ~$150 million over a 10 year
time horizon. Finally, the adoption and wide-spread use of the package and heat
sink technology will enable electronic systems based upon more efficient higher
power semiconductor materials (e.g., SiC, gallium nitride, etc.). This will
provide benefit to society in the form of more efficient, longer life
electronics; reduced energy consumption; and improved environmental quality.