* 1142459
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbial Synthesis of Propylene
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Abhay Singh, MOgene Green Chemicals LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to engineer
a biocatalyst for efficient transformation of feedstocks into a linear, volatile
olefin, namely propylene. Current production of propylene from fossil fuels is
unsustainable from economical, environmental, and social perspective. The
biomass-based technologies being developed also are limited by either the low
specificity of chemical processing or product toxicity to microorganisms. To
overcome these challenges, a novel pathway for direct fermentation of feedstocks
into propylene will be utilized. The functional attributes of propylene, such as
insolubility in aqueous solutions and high vapor pressure, make their production
process from microbial organisms facile by eliminating issues associated with
product toxicity and recovery. The current proposal outlines plans to optimize
biocatalyst efficiency by redirecting metabolite fluxes towards propylene. This
will be achieved by deregulation of the relevant metabolic pathways with
elimination of the known bottlenecks. The outcome of this project will be a
"fast-to-market" biocatalyst that transforms feedstocks into propylene, a
primary building block for petrochemical industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be the
development of a technology for microbial production of an important chemical
intermediate, propylene, from renewable and sustainable feedstocks with broad
applications in fuels and products. Propylene is one of the largest olefin used
by petrochemical industries with a market value exceeding $100 billion. It is
expected that by 2015, demand will outpace the propylene production capacity.
Success of the proposed project would, therefore, lead to a timely development
of a biorefinery industry for production of propylene from cheap and renewable
feedstocks. Moreover, the knowledge gained from this project will be leveraged
in optimization of biocatalysts for production of other olefins, thereby opening
new market opportunity. Success of the proposed process technology will
contribute to the economic and energy security of the U.S. by reducing the
dependence on fossil fuels.