* 1142720
* Collaborative Research: Linkages among Mitochondrial Form, Function and Thermal Tolerance of Antarctic Notothenioid Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2011,08/31/2013
* J. Malcolm Shick, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 40,843.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic notothenioid fishes have evolved in the
Southern Ocean for 10-14 MY under an unusual set of circumstances. Their
characteristics include the complete absence of the circulating oxygen-binding
protein, hemoglobin (Hb) within the Channichthyid (Icefish) family of
notothenioids. Moreover, some species within the 16 members of this family have
also lost the ability to express the oxygen-binding and storage protein,
myoglobin (Mb) in cardiac muscle. Our previous work has determined that the loss
of Hb and/or Mb is correlated with significant increases in densities of
mitochondria within oxidative tissues, and extensive remodeling of these vital
organelles. To date, nothing is known about how modifications in mitochondrial
architecture of icefishes affect organelle function, or more importantly, how
they affect organismal-level physiology. Most critical for Antarctic fishes is
that mitochondrial characteristics have been linked to how well ectotherms can
withstand increases in temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
research project will address the hypothesis that the unusual mitochondrial
architecture of Antarctic Channichthyids has led to changes in function that
impact their ability to withstand elevations in temperature. Specifically, the
research will (1) determine if the unusual mitochondrial architecture of
icefishes affects function and contributes to organismal thermal sensitivity,
(2) identify differences in organismal thermal tolerance between red- and white-
blooded notothenioids, (3) identify molecular mechanisms regulating changes in
mitochondrial structure in icefishes. The results may establish channichthyid
icefishes as a sentinel taxon for signaling the impact of global warming on the
Southern Ocean. Broad impacts of this project will be realized by participation
of high school biology teachers in field work through cooperation with the
ARMADA project at the University of Rhode Island, as well as graduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;