* 1142013
* CAREER: Storing, Querying and Re-Using Provenance of Computational Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Juliana Freire, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2014
* USD 437,549.00

Workflow-based systems have emerged as an alternative to ad-
hoc&lt;br/&gt;approaches to data exploration that are widely used in the
scientific&lt;br/&gt;community. Workflows can capture computational tasks at
various levels&lt;br/&gt;of detail and systematically record the provenance
(history) information&lt;br/&gt;necessary for reproducibility, result
publication and&lt;br/&gt;sharing. Although the benefits of using scientific
workflow systems&lt;br/&gt;are well known, the fact that workflows are hard to
create and&lt;br/&gt;maintain has been a major barrier to wider adoption of the
technology&lt;br/&gt;in the scientific domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to produce new algorithms and techniques&lt;br/&gt;for exploring
and re-using useful knowledge embedded in workflow&lt;br/&gt;specifications and
in the provenance of the data they manipulate.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
key limitations in existing workflow&lt;br/&gt;systems. First, it develops a set
of usable tools that enable casual&lt;br/&gt;users (who do not necessarily have
programming expertise) to perform&lt;br/&gt;exploratory tasks and solve problems
through workflows. These include&lt;br/&gt;intuitive user interfaces to
manipulate collections of workflow and to&lt;br/&gt;query workflows by example.
Second, it builds a scalable provenance&lt;br/&gt;management infrastructure to
support the efficient execution of
these&lt;br/&gt;operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results of this
project advance the state of the art and&lt;br/&gt;build fundamental knowledge
in storing, querying, and re-using&lt;br/&gt;provenance of computational tasks.
This project has the potential to&lt;br/&gt;impact a variety of applications
where the creation and maintenance of&lt;br/&gt;workflows is currently a major
bottleneck. This includes large&lt;br/&gt;computational science projects and
portals. Furthermore, it makes&lt;br/&gt;workflows and workflow technology more
accessible to casual users.&lt;br/&gt;Through our interdisciplinary
collaborations, this project will have&lt;br/&gt;immediate impact in helping
improve the scientific discovery process.&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of graduate
and undergraduate students in the project&lt;br/&gt;will provide mentoring
opportunities. The PI is committed to&lt;br/&gt;recruiting minority students.
The results of this project will be&lt;br/&gt;disseminated as research papers
and as freely available tools at the&lt;br/&gt;project
website:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.utah.edu/~juliana/projects/NSF-
IIS-0746500&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;