* 1142855
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy Efficient and Miniaturized Power Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,10/31/2012
* David Giuliano, Arctic Sand Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2012
* USD 149,943.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project leverages the game
changing&lt;br/&gt;Transformative Integrated Power Solution (TIPS?) power
conversion technology, to&lt;br/&gt;bring a radical breakthrough to the
traditional tradeoff between efficiency and circuit&lt;br/&gt;size, pushing this
figure of merit to a new frontier. By storing the required
energy&lt;br/&gt;primarily electrically (capacitive energy storage) rather than
magnetically (inductive&lt;br/&gt;energy storage), harnessing a 1000x
improvement in energy density, and using the&lt;br/&gt;adiabatic (lossless)
mechanism to charge and discharge the capacitors, the novel&lt;br/&gt;TIPS?
power conversion architecture is able to deliver miniaturized products of
30X&lt;br/&gt;smaller than the traditional approach, or cut the power losses due
to conversion by 50-&lt;br/&gt;75%, at cost parity. The project proposes a
radically novel systems architecture for the&lt;br/&gt;data center market, and
investigates the lower voltage end of the system, namely the&lt;br/&gt;12:1 step
down ratio necessary for servers. To de-risk the commercialization path,
this&lt;br/&gt;project researches, designs and fabricates prototypes based on
the TIPS? technology,&lt;br/&gt;by pushing the limit along three distinct
dimensions: conversion efficiency, size, and&lt;br/&gt;cost. This project will
generate a feasible 3D space of viable specifications to
accelerate&lt;br/&gt;bringing this game changing technology to
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, enables commercial&lt;br/&gt;power conversion products, at no cost to
the consumer, data center, or server&lt;br/&gt;manufacturer, that can save $1
billion a year in electricity cost, amounting to annual&lt;br/&gt;savings of 7
million tons of CO2 emissions worldwide. Data centers emit more heat
and&lt;br/&gt;green house gasses than the entire airline industry worldwide. By
2020, data centers?&lt;br/&gt;energy consumption will exceed 200 billion kWhr
per year. While server equipment&lt;br/&gt;spending has been declining,
electricity spending has increased 10 fold over the last&lt;br/&gt;fifteen
years, approaching $50 billion annually. More than 50% of this cost is due
to&lt;br/&gt;power conversion losses and the resultant cooling needs. The TIPS?
power converter&lt;br/&gt;technology can cut these power losses by 50%.
Additionally, by enhancing the scope&lt;br/&gt;and technological understanding
of this novel technology, and by making power&lt;br/&gt;conversion more
efficient, significant value flows to numerous other markets, such
as&lt;br/&gt;increased battery life in Mobile Devices ($3 billion), more power
generated by Solar&lt;br/&gt;Cells (&lt;$1 billion), extended driving range of
Electric and Hybrid Vehicles ($0.2 billion),&lt;br/&gt;no standby losses in
consumer electronics ($6 billion), and reduced component count&lt;br/&gt;and
higher reliability in the Industrial and Measurement sector ($4 billion).