* 1142085
* Revealing Late Holocence Climate Variability in Antarctica from Borehole Paleothermometry
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Atsuhiro Muto, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 02/29/2016
* USD 185,149.00

Alley/1142085&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to continue the
collection and analyses of firn temperature data from three automated firn
thermal profiling units deployed in Dronning Maud Land sector of East Antarctica
as part of the Norway-US IPY Traverse project between 2007 and 2009. The
intellectual merits of this project are as follows: 1) to constrain and improve
the parameterization of firn thermal properties (thermal conductivity and
specific heat capacity) that are required for the borehole paleothermometry, 2)
to study the change in firn temperature since the deployment of thermal
profiling units ~5 years ago and derive the surface temperature trend for that
time period, and 3) to compare and contrast the surface temperatures and their
trends derived from the measured firn temperatures and satellite thermal
infrared data for the past three decades. The project also involves acquiring
and deploying an automated system to record transient temperatures at multiple
depths in the top 16 meters of the shallow borehole at Dome Fuji, to provide
useful data and to prepare for the possibility of conducting temperature-logging
in the existing deep (3035 m) and shallow (112 m) boreholes at Dome Fuji in the
near future. The preparation of the shallow borehole and the installation of the
automated system will be carried out by collaborators from the Japanese
Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) in 2012-13 Antarctic field season. The data
collected by this automated system will be used to constrain the thermal
properties of upper firn layer at Dome Fuji, as well as comparing with data from
other sites, increasing the geographic extent of these studies. The broader
impacts of the project include presentation of results at scientific conferences
and publication of results in peer-reviewed journals. Public outreach will
include targeted work with science teachers and middle school students.