* 1142111
* EAGER: High-Gradient-Strength NMR Accessories for Transport Measurements in Advanced Nanomaterials and Microstructures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Haskell Beckham, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 99,990.00

1142111 Leisen

The objective of this Early-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to investigate molecular-level transport of (i) reactant species in
soups that generate functionalized nanotubes, (ii) probe molecules in designed
nanotubes, (iii) fluids in engineered micro-contacters, (iv) macromolecules with
multicyclic topologies, and (v) anions in anion exchange fuel cells. These
studies will be conducted by diffusion nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) using
specialized equipment acquired with support from this grant (high-gradient-
strength diffusion probe and gradient amplifier) on an existing NMR
spectrometer. The resulting new experimental capabilities are urgently needed to
enable exploratory research in fluid dynamics, separations, nano- and
microfluidics, nanoengineering, energy conversion, and fuel cell development.

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is embodied in the research
thrusts for which strong-gradient NMR diffusion measurements are needed:

(i) Mechanistic studies of nanotube growth and engineering -The requested NMR
accessories will enable measurements of size and structure of nanoparticles,
thus yielding significant insight into growth mechanisms of single-walled
inorganic nanotubes prepared in aqueous solution. This knowledge is crucial for
the development of nanotubes, which find applications in various
transformational technologies such as electronics, separations and energy
storage/generation/ management.

(ii) Transport in nanotubes - Nanofluidic transport in tubular materials is
poorly understood, in spite of its scientific and technological relevance.
Inorganic nanotubes (based on metal oxides) and organic nanotubes (based on
crosslinked cyclodextrins) are good model systems for nanotube membranes and
biological nanochannels. NMR diffusion measurements of probe molecules within
these nanotubes will provide important insights that cannot be achieved with
conventional techniques.

(iii) Hierarchically engineered fabrics for large-array micro-contactors
Engineered fabrics provide a novel and highly scalable approach to liquid-liquid
contacting of immiscible fluids for (bio)chemical separations. Development of
this technology requires transport measurements of multiphase flow and
characterization of pore structure in 3D amphiphilic microchannels.

(iv) Dynamics in topologically complex fluids - Diffusion of cyclic and
multicyclic macromolecules is poorly understood relative to linear polymers due
to the existence of unconventional entanglements. Investigation of the diffusion
behavior of blends of these topologically complex macromolecules with linear
polymers will be key in unraveling the effect of molecular topology on
fundamental aspects of polymer dynamics.

(v) Transport in anion exchange membranes - Fuel cell designs that employ anion
exchange membranes are being developed to overcome shortcomings of existing
proton exchange membranes. Diffusion of hydroxide ions and water confined in
cationic polymer membranes with heterogeneous morphologies must be studied in
order to optimize these membranes.

Broader Impacts: The NMR diffusion accessories will enable research that is
critical for development and understanding of materials, processes and
technologies with transformative potential in areas like chemical processing and
energy management. Important breakthroughs with inorganic and organic nanotubes,
inexpensive fabric-based micro-contactors, and anion exchange membranes could
have broad implications for economic development. The proposed equipment is a
modest investment that is critical for enabling exploratory research within all
of these ?high-risk high-payoff? areas and provides unique interdisciplinary
leverage. The requested equipment will significantly enhance the general
research capabilities of a large group of researchers across a variety of fields
in the greater Atlanta area.