* 1142128
* Graduate Student Travel Support for the 11th North American Masonry Conference (NAMC) of The Masonry Society (TMS); Minneapolis, Minnesota, 5-8 June 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Arturo Schultz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2011
* USD 5,000.00

This grant provides funds to enhance graduate student participation in the 11th
North American Masonry Conference (NAMC) of The Masonry Society (TMS). The 11th
NAMC brings together experts from diverse fields with a strong interest in
masonry structures. One of the focal points of the 11th NAMC is the
investigation of new applications of mechanics in enabling future advances in
masonry technology. Academics, industry representatives and students from many
fields (civil engineering, engineering mechanics, architecture and others) have
committed to presenting research results on a wide range of topics relayed to
masonry structures and mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These funds will allow
the conference organizers to attract graduate students to the 11th NAMC to
present their work. The students will present their work to an international
audience of academics and researchers, they will learn about the most recent
advances in the field of masonry structures, and they will be inspired to
continue working in and contributing to the field. The conference participation
will also facilitate cross-pollination between the disparate fields that
comprise the masonry research community, as well as between the US research
community with those in other countries. The 11th NAMC forum will help foster an
environment that allows for the anticipation of new challenges that engineers
face with regards to masonry structures, thereby facilitating professional
growth to ensure that the challenges are met.