* 1142663
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Network for Science, Engineering, Arts and Design (NSEAD)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Carol Strohecker, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 07/31/2012
* USD 43,493.00

The Network to support Science, Engineering, Arts and Design (NSEAD) will
support transformative research and pedagogy that are only possible through the
combined expertise of diverse knowledge domains and disciplines. For example, as
physicists and engineers developed new imaging techniques, visual artists
experimented with the new expressive potentials they enabled, often influencing
development of the technologies. Visual artists and musicians have created and
continue to create computer languages and algorithms while pushing technologies
for composing and recording in fields of software engineering, artificial
intelligence, graphics and visualization. Students who are involved in the arts
have higher math, verbal, and composite SAT scores than students who are not
involved in the arts. (Vaughn and Winner, 2000). There is a growing movement by
higher education academic institutions in the United States to integrate the
Arts and STEM disciplines to educate the whole student while leveraging creative
cognitive skills for solving complex problems in science and technology
disciplines. And finally, diverse ecosystem of academic programs in pre-K to
gray formal and informal STEM learning; scientific research conferences;
exhibitions, and cultural institution programs continues to emerge as new
information technologies, creativity support and social networking tools become
pervasive in our society. This project envisions a network that addresses
fundamental challenges including the need to align academic pedagogies with 21st
century thinking skills; to promote diversity of perspectives, approaches, and
people in the creative information technology economy; and to benchmark best
practices that create critical thinkers and leaders for the ever-changing
technology-driven job market. The development of such a network will provide a
platform to disseminate and generate public dialogue about the intellectual,
cultural, and economic potential of intersections of science, technology and
creativity.

NSEAD will be a platform to support the burgeoning research community of
Computer Scientists, Engineers, Artists and Designers engaged in integrative
research and pedagogy across these disciplines. NSEAD will provide a bridge for
academic institutions, non-profit organizations, industry liaisons, and resource
providers to collaborate, share best practices in research and pedagogy, and
build stronger affinities. It will serve as a junction for elements such as: 1)
research community development; 2) collaboration and project matchmaking
opportunities; 3) skills expertise referrals; 4) inter-institutional
collaborations; 5) forums to share best practices in pre-K to gray STEM learning
and creative enrichment; and 6) strategies for network leadership and resource
sustainability.