* 1142165
* Collaborative Research: The Land Unknown: Assessing Data Requirements for Modeling Change in the Antarctic Ice Sheet with an Emphasis on the Subglacial Bed
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Christina Hulbe, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 08/31/2013
* USD 289,181.00

Among the most dramatic changes now underway in the polar cryosphere is the
several-fold speedup of Greenland and West Antarctic outlet glaciers.
Computational models of ice sheets face considerable challenges in correctly
simulating these events, which in turn, limits glaciologists' and
climatologists' ability to predict future change. The challenge arises from
limited knowledge of key variables, for example, the shape of the land surface
beneath the ice. Data limitations present two problems; first, important details
of ice behavior may be missed and second, models may produce results that
compare well with observations but do so for the wrong reasons. The goal of this
project is to use these uncertainties themselves as a guide to identifying which
types of data are most important to producing useful projection of future ice
sheet change. The work is focused on two regions, the Aurora basin in East
Antarctica, where new high resolution data have recently become available, and
the catchment surrounding South Pole station deep in the interior or East
Antarctica, where ice flow is currently sluggish may have been faster in the
past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian inference may be used to investigate
formally the contributions of various model attributes to uncertainty in model
projections by synthesizing information from different sources of data, modeling
results, and corresponding error information. Here, an ice sheet model will be
asked to identify the regions and processes that have the largest influence on
ice flow and thickness change, according to an appropriate range of boundary
conditions and initial model states. The approach will allow us to create and
analyze correlation maps showing relationships between various boundary
conditions and model outcome in selected study areas. Those parameters or
regions that are most important should dominate the scatter in model projections
of change. The associated posterior probability density will provide guidance on
how to design observational strategies to meet specified scientific criteria.