* 1142784
* Project Baseline, a living plant genome reserve for the study of evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2011,01/31/2018
* Susan Mazer, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2018
* USD 1,313,480.00

The purpose of this project is to create a national scientific resource: the
first genome reserve of seeds specifically designed to allow investigation of
how plants respond to environmental change over long periods of time. Seeds will
be collected from approximately 80 species throughout the U.S., along with
population, environmental and climatic data, and stored at the USDA National
Center for Genetic Resources Preservation for future use by evolutionary
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To protect biodiversity and preserve our
national resources, it is critical to understand how species will adapt to
changing climates. Many species are already changing, as evidenced by patterns
of earlier flowering in the spring. One powerful way to determine if such
changes are due to adaptive evolution is to raise ancestors and descendents side
by side under common conditions. However, the fortuitous conditions that allow
viable seeds to persist over time and be resurrected from the soil are rare.
This project will create a planned collection of seeds that will allow future
studies of evolution in response to global change. With this project, we will
create a seed 'time capsule' that will allow future biologists to dissect the
genetic basis of evolutionary change. In addition, during the course of seed
collection, many undergraduate students, graduate students and post-doctoral
scholars will be trained in plant population biology and conservation.