* 1142743
* SBIR Phase I:  Personal Service Robotics with Tiered Human-in-the-Loop Assistance
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Matei Ciocarlie, Willow Garage, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,680.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes a
methodology and novel algo-&lt;br/&gt;rithms for Personal Service Robotics.
Recognizing that, in unstructured environments, autonomous
robotics&lt;br/&gt;alone is not yet reliable enough for performing complete
tasks, and complete manual teleoperation is too&lt;br/&gt;labor intensive, this
approach combines autonomous operation with human assistance in a Tiered
Human-&lt;br/&gt;in-the-Loop framework. At all levels, the autonomy will request
help when unexpected or anomalous events&lt;br/&gt;occur. For example, at high
levels the user may be asked to identify objects or adjust plans. At the low
level&lt;br/&gt;the user may be asked to remote control the robot end-e^ector to
unstick a wedged object. Automation&lt;br/&gt;will focus on the most frequent
task components, including motion planning, object grasping, and
simple&lt;br/&gt;rigid-environment manipulation. The major innovations arise
from (a) the design of limit-aware autonomy&lt;br/&gt;in each of these areas,
requesting human intervention when needed and (b) multi-tiered human-
assisted&lt;br/&gt;fallback options that necessitate greater involvement for
severe failures or complex circumstances. Phase I&lt;br/&gt;will demonstrate an
operator assisting a robot completing personal service tasks in non-industrial
environ-&lt;br/&gt;ments. Phase II will parallelize for an operator supporting
multiple robots, with the multiplicative e^ect&lt;br/&gt;demonstrating overall
labor savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project includes accelerating the deployment of robots&lt;br/&gt;in
unstructured environments, extending the market for personal robotic services
beyond single-purpose&lt;br/&gt;autonomous devices, and increasing access to in-
home assistance in daily living for an aging population.&lt;br/&gt;With
demographics shifting to an older population, we face a major shortage of manual
labor, particularly&lt;br/&gt;for unskilled work. This will impact the o;ce and
home environments, and dramatically a^ect the older&lt;br/&gt;population for
whom daily tasks become increasingly burdensome, but also for whom appropriate
service&lt;br/&gt;workers may not be available. Allowing an operator to assist
robots performing personal service tasks can&lt;br/&gt;increase the productivity
of such labor and perform greater personal service than traditionally
possible.&lt;br/&gt;Meanwhile, customers are clearly ready to invest into
robotic technology. For reference, even today's highly-&lt;br/&gt;limited
personal and home robots created a $1.28 Billion global market. A human-in-the-
loop personal service&lt;br/&gt;robot will greatly expand that market, as well
as create markets for operator services and
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;Delivering personal robotic service will have the
immediate bene ts of reduced labor costs and increased&lt;br/&gt;productivity,
while also allowing older adults to age in familiar housing and retain greater
independence.