* 1142562
* SBIR Phase I:  Biomolecular Cell Injection With Nanofountain Probe Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Juan Giraldo, INFINITESIMAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,137.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims at developing and
commercializing a cost-effective cell injection system based on nanofountain
probe (NFP) technology. The NFP has been recently used to investigate drug
delivery and direct cell injection. Benefits of this method include easy
integration with existing infrastructure, force control of injection, and the
ability to control injection volumes at the picoliter level. Injection of large
number of cells is necessary for drug discovery and associated large scale
genomic and proteomic studies. Such studies require delivery of drugs,
conjugated nanoparticles, DNA, siRNA, and proteins into living cells to study
spatial and temporal molecular regulatory mechanisms within the cell.
Considering the delicate nature of living cells, such a task is nontrivial. For
direct drug delivery, micropipette based injection has been used for many years.
However, its viability (cell survival) and lack of automation limit its broad
use. In this project, a single cell injection system will be developed based on
leveraging probe-cell force control and fluidic handling capabilities of NFPs.
The system has the potential for parallel cell injection and ultimately
automated operation, which would greatly enhance viability as a workhorse tool
for cell injection in research labs and pharmaceutical companies.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
new platform for high throughput single cell drug delivery, allowing for
efficient evaluation of drug efficacy and the development of diagnostics and
next generation therapeutics. The application of nanotechnology to medicine
(termed nanomedicine) has provided numerous emerging opportunities in
healthcare, particularly given the increasing demand for in vitro toxicology and
diagnostics as a pathway towards "personalized medicine". Drug delivery to
individual cells and monitoring of associated pathways is at the core of most
research toward in vitro diagnostics and toxicology. Personalized medicine will
require the systematic incorporation of genetic information from individuals in
optimizing preventive and therapeutic care, and much more efficient biomedical
tools. Commercialization of this platform would allow research centers and
pharmaceutical companies to have access to state-of-the-art nanotechnology tools
in their endeavor toward a patient-centered health care system. Furthermore, the
new single cell injection system will find utility in laboratories in
universities across the U.S., exposing the next generation of scientists to
nanotechnology and its impact on medicine.