* 1142890
* SBIR Phase I:  Functionalized Graphene-Based Biosensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2012
* Christian Punckt, Vorbeck Materials Corp
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,892.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
specialized materials formulations based on functionalized graphene sheets (FGS)
for electrochemical biosensor platforms. While carbon-based electrodes have been
applied in a wide range of electrochemical sensor applications, electron
transfer rates are small, leading to rather poor electrochemical activity, and
existing commercially available electrochemical sensing platforms vary greatly
in reactivity and general performance. Graphene has emerged in recent years as a
promising alternative material for the development of electrochemical biosensors
with high sensitivity and specificity. In the proposed program FGS materials
formulations will be developed for detecting specific biologically relevant
analytes. This project will examine the effect of graphene chemistry on
electrochemical activity and utilizing specific bio-active decoration of the
graphene sheets to optimize electrochemical properties and allow for the
efficient design and optimal working performance of the biosensor. The proposed
technology is anticipated to exhibit a combination of outstanding beneficial
properties, such as high electroactivity, good biocompatibility, and versatility
in many different sensing tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the availability of a biosensor
that improves the performance of existing glucose biosensors and opens
opportunities for new sensor product lines for other analyte assays where the
current carbon materials cannot provide the needed performance. The global
biosensor market forecasted to grow by 11.5 % over the next several years,
reaching $14 billion by 2016, with home diagnostics and point of care biosensor
markets comprising $2.8 billion and $6.3 billion respectively of the total
market share. Glucose biosensors account for 30-35 % of the world biosensor
market revenues, and biosensors for other analyst detection such as cholesterol,
proteins, etc, are also predicted to rapidly expand, with forecasted growth of
19 %. If successful, the anticipated electrochemical activity of the new
graphene-based biosensor technology is expected to make it a compelling choice
to improve sensitivity and performance of current carbon-based biosensors.
Furthermore, the science and engineering aspects of this project especially with
regards to electroactivity of graphene and functionalized graphene will be of
broad interest within the scientific community and improve the general
understanding of graphene-based electrochemical systems.