* 1142097
* Collaborative research: TRacing the fate of Algal Carbon Export in the Ross Sea (TRACERS)
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Alexander Bochdansky, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 299,367.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Sinking particles are a major element of the
biological pump and they are commonly assigned to two fates: mineralization in
the water column and accumulation at the seafloor. However, there is another
fate of export hidden within the vertical decline of carbon, the transformation
of sinking organic matter to fine suspended and/or dissolved organic fractions.
This process has been suggested but has rarely been observed or quantified. As a
result, it is presumed that the solubilized fraction is largely mineralized over
short time scales. However, global ocean surveys of dissolved organic carbon are
demonstrating a significant water column accumulation of organic matter under
high productivity environments. This proposal will investigate the
transformation of organic particles from sinking to solubilized phases of the
export flux in the Ross Sea. The Ross Sea experiences high export particle
production, low dissolved organic carbon export with overturning circulation,
and the area has a predictable succession of production and export events. In
addition, the basin is shallow (&lt; 000 m) so the products the PIs will target
are relatively concentrated. To address the proposed hypothesis, the PIs will
use both well-established and novel biochemical and optical measures of export
production and its fate. The outcomes of this work will help researchers close
the carbon budget in the Ross Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This research will support graduate and undergraduate students and
will provide undergraduates and pre-college students with field-based research
experience. Scientifically, this research will increase understanding of carbon
sinks in the Ross Sea and will help develop new tools for identifying,
quantifying, and tracking that carbon. The PIs will interface with K-12 students
through daily reports from the field and through educational modules developed
by several of the PIs in collaboration with science education specialists and
college students. A K-12 educator will be included on the research cruises.
Outreach will be through COSEE Florida and the Maritime Center in Norfolk, VA.