* 1142263
* SBIR Phase I:  Evaporative Cooling Building Envelope Materials Created from Recycled Glass
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Grant Marchelli, EnVitrum Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,935.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on the reuse
of waste glass to generate sustainable replacements for standard building
envelope materials such as concrete and masonry. The materials being developed
are comprised of over 95 percent waste glass and contain no environmentally
harmful additives. When compared to conventional masonry and concrete products,
they require up to 80 percent less energy to produce, and have a reduced carbon
footprint. However, the process to manufacture these materials imparts a unique
internal microporous structure that results in inadequate control of moisture
penetration. This project will investigate the strength characteristics of the
material and will explore the viability of applying environmentally responsible
sealants to reduce or eliminate moisture absorption. The Phase I research will
result in the development of methods for applying sustainable coatings, coupled
with a subsequent analysis of sealant compatibility and hydraulic
characterization of the composite material. A variety of sealants will be
characterized based on final application requirements. The Phase I program will
lead to the production of samples for evaluation by clients and partners in a
variety of application settings.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant.
Successful completion of our Phase I activities will have a positive impact on
both the glass recycling and building industries. The research in this proposal
will establish a new approach for glass manufacturing and will provide a
commercial outlet for waste glass, particularly the vast quantity that cannot
currently be recycled, and therefore is simply hauled to the landfills. This
material will allow manufacturers to adopt cost-effective green product lines
and will also bring value to the construction industry by providing a truly
green alternative to traditional facing materials. The environmental and
societal impacts of this novel building material include improving environmental
quality by decreasing energy consumption, and the associated greenhouse gas
emissions, and by minimizing the burden on the solid waste storage
infrastructure.