* 1142417
* SBIR Phase I:  Nutrient Analyzer with Integrated Optics and Glass-Diaphragm Pump for Field Studies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Philippe Bado, Translume
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will evaluate the
feasibility of developing a colorimetric field-analyzer that will autonomously
monitor inorganic nutrients in agricultural runoff, waste waters, rivers, and
estuaries, and provide the data necessary to model nutrient distribution in the
environment. The program?s long-term goal is to develop an instrument that can
measure nitrate, nitrite, ammonium, and orthophosphate. This instrument will be
designed for prolonged unattended field operations and will perform real-time
measurements with the appropriate sensitivity limits. Its operation will be
based on approved colorimetric methodologies. It will be made entirely of a
material (fused silica) compatible with the associated chemistries, will require
only microliters of reagent per measurement, and will integrate an optical
analytical section that will never require realignment or calibration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this research are
evident in that the initial market is expected to be comprised of researchers
working in the field of oceanography and environmental sciences. The public-at-
large will benefit from this work as essential water quality parameters will be
measured in a cost-effective way, and comprehensive temporal data at the scale
needed to resolve important environmental variability in nutrient
biogeochemistry will be collected. Nutrient concentration and the spatial and
temporal change in concentration, provide perspective for assessing the
biological activity of streams, lakes, estuaries, and oceanic environments. The
en product resulting from this collaborative effort between a small business and
a NSF-funded research center will be adopted by watershed monitoring agencies,
municipalities, and regulatory bodies.