* 1142071
* Seismic Documentation of Subsurface Damage Zones of the M7.2 Darfield and M6.3 Christchurch Earthquake Sequence in New Zealand Using Fault-Zone Trapped Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Yong-Gang Li, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2014
* USD 215,328.00

The M6.3 Christchurch earthquake struck the Canterbury region in New Zealand's
South Island on 22 February 2011, following ~6 months after the September 4,
2010 M7.1 Darfield earthquake in the same region, and has generated a
significant series of aftershocks, many of which are considered big for a M6.3
earthquake. It is not known whether the later M6.3 event is technically an
aftershock because of relationship to the ongoing activity since September last
year, or it is a separate event, given its location on a separate blind fault
south of Christchurch. In order to study the complicated subsurface structure of
damage zones caused by this sequence of earthquakes in NZ, under the support of
an NSF-RAPID and with collaboration of New Zealand researchers, the
investigators deployed 2 short linear seismic arrays of 12 PASSCAL seismographs
across the Greendale fault that ruptured in the 2010 M7.1 Darfield earthquake
and the aftershock zone of the 2011 M6.3 Christchurch earthquake. Two arrays
worked for 4 months starting from May 5th, 2011 and recorded ~1,000 M&gt;2
aftershocks, including a M6.0 and five M5+ large aftershocks with clustered
events. In this project the PI will conduct a systematic examination of the
waveform data recorded at the two cross-fault arrays to identify fault-zone
trapped waves (FZTWs) generated by aftershocks, and simulate these FZTWs using a
3-D finite-difference code to document (1) the subsurface structure and material
properties (width, depth extension, velocity reduction, Q value and co-seismic
rock damage magnitude) of fault zones ruptured in Darfield and Christchurch
earthquakes, (2) the rupture segmentation and branching at seismogenic depth,
(3) the post-mainshock heal of fault rocks from repeated aftershocks, and (4)
compare the results from this study with those we have obtained at rupture zones
of California earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a comparison of major
earthquakes at active faults on the plate boundaries in NZ and CA, the most
basic information on the in-situ state of the fault zone will aid further
understanding of earthquake processes and hazards globally. Results of
subsurface rupture segmentation and/or connection of the Darfield and
Christchurch earthquakes will help to address the question if the second event
is the first one?s aftershock or an individual mainshock, and evaluate the
possibility of a future earthquake in Christchurch areas.