* 1142032
* Test of Lorentz Invariance at the South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Michael Romalis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2015
* USD 559,974.00

Lorentz symmetry, the feature of nature that makes experimental results
independent of the orientation or the boost velocity of the laboratory through
space, lies at the foundation of both the quantum field theory and the theory of
general relativity. Their unification is regarded as one of the biggest, but yet
unmet, challenges in physics. Special relativity postulates that all laws of
physics are invariant under Lorentz transformations, which include ordinary
rotations and changes in the velocity of a reference frame. Subsequently,
quantum field theories all incorporated Lorentz Invariance in their basic
structure. The force of gravity, unlike other fundamental forces, is
characterized by a dimensionful coupling constant that introduces a
characteristic energy of the Plank scale. However, the existence of such fixed
high energy scale is not Lorentz-invariant; hence, tests of Lorentz symmetry
attract a lot of interest as one of the most promising ways for searching
experimental effects of the quantum gravity. Respective high-sensitivity
experimental techniques were developed to search for a spatial anisotropy caused
by Lorentz-violating spin interaction. Spatial anisotropy of an Earth laboratory
is mainly defined by three effects: gravity, magnetic fields, and Earth
rotation. Spin measurements are particularly sensitive to rotations which mimic
Lorentz violating effects, while gravity affects the mechanical stability of the
apparatus. In contrast, magnetic fields can be relatively easily shielded.
Therefore, the most isotropic location for such experiments is at one of the
geographic poles, where Earth rotation vector is parallel to the gravity vector.
This award is to test Lorentz Invariance with unprecedented precision by
deploying a very sensitive atomic spin sensor at the South Pole Station in
Antarctica, where it is unaffected by the Earth's rotation. The experiment will
constrain several possible forms of Lorentz violation in the sensitivity range
where the effects of quantum gravity can be expected, improving existing limits
by a factor of thousand. The project will attract wide attention as a simple
test of the spatial isotropy of the Universe, and observation of any finite
effects would certainly have a tremendous impact on the understanding of space-
time shedding light on one of the most challenging problems in physics ? origin
of gravity. The project will also involve training for the postdocs and students
at the graduate and undergraduate levels.