* 1142010
* Optical Fabric and Fiber Logging of Glacial Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Joseph Talghader, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2016
* USD 398,785.00

1142010/Talghader&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to combine
the expertise of both glaciologists and optical engineers to develop
polarization- preserving optical scattering techniques for borehole tools to
identify changes in high-resolution crystal structure (fabric) and dust content
of glacial ice. The intellectual merit of this work is that the fabric and
impurity content of the ice contain details on climate, volcanic activity and
ice flow history. Such fabric measurements are currently taken by slicing an ice
core into sections after it has started to depressurize which is an extremely
time-intensive process that damages the core and does not always preserve the
properties of ice in its in-situ state. In addition the ice core usually must be
consumed in order to measure the components of the dust. The fabric measurements
of this study utilize the concept that singly-scattered light in ice preserves
most of its polarization when it is backscattered once from bubbles or dust;
therefore, changes to the polarization of singly-backscattered light must
originate with the birefringence. Measurements based on this concept will enable
this program to obtain continuous records of fabric and correlate them to
chronology and dust content. The project will also develop advanced borehole
instruments to replace current logging tools, which require optical sources,
detectors and power cables to be submerged in borehole fluid and lowered into
the ice sheet at temperatures of -50oC. The use of telecommunications fiber will
allow all sources and detectors to remain at the surface and enable low-noise
signal processing techniques such as lock-in amplification that increase signal
integrity and reduce needed power. Further, fiber logging systems would be much
smaller and more flexible than current tools and capable of navigating most
boreholes without a heavy winch. In order to assess fabric in situ and test
fiber-optic borehole tools, field measurements will be made at WAIS Divide and a
deep log will also be made at Siple Dome, both in West Antarctica. If
successful, the broader impacts of the proposed research would include the
development of new analytical methods and lightweight logging tools for ice
drilling research that can operate in boreholes drilled in ice. Eventually the
work could result in the development of better prehistoric records of glacier
flow, atmospheric particulates, precipitation, and climate forcing. The project
encompasses a broad base of theoretical, experimental, and design work, which
makes it ideal for training graduate students and advanced undergraduates.
Collaboration with schools and classroom teachers will help bring aspects of
optics, climate, and polar science to an existing Middle School curriculum.