* 1142356
* SBIR Phase I:  Realization of Transparent Gallium Nitride Wafers by Ammonothermal Growth
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Tadao Hashimoto, SixPoint Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 179,370.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the
coloration problem of gallium nitride (GaN) grown by the ammonothermal method.
Despite its promise to reduce the cost of GaN wafers by 90%, the ammonothermal
growth technique has a coloration problem which impedes the use of the resulting
substrates for high-brightness light emitting diodes (HB-LEDs). The current
major application of GaN wafers is for growing laser diodes (LDs), for which
performance is not seriously affected by the coloration issue. However, optical
loss in the substrate is a serious issue for HB-LEDs. This project aims to
further develop the ammonothermal growth technology to realize low-cost,
transparent GaN wafers usable for HB-LEDs. Removing oxygen, which is the primary
impurity in ammonothermal bulk GaN, is one of the most challenging aspects of
this effort because of the presence of oxygen-sensitive mineralizers. In the
Phase I project, we will first conduct controlled sets of experiments to reveal
the correlation between impurities and coloration. We will also develop an
improved process to minimize the oxygen contamination. The goal of the Phase I
project is to prove the feasibility of these new approaches in obtaining
transparent GaN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is the realization of low-cost, transparent GaN wafers via
ammonothermal growth, which will improve the performance and reduce the cost of
HB-LEDs. The current high price of GaN wafers does not permit cost
competitiveness of HB-LEDs with competing products. The high wafer cost is
attributed to the current labor-intensive, low-yield production method of
hydride vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE). Since the ammonothermal growth process is a
scalable liquid-phase method, it is expected to reduce GaN wafer cost by 90%.
The availability of low-cost, transparent GaN wafers will permit substrates
grown via this method to address a market which is ten times the size of the
current niche (~$1 billion in 2015). Currently, several domestic and
international competitors are pursuing this goal; however, none has achieved
colorless GaN wafers suitable for the HB-LED application. Our novel processes
will directly address the oxidation problem of mineralizers which, we expect,
will solve the coloration problem. This project will contribute to realization
of low-cost HB-LEDs not only for energy-efficient solid-state lighting products,
but also for automobile headlamps and display backlights.