* 1142232
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-Time Monitoring System for Multiple Metallic Contaminants in Environmental and Industrial Waters
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Paul Henning, Advanced Chemical Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 152,296.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
demonstrate the feasibility of a&lt;br/&gt;system that allows for rapid
detection and measurement of the concentration of metal ions in water with
a&lt;br/&gt;view towards application of this system to monitoring water being
released into environmental waters by&lt;br/&gt;industrial companies. Companies
discharging water into the environment maintain wastewater
treatment&lt;br/&gt;facilities, which frequently use chemicals to remove
pollutants from wastewater. Controlling the&lt;br/&gt;efficiency of the
treatment process requires real-time monitoring of the treated water. The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;system will be capable of providing this capability, which
will allow for optimum use of treatment&lt;br/&gt;chemicals ? currently
treatment chemicals are used in excess to account for potentially
large&lt;br/&gt;concentration changes of the target pollutant to be removed.
Thus, a real-time sensor system reduces both&lt;br/&gt;environmental impact and
cost of treatment. The technology employs optical fibers, which
are&lt;br/&gt;chemically modified with sensor molecules whose luminescence
properties change in the presence of the&lt;br/&gt;target
pollutant.&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this research are that
this technology for real-time monitoring is not&lt;br/&gt;only capable of
meeting a critical need for real-time wastewater-treatment process control, but
can&lt;br/&gt;potentially address a range of monitoring tasks requiring a
robust, portable, and field-deployable&lt;br/&gt;measurement system while
offering significant cost advantages compared to existing laboratory-
based&lt;br/&gt;systems. Thus, the impact of this project is beyond the
initially targeted application to environmental&lt;br/&gt;monitoring in general,
exploiting the capability of the technology to accommodate sensors for a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;pollutants.