* 1142301
* WORKSHOP: The Doctoral Colloquium at UbiComp 2011
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Anind Dey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2012
* USD 17,910.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research symposium (workshop) of
approximately 10-15 promising doctoral students, along with 5 high profile
faculty and industrial researchers. The event will take place in conjunction
with and immediately preceding the 13th ACM International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp 2011), to be held September 17-21, in Beijing,
China, and sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery. The annual
UbiComp conference is the premier international forum for the presentation and
discussion of cutting edge research relating to both the technical and applied
aspects of ubiquitous computing technologies, systems and applications. This is
an interdisciplinary field of research and development that utilizes and
integrates pervasive, wireless, embedded, wearable and/or mobile technologies to
bridge the gaps between the digital and physical worlds. Thus, the conference
brings together researchers and practitioners from diverse areas that include
human-computer interaction, pervasive computing, distributed and mobile
computing, real world modeling, sensors and devices, middleware and systems,
programming models and tools, and human-centric validation and experience
characterization. More information about the conference may be found at
http://www.ubicomp.org/ubicomp2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three goals of the
full-day doctoral consortium are to increase the exposure and visibility of the
participants' work within the community, to help establish a sense of community
among this next generation of researchers, and to help foster their research
efforts by providing highly constructive feedback and guidance from senior
researchers in a supportive and interactive environment. To these ends, student
participants will each make a formal presentation of their work to the group,
with ample time allotted for questions and feedback from the faculty panel as
well as from the other student participants. The feedback is geared to helping
students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to
other research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Additional opportunities
for more informal discussion and networking will be during the doctoral
consortium's lunch and dinner events. The students will be invited to present
their research to a wider audience through posters at the conference, and
extended abstracts of their work will be included in the supplemental
proceedings which are distributed to all conference
attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The doctoral colloquium will
help expand the participation of young researchers pursuing graduate studies in
the various fields associated with ubiquitous computing, by providing them an
opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work
and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community. It will further help foster a sense of community among these young
researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Several participants in past UbiComp doctoral consortia have since
gone on to high profile research careers. The organizers of this year's event
have committed to accept no more than one student from any given institution,
and they will make special efforts to attract students who are diverse across a
number of dimensions (e.g., research interests, gender and ethnicity), so that
the participants' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field.