* 1142129
* Collaborative Research: Late Cretaceous-Paleogene Vertebrates from Antarctica: Implications for Paleobiogeography, Paleoenvironment, and Extinction in Polar Gondwana
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Matthew Lamanna, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 12/31/2017
* USD 96,431.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The role that Antarctica has played in vertebrate
evolution and paleobiogeography during the Late Cretaceous and early Paleogene
is largely unknown. Evidence indicates that Antarctica was home to a diverse
flora during the Late Cretaceous and Paleogene, yet the vertebrates that must
have existed on the continent remain virtually unknown. To fill this gap, the
PIs have formed the Antarctic Vertebrate Paleontology Initiative (AVPI), whose
goal is to search for and collect Late Cretaceous-Paleogene vertebrate fossils
in Antarctica at localities that have never been properly surveyed, as well as
in areas of proven potential. Two field seasons are proposed for the James Ross
Island Group on the northeastern margin of the Antarctic Peninsula. Expected
finds include chondrichthyan and osteichthyan fishes, marine reptiles,
ornithischian and non-avian theropod dinosaurs, ornithurine birds, and therian
and non-therian mammals. Hypotheses to be tested include: 1) multiple extant
bird and/or therian mammal lineages originated during the Cretaceous and
survived the K-Pg boundary extinction event; 2) the "Scotia Portal" permitted
the dispersal of continental vertebrates between Antarctica and South America
prior to the latest Cretaceous and through to the late Paleocene or early
Eocene; 3) Late Cretaceous non-avian dinosaurs from Antarctica are closely
related to coeval taxa from other Gondwanan landmasses; 4) terminal Cretaceous
marine reptile faunas from southern Gondwana differed from contemporaneous but
more northerly assemblages; and 5) the collapse of Antarctic ichthyofaunal
diversity during the K-Pg transition was triggered by a catastrophic
extinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
communicate discoveries to audiences through a variety of channels, such as the
Dinosaurs in Their Time exhibition at Carnegie Museum of Natural History and the
outreach programs of the Environmental Science Institute of the University of
Texas at Austin. In addition, Carnegie Museum will launch a student-oriented
programming initiative using AVPI research as a primary focus. This array of
activities will help some 2,000 Pittsburgh-area undergraduates to explore the
relevance of deep-time discoveries to critical modern issues. The AVPI will
provide research opportunities for eight undergraduate and three graduate
students, several of whom will receive field training in Antarctica. Fossils
will be accessioned into the Carnegie Museum collection, and made accessible
virtually through the NSF-funded Digital Morphology library at University of
Texas.