* 1142181
* The United States and Australian Collaborative Workshop on the New Science of Learning
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Andrea Chiba, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,950.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; This international venture aims to coordinate the US Science
of Learning Center scientists with those from the Australian Science of Learning
Centre through an exciting two day workshop and extended visits to the
Australian laboratories for the purpose of planning collaborations and
exchanging information. The two day workshop will bring together scientists,
policy makers, and government officials for the purpose of introducing the
scientific goals and progress from the Science of Learning communities and
engaging in a rigorous day of scientific talks and discussions aimed towards
gaining interdisciplinary perspectives on the role of attention in learning and
formulating research topics designed to move this science into the educational
setting. Finally, US trainees and scientists will spend extended time furthering
their discussions and plans with Australian scientists through laboratory
visits, meetings over data, and extended information exchange on topics relevant
to their specific lines of work. Hence the intellectual merit of this activity
rests in the exchange of ideas between the US scientists and the Australian
scientists, focused on particular issues in the Science of Learning.
Cyberinfrastructure will be developed to support the ongoing exchange of
information and sharing of data from this workshop. The Australian Science of
Learning Centre has graciously offered to incorporate the US community in their
existing symposium on Attention and Learning, in addition to providing all
facilities and organizational services. The broader impacts of this workshop
will be in developing synergies between the scientists in the two countries as
well as within the Science of Learning Centers itself. The workshop will serve
as a foundation for developing an International Science of Learning Community.
Gaining cross-cultural perspectives will enrich our science and be excellent an
excellent experience for our trainees. A major challenge that faces every nation
is how to provide effective and high quality education. This workshop will
contribute to solving this problem and is likely to have an impact on the future
of the global workforce and the global nature of science in general. The grass-
root efforts of international collaborations can be transformational both to the
education of the centers' trainees and to the future quality of the education
this country provides children. These grass-root efforts are essential in this
era of global science.