* 1142837
* CAREER: Understanding the Evolution and Nature of Shocks and Sheets in Space Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2011,01/31/2018
* Merav Opher, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2018
* USD 785,410.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) intends to investigate the nature of shocks and
their corresponding plasma sheets using new in situ spacecraft observations,
analytic theory, and numerical modeling. Her research will focus on how shocks
form close to the Sun, evolve, and then propagate through the solar wind to
Earth and beyond. The PI's goals specifically involve studying how shocks form
and evolve in the heliosphere, how plasma flows in sheets behave, which
mechanism(s) accelerate solar energetic particles (SEPs), identifying the
probable sources of shocks, how shocks propagate in the structured solar wind,
what causes the observed variability in heliospheric particle composition, and
what determines the structure of solar, coronal, and heliospheric magnetic
fields.

Shocks are present everywhere in the solar system, from close to the Sun to the
outer edges of the solar system. They are believed to accelerate particles to
extremely high energies (as in SEPs), which are a major space weather hazard and
pose serious concerns for the design and operation of both manned and unmanned
space missions. The PI's study of the nature of shocks and how they evolve as
they propagate from the Sun to the Earth will provide improved space weather
forecasting capability. The PI will also develop an innovative workshop program
for mentoring young women in space science, which promises to encourage greater
involvement of this underrepresented group.