* 1142312
* EAGER/CEMOR: A New Diagnostic for Quantitative Measurement of HO2 and RO2
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Nicholas Cernansky, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 60,018.00

1142312 Cernansky

Implementing new engine designs that operate utilizing Low Temperature
Combustion (LTC) has been identified as key to lowering emissions, enhancing
efficiency and thereby reducing the dependency of the United States on foreign
sources of fuel. Unfortunately, the chemistry models describing LTC are
inadequate to proceed with these designs and, while the best theories suggest
that LTC is controlled by hydroperoxy radical (HO2) and alkylperoxy radical
(RO2), these species are not readily measured in engines and other combustion
systems by existing methodologies. Quantitative measurement of these radicals
and development of LTC chemistry models will significantly shorten the time to
implement the benefits of LTC. This program is focused on demonstrating that
cavity enhanced magneto-optical rotation (CEMOR), a highly sensitive and
selective laser diagnostic technique developed at Drexel University, can be
applied for in situ measurement of HO2 and RO2 in reaction systems. CEMOR
combines the sensitivity of cavity ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS) with the
selectivity of magneto optic rotation (MOR) to provide selective detection of
weakly absorbing species in complex reacting environments. We have shown in our
laboratory that CEMOR allows selective observation of paramagnetic species,
simplifying detection in otherwise complicated mixtures, and we also have made
the first measurements of a radical, OH, in a lean premixed methane/air flame
using MOR and CEMOR. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of measuring
combustion generated radicals using the MOR and CEMOR techniques, and
illustrates the increase in sensitivity CEMOR exhibits over MOR. The next step
is to measure HO2 in the controlled environment of a photolysis cell using both
CRDS and CEMOR in order to generate high resolution absorption cross section
data and to calibrate the CEMOR technique for the subsequent demonstration of
quantitative measurements in a combustion environment.

Intellectual Merit Application of CEMOR for in situ measurements of HO2 and RO2
radicals will provide new insight into the reaction dynamics of low and
intermediate temperature combustion systems. This will aid in the design of the
next generation engine systems that use this reaction regime to achieve
increased efficiency and reduced emissions. This new measurement capability also
will be useful in other areas (e.g., atmospheric chemistry) where highly
sensitive and selective peroxy radical measurements are desired.

Broader Impact The societal impact of transitioning to engine designs employing
low temperature combustion technologies could be enormous, and this research
will provide an important tool to help enable such a transition. As such, the
research is both appropriate and needed. The educational impact of the research
will be through providing an opportunity to train students in optical
diagnostics and combustion science, giving them the required skills to
contribute to the combustion/energy community. One graduate research assistant
will be supported by this project, and one or two undergraduate students are
expected to participate in this project as part of our Honors Research Program
experience. Special attention will be given to attracting underrepresented
minority and female students building on successful programs existing at Drexel
University. The results of the research will be presented as professional
presentations, archival publications, website entries, and theses/dissertations,
providing other researchers and the public with the information needed to
understand newly important combustion processes.