* 1142570
* SBIR Phase I:  Portable, Low-Cost, and Robust Black Carbon Measurement Instrument using Radio Frequency Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Alexander Sappok, Filter Sensing Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of using radio-frequencies to provide a real-time measurement of
black carbon emissions. There is a growing demand for black carbon measurement
systems in response to increasingly stringent emissions regulations. Accurate
measurement and characterization of ambient and source black carbon emissions
are hampered by the lack of low-cost and portable measurement systems suitable
for use in the field. This information is critical to assess black carbon
levels, identify sources, and ultimately reduce emissions. Filter Sensing
Technologies plans to utilize radio frequencies to provide a direct, real-time
measurement of black carbon. The research will investigate using inexpensive
components, similar to those used in cellular phones, ideally suited for use in
a portable measurement system. The broader/commercial impacts of this research
are that currently the market for particulate matter and black carbon
measurement systems is rapidly outpacing the markets for other types of
emissions analyzers. There is a significant unmet need to provide portable,
real-time, low-cost measurement systems to monitor these emissions. Recent
studies indicate a significant warming potential for black carbon, and have also
linked the pollutant to a range of adverse health effects. Regulators and source
operators alike require tools to monitor black carbon emissions, ensure in-use
compliance, and improve process efficiencies. Currently, few technologies can
distinguish black carbon from other types of particulate matter. The proposed
technology is well-positioned to capitalize on this growth, providing a robust,
portable, and much lower-cost alternative to currently available instruments.