* 1142695
* SBIR Phase I:  ION Gate Membrane For High Performance Redox Flow Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Lin-Feng Li, Bettergy Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 10/31/2012
* USD 149,380.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel ion
gate membrane with controlled pore size for redox flow battery. Redox flow
battery is one of the most promising electric energy storage (EES) technologies.
However, the cost of the state-of-the-art (SOA) membrane used in such battery
has to come down dramatically in order to reach the overall system cost target
for EES applications. Moreover, the ion selectivity of the SOA membrane is also
very poor, leading to ion cross-over and lower energy efficiency for the
battery. In our approach, an ultra thin composite membrane will be developed to
address the issues. Due to its thin thickness, tight pore size control and
material selection, the membrane is expected to have excellent ion selectivity,
proton conductivity and chemical stability. Once fully developed, it will be
able to meet the stringent requirements of large scale redox flow batteries for
EES applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project includes promoting the widespread adoption of redox flow battery
as the low cost EES systems and facilitating the rapid deployment of smart
grids. As we know, in order to satisfy the surging energy demand and mitigate
the environment impact of foil fuel usage, renewable energy sources are becoming
more and more important in the power generation. However, renewable energy
sources, such as wind power, suffer the drawback of fluctuation. To mitigate the
problem, smart grids are now being proposed and developed. The EES system is
considered as the key components of the smart grids. The market for such
batteries is expected to grow rapidly. According to a study, the EES market
could reach $52 billion if 10% of wind plant adopts EES. Our low cost, high
performance ion gate membrane is one of the key components for the redox flow
battery. The breakthrough could accelerate the penetration of redox flow battery
in this market. In addition, development of this innovative membrane will help
maintain our nation's leading position in this important field, creating new
business opportunities and high tech jobs.