* 1142963
* Ocean Surfaces on Snowball Earth
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Bonnie Light, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The climatic changes of late Precambrian time, 600-800 million years ago,
included episodes of extreme glaciation, during which ice may have covered
nearly the entire ocean for several million years, according to the Snowball
Earth hypothesis. These episodes would hold an important place in Earth?s
evolutionary history; they could have encouraged biodiversity by trapping life
forms in small isolated ice-free areas, or they could have caused massive
extinctions that cleared the path for new life forms to fill empty niches. What
caused the Earth to become iced over, and what later caused the ice to melt?
Scientific investigation of these questions will result in greater understanding
of the climatic changes that the Earth can experience, and will enable better
predictions of future climate. This project involves Antarctic field
observations as well as laboratory studies and computer
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is not to prove or
disprove the Snowball Earth hypothesis but rather to quantify processes that are
important for simulating snowball events in climate models. The principal goal
is to identify the types of ice that would have been present on the frozen
ocean, and to determine how much sunlight they would reflect back to space.
Reflection of sunlight by bright surfaces of snow and ice is what would maintain
the cold climate at low latitudes. The melting of the ocean required buildup of
greenhouse gases, but it was probably aided by deposition of desert dust and
volcanic ash darkening the snow and ice. With so much ice on the Earth?s
surface, even small differences in the amount of light that the ice absorbed or
reflected could cause significant changes in climate. The properties of the ice
would also determine where, and in what circumstances, photosynthetic life could
have survived. Some kinds of ice that are rare on the modern Earth may have been
pivotal in allowing the tropical ocean to freeze. The ocean surfaces would have
included some ice types that now exist only in Antarctica: bare cold sea ice
with precipitated salts, and "blue ice" areas of the Transantarctic Mountains
that were exposed by sublimation and have not experienced melting. Field
expeditions were mounted to examine these ice types, and the data analysis is
underway. A third ice type, sea ice with a salt crust, is being studied in a
freezer laboratory. Modeling will show how sunlight would interact with ice
containing light-absorbing dust and volcanic ash. Aside from its reflection of
sunlight, ice on the Snowball ocean would have been thick enough to flow under
its own weight, invading all parts of the ocean. Yet evidence for the survival
of photosynthetic life indicates that some regions of liquid water were
maintained at the ocean surface. One possible refuge for photosynthetic
organisms is a bay at the far end of a nearly enclosed tropical sea, formed by
continental rifting and surrounded by desert, such as the modern Red Sea. A
model of glacier flow is being developed to determine the dimensions of the
channel, connecting the sea to the ocean, necessary to prevent invasion by the
flowing ice yet maintain a water supply to replenish evaporation.