* 1142166
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Upper Pleistocene Rapid Climate Change using Continuous, Ultra-High-Resolution Aerosol and Gas Measurements in the WAIS Divide Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 425,000.00

McConnell/1142166

This award supports a project to use unprecedented aerosol and continuous gas
(methane, carbon monoxide) measurements of the deepest section of the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) Divide ice core to investigate rapid climate changes
in Antarctica during the ~60,000 year long Marine Isotope Stage 3 period of the
late Pleistocene. These analyses, combined with others, will take advantage of
the high snow accumulation of the WAIS Divide ice core to yield the highest time
resolution glaciochemical and gas record of any deep Antarctic ice core for this
time period. The research will expand already funded discrete gas measurements
and extend currently funded continuous aerosol measurements on the WAIS Divide
ice core from ~25,000 to ~60,000 years before present, spanning Heinrich events
3 to 6 and Antarctic Isotope Maximum (AIM, corresponding to the Northern
Hemisphere Dansgaard-Oeschger) events 3 to 14. With other high resolution
Greenland cores and lower resolution Antarctic cores, the combined record will
yield new insights into worldwide climate dynamics and abrupt change. The
intellectual merit of the work is that it will be used to address the science
goals of the WAIS Divide project including the identification of dust and
biomass burning tracers such as black carbon and carbon monoxide which reflect
mid- and low-latitude climate and atmospheric circulation patterns, and fallout
from these sources affects marine and terrestrial biogeochemical cycles.
Similarly, sea salt and ocean productivity tracers reflect changes in sea ice
extent, marine primary productivity, wind speeds above the ocean, and
atmospheric circulation. Volcanic tracers address the relationship between
northern, tropical, and southern climates as well as stability of the West
Antarctic ice sheet and sea level change. When combined with other gas records
from WAIS Divide, the records developed here will transform understanding of
mid- and low-latitude drivers of Antarctic, Southern Hemisphere, and global
climate rapid changes and the timing of such changes. The broader impacts of the
work are that it will enhance infrastructure through expansion of continuous ice
core analytical techniques, train students and support collaboration between two
U.S. institutions (DRI and OSU). All data will be made available to the
scientific community and the public and will include participation the WAIS
Divide Outreach Program. Extensive graduate and undergraduate student
involvement is planned. Student recruitment will be made from under-represented
groups building on a long track record. Broad outreach will be achieved through
collaborations with the global and radiative modeling communities, NESTA-related
and other educational outreach efforts, and public lectures. This proposed
project does not require field work in the Antarctic.