* 1142778
* SBIR Phase I:  Sprayable Reversible Hemostat for Treatment of Non-Compressible Hemorrhage
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Matthew Dowling, GEL-E, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
sprayable "reversible" foam hemostat for treatment of non-compressible
hemorrhage, which is the leading cause of death (~90%) for bleeding-related
trauma. The foam material is based on the biopolymer chitosan; a modification to
this polymer with novel hydrophobic grafts allows the material to clot blood
much more rapidly and adhere to tissue more strongly than the unmodified
version. Also, a complementary cyclodextrin-based technology is able to reverse
the hemostatic action of the modified chitosan on demand. The biopolymer is
packaged into aluminum hand-held canisters with liquefied propellant and
expelled via mechanical actuator creating a foam that is able to expand into
irregularly shaped cavities. The desired outcome of the project is to develop a
working prototype of the canister containing an optimized modified chitosan with
respect to hydrophobic grafting density and hydrophobe length. Foam formulations
will be tested for clotting and reversibility in vitro via dynamic and steady
shear rheology studies in the presence of blood and in vivo using non-
compressible bleeding models in rats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is better control of non-
compressable hemorrhage on the battlefield and trauma medicine. Foams are the
future of acute wound treatment on the battlefield and in emergency medical
services. Severe bleeding, especially internal bleeding, is not easily treated
with a spatially contained product, such as a bandage. Furthermore, correct
bandage placement on an acute wound requires a great deal of skill and
experience. However, a sprayable foam is very user friendly and allows potential
for adequate self-application or application by an unskilled "buddy" for a wide
range of hemorrhage types. Thus, we envision our chitosan foam as a necessary
supply in the soldier's backpack, the emergency room and the home first aid kit.
This vision is a viable economic prospect because the material is low cost,
lightweight and highly durable even in extreme ambient conditions. Additionally,
the reversibility provided by the complementary cyclodextrin system provides a
streamlining tool for the trauma surgeon. Removal of hemostatic material and
precise identification of the injury site are necessary tasks in the operating
room, which are made much easier by this unique technological feature.