* 1142154
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of the Southern Rocky Mountains from cross-term estimates of the seismic Green tensor
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Kasper van Wijk, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 16,223.00

This project centers on two questions: 1. What props up the Rocky Mountains of
Colorado and New Mexico - is the surface elevation high because of extra-thick,
buoyant crust underneath, or is the crust no thicker than in the surrounding
areas and it is instead hotter than usual mantle sitting underneath that
supports the unusually high elevations? To answer this question, we must map the
crust-mantle boundary under the Rockies. Conventional methods to do this have so
far left a fair amount of ambiguity regarding crustal thickness. We propose to
solve this by investigating question 2: Can we use a recently developed method
that has been successfully applied to shallow geophysical problems, such as
hydrological imaging, to find the much deeper crust-mantle boundary?

We will use already collected seismic data sets and apply new analysis
techniques to provide constraints on the dynamics of a tectonically enigmatic
area. The Southern Rocky Mountain region has recorded a complex history of
continental assembly, mountain building far from plate boundaries, and incipient
continental rifting. Because the mechanism and timing of uplift of this large
area are still under debate, the region has been the subject of intensive study
with active and passive source seismic profiles and networks. A recurrent theme
from these studies is that the high surface elevations are not mirrored by a
thick crustal root, however the most recent crustal thickness estimates still
differ by ~10 km. This difference has significant implications for mechanisms to
explain the support of high topography in the region, specifically whether the
surface elevation is isostatically balanced within the crust or support for the
high elevations has to come from deeper in the Earth. Our project is an
interdisciplinary collaboration to apply techniques developed by the team for
shallow high-frequency seismic applications to lithospheric scale seismology.
Specifically, we plan to use diffracted seismic waves, from earthquakes and from
ambient seismic noise, to image the Moho (the seismic velocity contrast that can
be identified with the crust-mantle boundary). Detection of Moho diffractions is
to date limited to earthquakes and explosion sources. Our approach is to perform
interstation crosscorrelations of previously recorded explosions and earthquakes
and of ocean-generated ambient seismic noise to simulate a signal source at each
station location. This technique would allow detection of Moho diffractions and
therefore Moho mapping in areas where conventional techniques are not
applicable.