* 1143813
* Making the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center Business Model Possible
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Erich Grotewold, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/29/2016
* USD 573,590.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC)
was established in 1991 and supported since by NSF through five-year grants. The
ABRC collects, preserves, reproduces and distributes diverse seed and DNA stocks
of Arabidopsis thaliana and related species. Information and ordering services
for the distributed resources are maintained by The Arabidopsis Information
Resource (TAIR; http://arabidopsis.org/). The ABRC serves a dynamic community of
plant researchers with a common goal to understand the basic processes of
flowering plants, as well as to apply this understanding to further crop
improvement. The activity of the Center is essential towards full-filling the
community goal of having multiple mutant alleles for every one of the
Arabidopsis ~27,000 genes. Approximately 10,000 registered users in TAIR utilize
the Center by ordering close to 100,000 stocks annually from a collection of
approximately 1,000,000 stocks, equally distributed between seeds and DNA. The
impact of the ABRC is represented by a significant contribution to hundreds of
articles by the Arabidopsis community in high-impact journals each year. Stock
donation and demand continues to grow and is likely to remain high for the
foreseeable future. Here, the ABRC requests funds to upgrade and increase the
capacity and efficiency of the DNA and seed-handling operations. Specifically,
funds are requested for a cold dry room with a specialized rack system for short
and long-term seed storage, for a specialized -20 C freezer for very long-term
seed storage, a robotic system for increased output in DNA stock operations, and
a soil handler to increase planting reproducibility and efficiency. These
equipment pieces are central to the realization of a Business Model in which
ABRC becomes significantly more independent from NSF support in its
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Realizing the
strategic position of the ABRC in the Arabidopsis and plant community, the
Center started a pilot program to harness the know-how and stocks at the ABRC to
enhance the awareness and visibility of plants in K-12. Towards this objective,
ABRC personnel developed a three-module research project entitled "Greening the
Classroom: Arabidopsis thaliana as a tool to teach plant genetics", the
relationship of plants with the environment, and plant development for high-
school students". This plan is currently being implemented in high-schools in
the Columbus City School district, and will be expanded to a number of other
schools in Ohio. This effort is supported by the Curriculum Quality Control
Council of Columbus City Schools (http://www.columbus.k12.oh.us), which included
the "Greening the Classroom" initiative in the official curriculum of CCS. In
addition, the ABRC participated in the organization of the second Plant
Functional Genomics Workshop (http://www.biosci.ohiostate.edu/workshop/). This
workshop offered a hands-on practical experience combined with lectures by
leaders in the field to ~20 participants (high-school teachers, undergrads,
Ph.D. students, postdocs and junior faculty members) from all over the world.
These educational initiatives are significantly complementing the sustained and
highly-valued community service mission of the ABRC, thus increasing the
appreciation for Arabidopsis and plants in general in our younger
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funded by the Divisions of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, Integrative Organismal Systems, and Biological
Infrastructure.