* 1143255
* SBIR Phase I:  Ion-Exchange Fiber Composites for Rapid and Selective Removal of Perchlorate from Water
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* James Langer, Serionix Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 164,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result in
the development of novel ultrafast, highly selective, high permeability ion-
exchange fiber composites for removing perchlorate from drinking water. The
proposed technology removes perchlorate 10-100 times faster than the best
currently available options, and employs a low-cost production method compatible
with widely available manufacturing equipment. Rapid contaminant removal is made
possible by the use of micron-scale mass transfer distances; whereas commonly
used beads and granular media are limited to much larger sizes because of
significant drawbacks including difficult containment and enormous pressure
drop, fiber composites display both high permeability and self-containment due
to their permanently intertwined, self-supporting structure. Serionix will
demonstrate feasibility of this new technology through the following activities:
1) preparation of active resin/substrate fiber composites using a spray-casting
method; 2) characterization of perchlorate-removal efficiency in both continuous
and intermittent flow configurations; and 3) research and development of
pretreatment methods to replace the current processing solvent (acetone) with
water and to improve composite wetting properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impact of this research is the development and
commercialization of a low-cost technology enabling regulatory compliance and
improved protection of human health. The EPA is set to regulate perchlorate in
drinking water by 2014. This application represents only the first commercial
opportunity for a platform technology with the ultimate potential to transform
the industrial and residential water treatment landscape. Future applications
may include ultrahigh efficiency water deionization, softening, and industrial
wastewater recycling, personal protective equipment and clothing, and high
activity solid acid/base catalysts. Dissemination of data and interpretation
will contribute to improved understanding of mass transfer characteristics in
fibrous sorbent materials used in both water and air treatment.