* 1143218
* SBIR Phase I:  High Efficiency, Compact Thermoelectric Generator (TEG)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Steven Casey, VECARIUS
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,918.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will pursue the
development of a novel design architecture for recovering exhaust waste heat
energy from an internal combustion engine by converting heat into electricity.
As vehicles become increasingly electrified, recovering a fraction of such heat
by generating significant electrical power would off-load the vehicle alternator
and substantially increase fuel economy. The proposed innovation uniquely
combines the latest advances in component technologies from fields in thermal
management and energy conversion, resulting in a thermo-mechanical system that
promises to be reliable, compact, and scalable while ?scavenging? significant
power efficiently. The research objectives include the preliminary design of a
full-scale system and the design, fabrication, testing, and evaluation of a
fractional proof-of-concept prototype. Based upon results, the feasibility of
the TEG system design will be ascertained, and its commercial viability
evaluated more fully.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to recover a significant portion of the massive
amounts of energy that is not utilized in our society but rejected in the form
of waste heat from energy/power systems. Exhaust heat rejected to the
environment from internal combustion engines continues to be a significant
untapped source of energy, representing over 40 percent of the available energy
in these engines. Most markets which utilize IC engines involve mobile or
portable power such as automotive vehicles and military portable generators,
requiring increasingly higher performance, efficiency, and reliability within a
more compact and lightweight design ? key metrics addressed by the proposed
innovation. While reducing energy consumption in these applications, the
innovation also reduces emissions since less fuel is consumed, helping companies
meet stricter emission standards -- most notably the Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFÃ‰) standards which impose high financial penalties for non-
compliance. Other adjacent markets include stationary power generation, solid-
oxide fuel cells, and potentially aircraft propulsion systems. In addition to
meeting market need, the proposed design approach contributes technically
towards new or improved system design methodologies and catalyzing system-level
innovation ? a particular need in the area of automotive exhaust waste heat
recovery.