* 1143571
* Olmec Household Archaeology: Investigating Los Soldados
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Carl Wendt, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 248,907.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Carl J. Wendt and an international
team of colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research on
the Mexican Gulf Coast at the medium-sized Olmec (1200-500 B.C.) site of Los
Soldados. The team will collect household-level data from the Middle Formative
period (1000-400 BC) site of that is situated 11 km southwest of the La Venta
capital. The resulting data will be used to (1) develop a ceramic typology and
ceramic stratigraphic sequence for the La Venta region, (2) elucidate domestic
organization, domestic ritual, and subsistence adaptations, and (3) make
inferences on regional resource control and political economy. Not only will
household archaeology increase our understanding of Olmec community structure
and domestic organization, Middle Formative domestic activities are a key to
understanding larger questions of household socioeconomics and or cultural
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists believe that the Olmec were the
first "complex" society in Middle America and that the roots of later
civilizations such as the Maya can be traced back to this base. Thus the
research is highly significant in a New World context. The work will also shed
light on the processes which led to the emergence of complex societies and thus
has relevance within a broader context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
significant and unique in Olmec studies in that it takes a "bottom-up" approach
to the study of the Middle Formative Olmec by collecting household-level data
from a range of domestic contexts across a secondary center to address questions
and test hypotheses on Olmec domestic organization, subsistence patterning, and
regional resource control. The research will build on the body of household
archaeology theory and method to generate a much clearer picture of Middle
Formative Olmec daily life, exchange networks and procurement systems, the
organization domestic craft production, and how people adapted to and modified
their tropical lowland environment. The "bottom-up"/household approach contrasts
with most other studies of Olmec society and polity that draw inferences from
the more grandiose aspects of the society such as stone monument carving and
transport. By measuring differences in household assemblages, Wendt and his team
will be able to determine what the Olmec elite actually controlled, and
investigate the scale of the control, rather than drawing inferences indirectly
from measures of monument transport or artistic skill, which often result in
erroneous impressions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research
is that it will contribute to undergraduate and graduate student learning, help
build and strengthen international partnerships (US and Mexico), and employ
household archaeology to study ancient daily life in Mesoamerica as well as the
nature of economic and political control in an early Mesoamerican society. More
broadly, this research will help elucidate the processes and factors involved in
the rise and organization of complex societies in Mesoamerica in particular, and
the New World in general. Results also will be used to contribute to and build
on theory on power strategies used by elite in early complex societies by
providing data on one specific instance of what resources and commodities La
Venta elite actually controlled.