* 1143828
* WORKSHOP: Building Capacity for Sociotechnical Innovation in Next-Generation Network Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Wayne Lutters, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2013
* USD 99,931.00

This proposal seeks to further a network of sociotechnical researchers in
academia and industry capable of developing innovative applications that
leverage next-generation gigabit networking infrastructure. This will foster new
multidisciplinary partnerships between the social and computing sciences that
will challenge established researchers and develop a new generation of students
capable and confident in working in this area. The complex domains addressed by
these applications, for example city-wide, media-rich socialinformation spaces
for homeless citizens, will necessitate fundamental advances in network science.
The emergent co-evolutionary properties will also likely drive research in
human-centered computing. The urban government partnerships enable a scale of
deployment typically impractical for academic research labs. This will enable
at-scale experimentation with a critical mass of users in authentic usage
environments, which is essential for advancing our understanding of social
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes a culminating two-day
proto-proposal development workshop. The projects that emerge from this workshop
will help envision a new future in which high-bandwidth connectivity coupled
with a reengineered Internet enables new forms of social interaction and digital
citizenship.