* 1143347
* SBIR Phase I: RF MEMS Relay for ATE Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Chopin Hua, Laserlith Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 179,479.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop RF
MEMS (Radio Frequency Microelectromechanical Systems) relays for automated test
equipment (ATE), wireless frontends, and other commercial applications. As the
advancement of microchip technology continues, the testing and qualification of
microchips become more challenging and costly. RF MEMS may enable lower cost,
higher throughput and more repeatable test and qualification in mainstream
semiconductor manufacturing. In particular, RF MEMS relays may offer benefits
for probing of next generation 3D chips with thru-wafer vias that require
sensitive and yet very rapid test capabilities. The proposed project addresses
the manufacturability and packaging challenges for production. In comparison to
boutique manufacturing processes utilized by many RF MEMS technologies, the
proposed project leverages the proven and robust silicon MEMS production
processes and infrastructure. Furthermore, packaging is performed using wafer-
level hermetic packaging that addresses the high cost of hermetic sealing for RF
MEMS devices. ATE applications represent the initial application of the proposed
RF MEMS relay technology. Wireless applications, as well as other applications,
can be enabled by lower prices as production volumes are ramped up. Anticipated
results include a RF MEMS relay technology, with low-cost integrated packaging,
ready and qualified for production.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes ATE, wireless,
and enabling RF capabilities for the scientific community. RF MEMS may offer ATE
key advantages in testing next generation microchips, including improved
repeatability and reliability compared to conventional mechanical relays. RF
MEMS may be critical for testing next generation 3D microchips with thru-wafer-
vias that require sensitive and yet high-throughput testing. For wireless, RF
MEMS address reconfiguration and tuning for improved power efficiency and link
robustness of radios. For example, RF MEMS may be utilized for (1) changing a
reconfigurable antenna from a high bandwidth line-of-sight configuration to a
lower bandwidth diversity configuration, or (2) compensating a wireless
handset?s power amplifier for its changing operating environment to maintain
maximum efficiency (including impedance and distance from the base station). For
scientific applications, RF MEMS relays offer low insertion loss and superior
linearity from DC to >100 GHz. In comparison to semiconductor transistors, RF
MEMS have an approximate 10x reduction in insertion loss. Thus, a variety of
radio architectures may benefit, as well as radiometers for monitoring weather
and climate. Anticipated results include a RF MEMS technology, with low cost
integrated packaging, ready and qualified for production.