* 1143249
* SBIR Phase I:  Bandgap-Uniform Semiconducting Carbon Nanotubes for Thin Film Transistors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Nathan Yoder, NanoIntegris, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 146,637.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
diameter refined semiconducting single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) to
address the challenge of bandgap heterogeneity in semiconducting SWNTs. The plan
is to utilize the latest advances in SWNT separation including Density Gradient
Ultracentrifugation (DGU), preferential chemistry, and chromatographic
techniques to reach the desired outcome of uniform bandgap, semiconducting
SWNTs. The high degree of uniformity of this refined material will provide
superior device performance (threshold voltage uniformity, sub-threshold swing,
on/off ratio) in Thin Film Transistors (TFTs) for the next generation of
displays based on Organic Light-Emitting Diodes (OLEDs).

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to provide
high mobility, solution processable semiconductors to enable low-cost, large-
scale OLED production. Currently, the display industry is attempting to develop
economical, large-area displays based on OLED devices. Unlike current liquid
crystal displays (LCDs), OLEDs are current-driven devices and require
semiconductor mobilities that are well above the performance threshold of the
amorphous silicon TFTs currently used in LCDs. In addition, the display industry
is planning to shift from expensive vacuum processes (sputtering, chemical vapor
deposition) toward solution processes (spin-coating, printing) which also have
the potential for continuous, high-volume manufacturing. Diameter refined
semiconducting carbon nanotubes are not only solution processable, but also have
the potential to overcome mobility limitations that other material classes such
as organic semiconductors and amorphous oxides have.