* 1143949
* Conference: The XIV National Congress of Biochemistry and Plant Molecular Biology &amp; 7th Symposium Mexico-USA (Campeche, Mexico: November 29 - December 2, 2011)
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Robert Stupar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 10/31/2012
* USD 19,250.00

The XIV National Congress of Biochemistry and Plant Molecular Biology &amp; 7th
Symposium Mexico-USA will be held in Campeche, Mexico, November 29 - December 2,
2011. The objectives of the meeting are to: 1) share the most recent research
findings in plant biochemistry, genomics, and genetics between U.S. and Mexican
colleagues in order that they may explore common research interests; 2)
facilitate collaboration on plant biology research between US and Mexican plant
scientists; and 3) ensure that there is broad participation from the US at the
conference, by targeting early career, women and minority scientists. The
proposed topics focus on fundamental discoveries that extend our understanding
of several aspects of plant biology and address compelling and novel scientific
discoveries relative to plant biochemistry, molecular biology, and food
security. The proposed meeting topics include: Plant responses to the
environment, Plant-Pathogen and insect interactions, Plant nutrition, Plant/crop
evolution, Epigenetic regulation of plant processes, Plant molecular systematics
and biodiversity, Applied biotechnology, Association mapping and crop
improvement, Comparative structural and functional
genomics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The international and
local organizing committees will identify women, early career scientists and
participants who are members of underrepresented groups. The targets for
participation are: 50% for female representation, 15% for underrepresented
groups and 15-20% for early career scientists.