* 1143988
* Post-PASI Workshop - Solidifying networks and staying current in parallel computing; Seattle, Washington; November 12-18, 2011
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Lorena Barba, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 31,713.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1143988: Barba, Lorena A.; Trustees of Boston
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support two senior researchers
and fifteen junior scientists from the United States, under the direction of Dr.
Lorena A. Barba, to attend and conduct a workshop in Seattle, Washington, as a
side meeting to the Supercomputing-11 Conference held concurrently during
November 12-18, 2011. The workshop is a follow up to a Pan-American Advanced
Studies Institute (PASI) held in Valparaiso, Chile in January 2011, titled
"Scientific Computing in the Americas: the challenge of massive parallelism."
The primary goal of this workshop is to reinforce the network created during the
PASI, reconnecting young scientists with senior researchers (PASI lecturers) and
their peers, and, ultimately, to stimulate new collaborations. The venue chosen
will enable close interactions with one of the top events in the field of high
performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The original PASI brought together
many high-level researchers in computational science and students at various
levels to focus on the impact of general-purpose computation on Graphics
Processing Unit (GPGPU) accelerators on scientific productivity. GPU clusters
are becoming a leading player in the high-performance computing arena, with 3 of
the top 5 supercomputers in the world now based on this hardware. There are
important lessons to be learned in programming these accelerators as well as the
more general issues associated with understanding the algorithms and programming
models to achieve desired results. The proposed workshop will be invaluable in
providing the networking needed for these participants to continue with the work
they started at the PASI and enable new collaborations.