* 1143751
* 4th International IASPEI Symposium on Effects of Surface Geology on Seismic Motion UC Santa Barbara, 23 - 26 August, 2011
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Ralph Archuleta, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 28,237.00

The 4th International IASPEI/IAEE Symposium on the Effects of Surface Geology on
Seismic Motion (ESG) will be held at the University of California, Santa Barbara
from 23 ? 26 August 2011. Approximately 250 scientists and engineers from around
the world are expected to attend this symposium to present the latest results on
how local site conditions affect ground motion induced by earthquakes. Since the
3rd Symposium in Grenoble in 2006, there have been significant earthquakes in
Japan, China, Italy, Haiti, Chile, Mexico, and New Zealand that have provided a
wealth of data. In particular, the 2010 Darfield event in New Zealand and the
2011 Tohoku event in Japan induced widespread liquefaction. Analysis of the data
from these events and dissemination of the results to larger communities will
aid in the mitigation of damaging effects from earthquakes in the future. This
conference will bring together an international community of earthquake
scientists and engineers. It will promote an interdisciplinary exchange of ideas
and provide everyone with a perspective on the current state-of-art research
into the fundamental problems associated with quantifying the effects of the
local site geology. The papers presented at the conference will be published on
a CD-ROM and distributed to all registered participants. The papers will also be
available through the conference website to the general public.