* 1143807
* EAGER: Discovering Emerging Events in Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* AnHai Doan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Social media have become increasingly critical in many domains, such as
commerce, disaster management, science, and national security. In these domains,
applications often have to integrate social media to detect emerging events.
Today however few solutions for event detection have been developed and they
suffer from several important limitations. This exploratory project addresses
these limitations and develops a solution that effectively integrates social
media to detect emerging events. The solution will focus on the Twittersphere,
and will address the following three key challenges: (a) how to exploit
characteristics unique to social media to improve the accuracy of detecting
events, (b) how to design the solutions such that they scale to high-speed
streams of social media (such as 1500 tweets per second), and (c) how to
leverage crowdsourcing to find truly interesting events and extract attributes
of these events.

The project will be among the first to explore in depth how to integrate social
media to detect emerging events, taking into account social media
characteristics. As such, it is a high-risk/high-payoff project that can open
the door to novel research directions, and help accelerate research into social
media integration, an increasingly critical problem that impacts many areas of
the society. If successful, the project can also help build practical event
discovery tools that can make immediate impacts. Finally, the project will help
train a Ph.D. student for two years, and help build and release a set of
infrastructure tools and testbeds that can help accelerate subsequent research
into social media integration, for both the PI's group and other research groups
in social media. The project information will be disseminated via publications,
workshops, tutorials, and the Web site
(http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~anhai/projects/event-detection.html) that will include
the resulting research results, data and system artifacts.