* 1143545
* SABER: Accelerating the emergence of Biology Education Research as a new sub-discipline of Biology
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Mary Pat Wenderoth, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 02/28/2014
* USD 99,944.00

SABER: Accelerating the emergence of Biology Education Research as a new sub-
discipline of Biology&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Several national reports have called
for reforms in undergraduate biology education and instructors have tried a
range of pedagogical approaches in the classroom. Are there data on whether
these changes improve student learning? Faculty conducting biology education
research (BER) focus on rigorous research to assess student learning but they
are isolated and fragmented across the sub-disciplines of biology. Through the
new network of the Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research
(SABER), we propose to create a vibrant community of biology education
researchers that will provide the leadership and vision to promote, maintain and
guide the scholarly work required to foster and enhance student learning in the
biological sciences. The national meeting will be a place where they can meet to
exchange ideas, set research agendas, build collaborations and then disseminate
those successful strategies that help reform undergraduate biology education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The new network will accelerate the
maturation and impact of the new BER sub-discipline, ultimately improving
student learning and retention in the biological sciences. Research findings
from this new field will document the learning gains associated with pedagogies
implemented in the classroom, thereby collecting the data for evidence-based
teaching practices and improved learning environments that support the success
of a more diverse population of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The network includes faculty from a range of sub-disciplines, from a range of
institutions, and with a range of professional experience. Therefore results of
these efforts can have very widespread impact. One goal of the network
activities is to better understand how college students learn biology and to
develop curricular approaches that will be based on evidence instead of
anecdote. This network will benefit current and future undergraduates,
particularly underrepresented minorities, who leave the basic and life sciences
at a much greater rate than other college disciplines. By advancing our
understanding of how best to help students learn biology, we may be able to stem
the loss of talent in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded
jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education efforts.