* 1143968
* NSF RAPID: Salvaging a newly discovered dinosaur trackway from southwest Arkansas, USA.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 12/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

On 6 June 2011, the University of Arkansas Department of Geosciences received a
citizen?s report of a dinosaur trackway exhumed in southwest Arkansas. The
trackway is paleontologically significant as the first occurrence of tracks from
a large theropod (tentatively attributed to Acrocanthosaurus atokensis) in
Arkansas. These tracks occur among a diverse assortment of other dinosaur track
morphologies (sauropods, ornithodopods, smaller theropods, and other as-yet-
unidentified quadrupedal dinosaurs). Scientists from the University of Arkansas,
University of Kansas, and University of Texas ? San Antonio will use state-of-
the-art laser imaging to create virtual reconstructions of the entire trackway
site (approximately 6,000 m2). In addition, the scientific team will attempt to
preserve portions of the trackways using traditional casting techniques and
quarrying of the trackways for later study and public display. Publicly
disseminating information from this well-preserved assemblage of dinosaur tracks
provides an exceptional opportunity for informal science education in Arkansas
and nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;The site is also of geological importance to studies
attempting to reconstruct global climate during the early Cretaceous period (125
? 100 million years ago). The trackway is developed among evaporites (primarily
gypsum, but also gypsiferous mudstones and thin limestones) of the DeQueen
limestone in SW Arkansas. This site was interpreted to lie beneath the
descending limb of the early Cretaceous atmospheric Hadley Cell and may aid in
delineation of the early Cretaceous global hydrologic cycle. &lt;br/&gt;Finally,
the project engages three early career scientists, two of whom are from an
underreprestented group (Hispanic females), as collaborators; one of these will
join the University of Arkansas Department of Geosciences faculty in August
2012. Participation in this research project provides a unique opportunity for
these early career scientists to establish collaborative relationships and in
developing vigorous, cutting-edge research programs.