* 1143995
* EAGER: Computer Architectures and Algorithms for Adaptive Human Computer Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Ryan Kastner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The ease of use of a human computer interface depends critically on the latency
of the system and its ability to adapt to the environment. Differences in
lighting, visual appearance and user behavior can significantly alter the input
data. Furthermore, the reaction time must be less than 100 milliseconds to
appear instantaneous to the user. Achieving high accuracy demands a system that
adapts to these changing characteristics while processing a significant amount
of data in a short amount of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a computer
architecture for adaptive real-time signal processing systems that combines a
general purpose processor with custom hardware. The custom hardware performs the
low-level, high-throughput signal processing on the raw signals and feeds them
to the processor which performs the high level signal processing and decision
making. The processor also executes machine learning algorithms that change the
parameters of the low-level processing to adapt them to the current statistical
properties of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a human-
computer interface based on audio and video sensors that allows a user to
interact with the computer through gestures and voice alone. This requires
research advances in computer architecture, embedded systems, signal processing,
machine learning and human-computer interaction. The major research challenge is
in the integration of knowledge from the different areas to create a functional
system. This system will serve as a prototype for novel human computer
interactions and will be a foundation for future collaboration between the
different fields.