* 1143685
* PC3: Collaborative Research: Wireless Sensor Networks for Protecting Wildlife and Humans
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Anish Arora, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 262,212.00

This award provides funding for a collaborative project between Ohio State
University, Cornell University, The Indian Institute of Science - Bangalore, the
Wildlife Institute of India, and the Indian Institute of Information Technology
- Allahabad. The dramatic dwindling of forests and concomitant escalation in
human-wildlife conflicts are resulting in broad environmental impact, including
large economic and social costs, increasing human deaths in areas used by large
mammals, and animal population decline. This project enables a baseline
operational wireless sensor network system for protection of animals, humans,
and the forest. The forest setting involves complex scenes demanding the
discrimination of several targets of interest in a highly cluttered setting as
well as discrimination of their intent and behaviors. Activity patterns evolve
in a naturally adversarial environment. The system architecture being developed
integrates in a transformative way a suitably rich set of sensing modalities
with intent inferencing, learning, optimization, and deployment techniques, to
monitor a diverse set of targets. Mature system components are to be deployed in
Panna, a tiger reserve in central India, in close cooperation with domain
experts and forestry management. The project is a collaboration between
researchers in the US and India who are substantially involved in complementary
aspects of wildlife related research. A subsequent protection-centric effort in
the US is envisioned that builds upon the lessons learned by this effort.

Successful realization of system components and a baseline system would lead to
an assessment of the potential benefits of using wireless sensor networks for
protection related to forests and potential transition into production use. Over
time, this will help establish credible early-warning systems, and monitoring
protocols for animal use of human areas and human use of forest areas that can
support recovery efforts. This project is part of the Pervasive Communications
and Computing Collaboration (PC3) initiative.