* 1143753
* A Proposal to Conduct a Workshop on Professional Development of  Underrepresented Minority Master?s and Doctoral Engineering Students
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 08/31/2013
* USD 308,358.00

Proposal # 1143753&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Proposal to Conduct a Workshop on
Professional Development of &lt;br/&gt;Underrepresented Minority Master?s and
Doctoral Engineering Students.&lt;br/&gt;P.I. Shirley McBay, President of
Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM)
Network is funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), Directorate for
Engineering (ENG) and Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, to
conduct the third in a series of workshops focused on the professional
development of underrepresented minority students in engineering and materials
science. The goals of the two-day November 2011 workshop are to: 1) provide
masters and doctoral engineering students from underrepresented minority groups
with information, resources, and skills development opportunities to increase
their success in graduate school and in transitioning to engineering careers in
academe, government, or industry; and (2) provide networking opportunities for
student participants with each other as well as with engineering faculty/other
professionals attending the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;The first workshop in the
series, conducted in November 2009 with ENG Directorate support, was on
Mentoring of Underrepresented Minority Undergraduate Students in Engineering.
The workshop brought together 142 students and their faculty advisors from 15
institutions. The second workshop, conducted in May 2011 convened three-member
engineering faculty/staff teams from the 14 institutions to be invited to the
proposed third workshop in November 2011. Faculty/staff advisors from ten of the
institutions participating in the first workshop, who met in July 2010 to
discuss next steps, strongly recommended the second and third workshops.
Institutional teams in the proposed third workshop will consist of seven masters
and doctoral underrepresented materials science and engineering students and the
three-person faculty/advisor teams that participated in the May 2011 workshop,
for a total of 14 ten-member institutional teams. Students on each team will
include three masters and four doctoral students, including, where possible, at
least three female students. Each racial/ethnic underrepresented group in a
participating institutions graduate materials science or engineering program
will be represented. &lt;br/&gt;The November 2011 workshop plenary sessions and
breakout groups will focus on the requirements for completing a masters and/or
doctoral degree in engineering or materials research; how to succeed in graduate
school and secure support for graduate study; and the role and importance of
research, publishing, conference attendance, mentoring, and networking. The
workshop will examine requirements for success in academe, industry, and
government and the critical transition from masters to doctoral degree programs
in the fields represented.