* 1143478
* SBIR Phase I:  Optically Actuated MRI-Compatible Active Needle for Medical Interventions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Richard Black, INTELLIGENT FIBER OPTICS SYSTEMS CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
miniature optically actuated and instrumented tools that can be used during
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) interventions to make them faster and more
precise. The initial focus is an active steerable biopsy needle prototype that
uses laser heating conducted via optical fibers to a low temperature (50C) shape
memory alloy (SMA) actuator located inside the needle. The prototype employs
optical fiber sensing of the needle shape and temperature, for control. In
contrast to previous "point and shoot" approaches for needle insertion, a
physician will be able to stand outside the scanner bore, guiding an MRI
compatible needle through the perineum and steering it to the target in the
prostate with visual feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial
impacts of this research include minimally invasive MRI compatible needles,
catheters, and apparatus for ablations and brachytherapy. Following development
of the active needle, the IFOS team plans integration with MRI scanning software
to significantly reduce time and cost, and increase the precision of MRI guided
interventions such as biopsy and brachytherapy. Combined optical actuation,
temperature profile and shape monitoring can add still more versatility,
allowing IFOS to address the sizeable image guided surgery market. IFOS intends
to leverage existing products and strategic partnerships to reduce the technical
risk and offer its technology in interdisciplinary fields across the image
guided medical industry. This research involves the work of a diverse group of
researchers, industrial product developers, surgeons and business people with
commercial acumen.