* 1143570
* EAGER: Novel Functionality-Enabling Devices Based on 1D and 2D ZnO Nanostructures on Flexible Substrates
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Hongbin Yu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
demonstrate proof-of-concept of the transformative idea of self-powered photo-
electrochromic system based on 1D and 2D ZnO nanostructures on flexible
substrates for significant potential payoffs. The power conversion efficiency
may be below 3%, but the important metric of open circuit voltage to drive the
electrochromic material is computed to be acceptably high (~2.25-2.75 V).
Initially, UV photovoltaic Schottky and p-n junction devices, based on ZnO NWs
and thin films, will be fabricated and characterized. Finally, monolithic
integration of ZnO NW photovoltaic cells and electrocrhromic layers will be
demonstrated using a flexible polymer as the substrate, to achieve self-powered
smart windows. The intellectual merit of this work lies in the interdisciplinary
and integrated approach, the&lt;br/&gt;success of which will be transformative
in a number of areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall promise of this project is in creating a
breakthrough for developing self-powered nanostructure based electrochrmoic
devices on flexible substrates. In addition, future engineers will gain hands-
on, problem-solving skills in multiple disciplines including nanosciences, while
taking necessary courses in advanced characterization, solid state devices,
nanofabrication, and photoelectrochromic technologies at ASU.