* 1143681
* PC3: Collaborative Research: GENIUS: Green Sensor Networks for Air Quality Support
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Stefano Basagni, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2015
* USD 211,219.00

With different gaseous pollutants collectively responsible for an estimated
41,200 annual deaths in the U.S. air quality monitoring becomes an imperative
for the health and well-being of the population. The project GENIUS (for Green
sEnsor Networks for aIr qUality Support) aims at building a continuously
operational pollution monitoring network through proposing advancements in
sensor hardware, communication protocols, analytical models with the goal of
realizing self-sustaining sensor nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of an
integrated sensor combining an on-demand wake-up radio and energy harvesting
technologies is a key contribution of this research, enabling the deployment of
energy neutral sensor networks for pollution monitoring that are virtually
perennial. GENIUS revisits the network protocol stack in light of this new node
architecture. Techniques for jointly optimizing duty cycles based on energy
prediction, the choice of energy storage components, as well as finding routes
that ensure the highest throughput for a given energy availability are being
explored in this work. Moreover, Òpollution mapsÓ using novel spatio-temporal
data modeling tools are integrated with the protocol design to improve the
operational performance.Ê&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy neutral sensor networks
will impact many different applications, such as environmental, structural, and
patient health monitoring, where deployed sensors are not easily accessible. The
project also involves international collaboration with India, giving an
opportunity for U.S. students and researchers to interact with their Indian
counterparts, conduct joint experiments, and develop mutually beneficial
research strategies to combat the global challenges posed by air pollution.