* 1143838
* Application for Grant to support ISVD2012, the 9th International Symposium on Voronoi Diagrams in Science and Engineering, July 2012
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Bahman Kalantari, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 12/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

ISVD 2012 will be the continuation of a highly successful and innovative series
of conferences within the geometric modeling and computer graphics disciplines.
The eight previous events were held in Tokyo, Japan; Seoul, Korea; Banff,
Canada; Kiev, Ukraine; Copenhagen, Denmark; Quebec City, Canada, and Quin Dao,
China. While many conferences in the areas of computational geometry, computer
graphics and engineering have touched some topics covered by the proposed event,
it is only recently that the Voronoi diagram research has formed into a separate
discipline and the unique forum on Voronoi Diagrams in Science and Engineering
was created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the International Conferences on
Voronoi Diagrams in Science and Engineering is to concentrate specifically on
unique aspects of the research into the Voronoi diagrams and on practical
applications of this research to manufacturing engineering, VLSI design,
communication, geomatics, GIS (geographical information systems), urban
planning, medicine, bioinformatics, high-performance computing, education and
other applications. Another unique aspect is that this year will also feature a
Voronoi Art Symposium that runs concurrently with the conference and showcases
artistic drawings and interpretations of the Voronoi concept. This event,
without a doubt, bridges the gap between Sciences and Arts.