* 1143416
* SBIR Phase I:  Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering Tags for Multiplexed Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Dave Sebba, nanoComposix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) nanotags for diagnostic and security
applications. A novel class of SERS tags that exhibit much higher performance
than other tag formulations were demonstrated. This novel class of tags consists
of a bimetallic nanoparticle with the Raman-active molecule trapped at the
metal/metal junction. In this project, four spectrally distinct SERS tags will
be fabricated, coated with silica shells, and functionalized with antibodies to
provide specific targeting for diagnostic applications, or with polymers to
provide stability in solvents and inks for security applications. Tags will be
characterized using a novel high throughput flow spectroscopy instrument capable
of analyzing thousands of individual SERS tags, enabling rapid optimization of
tag formulations. The performance of optimized tags will be tested in diagnostic
and security applications to demonstrate and quantify tag efficacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the
potential to provide bright, robust, and spectrally distinct molecules and
nanoparticles that can be used to identify and track biologics, people, and
products. Currently fluorescent molecules are the most commonly used tag;
however, due to their spectral widths, current instrumentation is limited to
tracking only 5-20 tags simultaneously. SERS tags, with their very narrow
spectral features thus more distinct variants, offer the promise of much higher
multiplexing.