* 1143941
* EAGER: Ensemble Design of Resource-Aware Control Strategies for Multi-Agent Robotic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,06/30/2014
* M. Ani Hsieh, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 06/30/2014
* USD 107,999.00

This project, generalizing mean-field approaches from physics and chemistry for
integrated design of scalable, network resource aware, distributed control
strategies for multi-agent robotic systems, aims to develop macroscopic models
that retain salient features of the underlying multi-agent robotic system and
use these models in the design of distributed control strategies. For complex
cyber physical systems, this promises to provide a novel design methodology that
is potentially applicable to a large class of systems and, therefore, will
result in foundational knowledge of use to the community at large. This high-
risk, high-reward project integrates ideas from physics, chemistry, control
theory, and robotics to develop new theoretical foundations for the design,
validation, and improvement of coordination strategies for multi-agent robotic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project?s intellectual merit lies in the
ensemble approach towards the design, validation, and improvement of cyber
physical systems. Mean-field methods provide a system-level abstraction of the
underlying distributed system while retaining the salient features of the
various agent-level interactions. The generalization of these models to
ensembles of interacting engineered systems provides new methods for designing
distributed controllers that are sensitive to changing network resources and
whose performance can be predicted and adjusted to achieve both the desired
short-term and long-term performance
specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of
this project are twofold. First, the mean-field approach takes into account
network resource usage and management, providing an integrated strategy for
designing scalable decentralized control and coordination strategies. Second,
different from biologically-inspired approaches, the mean-field approach enables
the design of distributed coordination strategies whose performance can be
systematically predicted and tuned to meet detailed performance specifications.
This has the potential to unify various existing multi-agent coordination
approaches. The research outcomes will be disseminated through publications in
technical conferences and journals and incorporated into the PI?s existing
undergraduate and graduate curriculum and K-12 outreach efforts targeted at
increasing female participation in STEM fields.