* 1143199
* SBIR Phase I:  On chip Raman spectroscopy solution for Biomedical applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Amir Atabaki, Askari                  Murtaza
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
implement a low-cost compact, wide-band, and high-resolution on-chip
spectrometer and other components for Raman spectroscopy applications. The
proposed architecture consists of silicon-nitride (SiN) spectrometer bonded with
a silicon detector array to detect the output power of different spectral
channels. A bandwidth of 25 nm with a resolution of 0.6 nm will be demonstrated
for the proposed spectrometer. A notch-filter for pump rejection (&gt; 25 dB)
will also be demonstrated. Appropriate software for data acquisition from the
detector array and for compensating any fabrication-induced non-uniformity in
the spectral channels will also be developed as part of this work. The
spectroscopy chip and the software will then be used to measure spectrum of a
wideband source and the results compared with that of a commercial
spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project includes low-cost Raman spectroscopy solution for biomedical
applications. Raman spectroscopy has shown great promise for many biomedical
applications such as blood analysis, and cancer detection. However, the existing
Raman spectroscopy solutions are expensive, bulky and well beyond the
comprehension of a common medical professional. The proposed solution will be
low-cost, accurate and easy to use to allow health care professionals to use
this technology to detect cancers and do blood analysis with the same accuracy,
faster time, less patient anxiety, and less sample volume than the currently
existing tests, which are currently performed in centralized laboratories,
require specially trained staff, and are expensive. The silicon-nitride platform
(being transparent in visible and NIR wavelength range) will allow easy
extension of the on-chip spectroscopy solution for other commercial applications
of interest such as fluorescence, and absorption spectroscopy.