* 1143623
* Probing the Multiscale Nature of Crustal Magma Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Leif Karlstrom, Karlstrom               Leif
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 01/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Leif Karlstrom has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at Stanford University. He
will investigate magma transport processes in the crust on two different scales
through modeling of volcanic tremor and statistical inference of arc-scale
eruption patterns. The tremor work aims to identify available mechanisms for the
origin of seismicity during volcanic eruptions, and will examine long period
seismic signatures of different eruption styles with a coupled fluid flow and
elastodynamic numerical model. The larger scale aspect of this work will test
models of magmatic plumbing with Quaternary eruptions in the Cascades arc.
Network inference techniques and Bayesian statistics will be applied to a newly
compiled dataset of recent volcanism throughout the Cascades. The goal of this
study is to test for the degree to which magma transport is controlled by
dynamic internal organization versus external forcing (glaciation, spatially
variable tectonic stresses).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magma transport is relevant
both for understanding Earth history and volcano-human interactions, but it is
largely inaccessible to direct observation. As a result, the mechanics of rising
and cooling magmas that generate episodic volcanism are poorly constrained. This
work probes the deep structure of volcanoes by modeling patterns of radiated
seismic waves during eruptions, and using statistical inference techniques to
probe the structure of magma plumbing throughout the Cascades volcanic arc.
These studies ask the general question: to what extent can theoretical models
represent or predict indirect, remote observations? This question has important
implications for the degree to which models and data can be synthesized to
interpret the geologic record and assess volcanic hazards. Educational
activities associated with this project include leading a field trip to Lassen
National Park and co-teaching a course on physical volcanology at Stanford.