* 1143084
* SBIR Phase I:  Assisted Handwriting Training System: An Innovative Haptic Force Feedback Platform for Visual Motor Integration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Young-Seok Kim, TACTUS TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,902.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will allow
children to improve their visual motor skills and handwriting through the use of
a new, innovative haptic-based handwriting training technology. The proposal
will address the following intellectual challenges: First, a low cost haptic
workstation system which costs below $1,500 will be developed making haptics a
practical system, viable and affordable to schools by plugging into their
existing computers; Second, a set of software for fully computer-based visual
motor skills lessons will be developed based on standard worksheets and books
currently used by schools for improving handwriting; Third, algorithms of an
assistive technology will be developed to help children perform repeated motor
skill tasks to improve hand-eye coordination using the proposed workstation. A
new paradigm called ?shared control,? will recognize the level of participation
by the child and automatically adjust the force feedback while the child
participates in visual motor activities. This mode of assistance is not
currently possible with any therapy. Finally, this system can be extended
through additional study as a standard handwriting trainer for children with
normal development and handwriting skills, and perhaps even for rehabilitation
of adults who suffer from neuromuscular disorders and stroke.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is an improved method
for delivering a standardized course of fine-motor hand training which leverages
technology already in mass-production not only for children with Visual Motor
Integration (VMI) but for a wide range of hand related trainings. The Assisted
Handwriting Training system provides an interesting product opportunity with
potential markets in excess of $26 billion based on published estimates. The
technology is relatively mature and could almost certainly be brought to market
within 3 years. Even though the primary goal of this proposal is to assist
children with poor handwriting, once its efficacy is demonstrated, this system
has the potential of being used by all children, even those with normal
handwriting, and may become part of the writing curriculum in elementary schools
all over the country. In the area of education, in addition to writing, this
system can be used to teach K-12 students skills ranging from learning to paint
and sculpt, to controlling mechanical devices. Future work will also lead to a
system which assists physiotherapy sessions for adults with stroke or various
neurological conditions.