* 1143667
* PC3: Pervasive Sensing and Computing Technologies for Energy and Water Sustainability in Buildings
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* William Kaiser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 352,364.00

This award provides funding for a collaborative project between University of
California, Los Angeles and Indian Institute of Information Technology, New
Delhi, India. Buildings are among the largest consumers of energy, both directly
in the form of electricity, gas etc. as well as indirectly through consumption
of water as part of the critical energy-water nexus that one must consider for
true sustainability. The objective of this project is to develop the foundations
of low-cost and easy-to-deploy sensing methods that provide observability into
patterns and causes of energy and water consumption in a building, and run-time
methods that use the sensory information for intelligent control of various
buildings systems to minimize the direct and indirect energy use. The project
team is collaborating with international academic and industrial collaborators
who offer access to complementary experimental opportunities and unique
opportunities to develop low-cost technologies that scale across different
climatic and socioeconomic contexts. Key elements of the research include (i)
Low-cost self-calibrating sensors that infer energy and water usage indirectly
from side-band signals, (ii) Methods to reduce overall energy and water
footprint by better management of building subsystems, by timely identification
and repair of energy and water wasting physical degradations, and by providing
information feedback and incentives to influence occupant behaviors, and (iii)
Study of the impact of human, cultural and societal factors on privacy, safety,
and user interaction mechanisms. The project has the potential of significant
socioeconomic benefits by facilitating assessment of efficacy of conservation
measures, targeting of incentives, auditing compliance with regulations, and
facilities maintenance. The project also contributes to workforce development
and training of students on energy challenges in a global socioeconomic context.
This project is a part of pervasive communications and computing collaboration
(PC3) initiative.