* 1143601
* REU Site: Democracy, Interdependence and World Politics Summer Research Program
* SBE,SMA
* 06/08/2011,02/28/2015
* James Scott, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2015
* USD 135,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an increasingly interconnected world,
study of the forces that shape state behavior and&lt;br/&gt;interactions is
increasingly essential. Building on previous success of this program since
2004,&lt;br/&gt;the Democracy, Interdependence and World Politics Summer
Research Program at Texas&lt;br/&gt;Christian University in Fort Worth, Texas
will be held in the summers of 2012 and 2013. Within&lt;br/&gt;the overall
project theme students devise and complete independent, mentored
research&lt;br/&gt;projects on issues with significant academic and popular
value. Each year, 7 students will work&lt;br/&gt;with faculty mentors to develop
research projects, gather and analyze data and produce&lt;br/&gt;scholarly
papers reporting their findings. Activities include research methods seminars,
intensive&lt;br/&gt;project development workshops, presentations by guest
scholars, community events, and&lt;br/&gt;research under the guidance of project
mentors with established records of research and&lt;br/&gt;publication. Unlike
most REU programs, the focus on international relations and
independent,&lt;br/&gt;faculty-mentored student projects, and extensive research
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
geo-political events and the global spread of democracy make studying
democracy?s&lt;br/&gt;consequences for world politics compelling. Key concerns
include the ability of democracies to&lt;br/&gt;formulate and sustain successful
foreign policies, the prospects and implications of&lt;br/&gt;democratization
and democracy promotion, and the effect of democracy on violent
conflict.&lt;br/&gt;Because this project promotes undergraduate research into
these timely areas of study, it builds&lt;br/&gt;on growing areas of inquiry in
world politics. High quality student research projects
examine&lt;br/&gt;critical factors impacting state behavior and interactions,
and are disseminated publicly through&lt;br/&gt;presentation at the annual
International Studies Association meetings, with whom the program&lt;br/&gt;will
partner to ensure dissemination and impact for the projects. Moreover, student
participants&lt;br/&gt;are highly likely to go on to graduate study, for which
they are substantially better prepared&lt;br/&gt;because of the intensive
training of the summer program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This unique program expands national understanding
of undergraduate education in Political&lt;br/&gt;Science, which has limited
examples of undergraduate student-faculty collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;Second, the program provides meaningful opportunities to
students to engage in international&lt;br/&gt;studies research and contribute
research projects to the discipline?s discourse. Third,
consistent&lt;br/&gt;with NSF principles emphasizing the positive impact of
mentored research on undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;education, the program develops and
enhances research skills and prepares students for&lt;br/&gt;graduate study and
other applications. Fourth, the program enables diverse students
from&lt;br/&gt;different regions and institutions of the country to challenge
and support each other in a cohort.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, by offering a competitive
stipend, this project is accessible to students from middle and&lt;br/&gt;lower
economic strata as a summer employment opportunity that enriches their
education.