* 1143119
* SBIR Phase I:  High-throughput 3-D Insect Data Capture Enabling Large Scale Specimen Digitization and Machine Species Identification
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Jeffrey Sieracki, SR2 Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I is directed toward high-
throughput robotic&lt;br/&gt;imaging and data capture of 3D physical insect
specimens with applications to national intelligence and&lt;br/&gt;security,
vector epidemiology, agriculture, biodiversity research, and museum curation.
Natural history&lt;br/&gt;museums are vast, largely untapped sources of
biological data for addressing complex questions ranging&lt;br/&gt;from tracking
terrorists to climate change. Yet ~1 billion U.S. specimens remain in museum
drawers and&lt;br/&gt;cabinets, their characteristics, associated data, and even
their existence hidden. Insects preserved on&lt;br/&gt;pins represent a
significant proportion, with the ten largest collections housing over 100
million. While the&lt;br/&gt;scope of collections is immense, the expertise
needed to identify insects of importance is in decline as&lt;br/&gt;taxonomists
retire and university positions close. For some insect groups, few or no experts
remain&lt;br/&gt;capable of identifying species. The proposed technology will
radically accelerate the pace of insect&lt;br/&gt;specimen digitization. It will
capture critical data from museum specimens and revitalize taxonomy
by&lt;br/&gt;providing datasets for computer-automated insect identification
efforts. The project demonstrates robotic&lt;br/&gt;handling of pinned specimens
is feasible, enabling a high-throughput system capable of
manipulating&lt;br/&gt;pinned specimens, partitioning the 3D scene,
photographing specimens, and extracting database&lt;br/&gt;information with OCR
rendering of specimen labels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project spans myriad applications. Insects
vector&lt;br/&gt;important diseases of humans, livestock, and crops. Annually,
malaria is implicated in a million human&lt;br/&gt;deaths worldwide and aphids
and their viruses cost US farmers over one billion dollars. New
invasive&lt;br/&gt;insects regularly arrive on our shores undetected. Insects
also have forensics applications, locating&lt;br/&gt;events in time and place
and calculating times of death. Tools to quickly and efficiently identify
insects&lt;br/&gt;have immediate application in vector epidemiology,
agricultural and environmental monitoring, border&lt;br/&gt;security and port
inspection, law enforcement, and intelligence. Spatial-temporal data associated
with&lt;br/&gt;field collection of insect specimens are crucial for geolocation
forensics, tracking climate change and&lt;br/&gt;range expansion of invasive
species, and locating geographic sources of potential biological
control&lt;br/&gt;agents for exotic pests. Current technologies and specimen
digitization practices take too much time, cost&lt;br/&gt;too much money, and
simply cannot image most specimens. Semi-automated systems address
only&lt;br/&gt;microscope slide- or paper-mounted specimens. Currently no
technology exists to even partially&lt;br/&gt;automate the digitization of
individual pinned insect specimens. Potential customers include
insect&lt;br/&gt;collections, museums, agribusinesses, epidemiologists, and
agents in homeland security, port inspection,&lt;br/&gt;environmental
monitoring, and national intelligence. Enormous secondary commercial potential
exists&lt;br/&gt;with value-added online databases.