* 1143160
* SBIR Phase I:  Chemically Vapor Deposited Hydrophobic Dielectric Polymer Thin Films
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Aleksandr White, GVD CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 177,738.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore the failure
mechanisms associated with hydrophobic dielectric coatings used in electronic
paper (E paper) displays. Specifically, electrowetting (E paper) displays
require such coatings in order to modulate the contact angle of colored fluids
and produce visual images. In order to provide adequate electrical insulation,
conventional dielectric coatings must be deposited at thicknesses that require
high voltage operation. Conventional hydrophobic coatings deposited on top of
these dielectrics are encumbered by electrolyte entrapment (which diminishes the
electrowetting effect over time) and poor substrate conformality. We will design
improved hydrophobic dielectrics that address the shortcomings of conventional
offerings. Specifically, we will develop novel hydrophobic dielectric polymer
coatings that exhibit the required combination of thinness, uniformity, and
performance. The Phase I effort will identify promising coating recipes based on
dielectric failure testing and electrowetting modulation testing. In Phase II,
strategies will be developed for reducing dielectric coating defects to
manufacturing levels, with an eye towards
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is embodied in the project's anticipated advance of the state-
of-the-art in thin dielectric coatings, which are used in a wide range of
applications. Applications in which these coatings are simultaneously exposed to
ionic solutions and electrical potentials are particularly challenging. Such
applications include E paper (electrowetting) displays, implanted medical
devices (e.g. neuroprosthetics, cardiac pacemakers), and military electronics.
The need to prevent ingress of water and ions is acute in these applications,
avoiding the short circuiting and corrosion of encapsulated electronics. Thin
dielectric coatings are increasingly being viewed as viable alternatives to
bulkier, more expensive hermetic packaging. While thin inorganic coatings have
often been employed in similar cases, the attendant high cost and high
processing temperatures associated with these materials may be prohibitive.
Organic polymer encapsulants are generally not considered to be hermetic, but
the assumption that electronic device hermeticity is required is often
erroneous. It is anticipated that this project will facilitate both a better
match between coating performance and actual device needs, and the manufacturing
of reliable, lower cost electronics.