* 1143129
* SBIR Phase I: Hardware-Assisted Security Monitoring for Embedded and Wireless Systems Using Power Fingerprinting
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Carlos Aguayo-Gonzalez, Power Fingerprinting, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
demonstrate the technical and&lt;br/&gt;commercial feasibility of a novel
approach called Power Fingerprinting (PFP) for integrity
assessment&lt;br/&gt;and intrusion detection in critical embedded and wireless
systems based on side-channel analysis by an&lt;br/&gt;external monitor. Such
integrity assessment approach is fundamental for protecting
critical&lt;br/&gt;systems from cyber attacks in government agencies, financial
institutions, military command,&lt;br/&gt;and industrial control. PFP treats
cyber security as a signal detection and classification problem
and&lt;br/&gt;introduces tangible quantitative metrics for security and trust.
Phase I objectives include: (1) demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;the feasibility of
characterizing kernel modules and core applications for embedded systems; 2)
extract&lt;br/&gt;behavioral signatures to improve performance; 3) develop
techniques to compensate for variations in&lt;br/&gt;power consumption due to
manufacturing and environmental variations; and 4) create a
general&lt;br/&gt;architecture for the application of PFP. The research will be
performed using Angstrom Linux on a&lt;br/&gt;Beagleboard embedded platform,
from which PFP signatures will be extracted and used to
detect&lt;br/&gt;malicious intrusions in blind tests. The expected result is to
achieve over 95% accuracy in detecting&lt;br/&gt;execution anomalies during
blind tests and provide a baseline to develop a commercial PFP
monitor&lt;br/&gt;prototype in Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project includes the development of an
innovative&lt;br/&gt;mechanism for early detection of cyber attacks to critical
infrastructure from well-funded adversaries.&lt;br/&gt;Such attacks, if not
promptly discovered, that can steal state secrets and intellectual property
with&lt;br/&gt;devastating consequences to national security. PFP brings a new
perspective to cyber security treating it&lt;br/&gt;as a signal detection and
classification problem and introducing tangible quantitative metrics for
integrity&lt;br/&gt;and trust. PFP addresses a growing need to secure critical
embedded systems. PFP is very difficult to&lt;br/&gt;evade, adds little overhead
in the processor being monitored, and is effective against zero-day attacks.
In&lt;br/&gt;comparison, traditional cyber security monitoring approaches are
susceptible to evasion and ineffective&lt;br/&gt;against new attacks because
they depend on known malware signatures. These features make PFP
capable&lt;br/&gt;of detecting sophisticated covert attacks and rootkits, such
as the recent Stuxnet worm. PFP has dual&lt;br/&gt;application in the commercial
and government markets, particularly for resource-constrained
and&lt;br/&gt;embedded platforms, including smart phones, smart grid, critical
industrial control, and tactical&lt;br/&gt;communication devices. PFP has the
potential to become a fundamental player in cyber-security
by&lt;br/&gt;protecting the nation?s infrastructure and promoting further
development of the economic base and&lt;br/&gt;employment.