* 1143395
* SBIR Phase I:  Monolithic Ceramic Pressure Sensors for High Temperatures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Dmitri Routkevitch, InRedox LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project targets development and
commercialization of pressure sensors capable of operating at temperatures
greater than 650°C for application in gas turbines; aircraft engines and
internal combustion engines; in downstream measurements in oil &amp; gas
drilling and geo-thermal explorations and in other performance-driven process
control systems involving harsh operating conditions. Availability of reliable
and inexpensive microsensors for such environments is hindered by the challenge
of micromachining refractory materials, such as silicon carbide, diamond or
ceramics. As a result, upper operating temperature of the current sensors is
limited to ~650°C. This project will employ a novel micromachining process to
create monolithic ceramic pressure transducers that can operate at temperatures
as high as 850-900°C. The proposed technology is also expected to support a
broad dynamic range and have low manufacturing cost. The objectives of Phase I
include design and fabrication of preliminary prototypes, demonstration of their
high temperature operation, as well as selecting design and packaging options
for Phase II development. The expected Phase I results include demonstration of
the proposed microstructures, initial performance data and analysis of the
feasibility of the proposed approach to meet the market needs at acceptable
cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is derived from a new family of products: low-cost pressure sensors for
high temperature, harsh environment applications, such as combustion engines,
aircraft and industrial turbines, geothermal installations, oil wells and
industrial processes. The proposed technology will help enable "intelligent
engines" by providing process control in conditions unavailable with existing
sensors. Deploying this technology is expected to increase reliability, improve
fuel efficiency and reduce the emissions of engines and turbines, resulting in
overall reduction of operating cost and better resource utilization. In the long
term, the project will also enhance scientific and technological understanding
in the MEMS industry by developing a new technology platform that supports a
wide range of designs and enables new products. Expanding the materials and
process library in the rapidly growing MEMS industry will help deliver critical
and value adding functionalities to end users. Societal impacts include reduced
pollution, increased fuel efficiency and increased product reliability enabled
by intelligent process control using proposed sensors. Combining advanced
performance with low manufacturing cost positions this technology for rapid
commercialization.