* 1143430
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtual-Worldizing ThinkMath: An Existing K-5 Math Curriculum Building Computational Fluency
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Jennifer Sun, Numedeon, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
design and testing of graphical, collaborative games within a virtual world
environment to support math learning for elementary school students. Numedeon,
Inc. is the creator of Whyville, the award winning educational virtual world for
children ages 8 to 15. Whyville has engaged 7 million users in science and math
explorations since 1999, with 200,000 monthly uniques spending 30+ minutes on
average per visit. Numedeon brings its experience in creating collaborative,
open-ended learning games to this project, building online games and experiences
upon specific components of the ThinkMath! curriculum. ThinkMath! is an
innovative K-5 mathematics curriculum developed by Education Development Center
(EDC) with prior support from the National Science Foundation. Pooling expertise
from consultants at EDC, WestEd, and DaVinci Minds, Numedeon will address three
fundamental challenges in the effective use of games in formal education:
providing scaffolding and assessment without compromising game play and
engagement, leveraging collaboration and user creation to promote in-depth
understanding, and designing integrated tools for training and supporting
teachers. The resulting pilot games along with teacher tools and embedded
assessment will be launched in Whyville for testing and evaluation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in creating a new
form of interactive learning that integrates formal classroom-based instruction
with informal game-based learning within an online social environment. As the
$6.2 billion textbook market in the US goes digital, this project challenges the
mindless conversion of print curriculum to digital textbooks and drill-based
practice of ?math facts? while addressing a critical national need to promote
mathematics competency. By combining the best in curriculum development (EDC)
with the best in collaborative game-based learning (Numedeon), this effort to
bring a standards-based mathematics curriculum into a successful commercial
virtual world is first of its kind. It will set a standard for thoughtfully
marrying curriculum with digital medium to create a high value, high visibility
product that goes beyond rote memorization and drilling to building mental
infrastructure and mathematical understanding. In addition, the visual nature of
game-based instruction will reduce barriers to use for bilingual and special
needs students. Finally, teacher professional development and support tools
designed as part of an integrated process, as opposed to tacked-on as an
afterthought, will have significant pedagogical impact and market potential.