* 1143747
* Impulsive and reflective trust and the transition to parenthood
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Sandra Murray, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2017
* USD 373,237.00

This research advances a model of trust to delineate contextual and
psychological factors that foster sustained satisfaction across the transition
to parenthood. In relationships, trust functions to signal the safety of
approach. Impulsive trust corresponds to automatic evaluative associations to
the partner. Reflective trust corresponds to considered beliefs about the
partner's motivation to be responsive. The proposed model predicts that being
impulsively trusting can inoculate against concerns about the partner's
responsiveness in ways that sustain satisfaction. This project involves a
longitudinal, multimethod study of the transition to parenthood. The work to be
conducted within the scope of the project is promising on several fronts. First,
it advances a dual-process model to predict relationship satisfaction over a
major life transition. No previous research has examined the singular or joint
effects of impulsive or reflective trust on satisfaction over the transition to
parenthood. Second, research and theory in the close relationships area has only
begun to explore dual-process models. This project is the first to investigate
the automatic and controlled processes involved in responding constructively vs.
destructively to conflicts-of-interest (in the lab and daily life). Third,
people's limited ability to accurately introspect on their experience can impede
scientific understanding of the factors that promote relationship satisfaction
and stability. Importantly, this work can reveal ways to circumvent such
limitations through its focus on reactions that do not require conscious insight
into behavior (i.e., challenge/threat cardiovascular responses, if-then
contingencies).

In addition to its scientific merit, the research to be carried out promises
societal benefits as well. This research could potentially identify tractable
points of intervention for strengthening relationships over the transition to
parenthood. It could also reveal how strengthening impulsive trust might help
vulnerable people (e.g., low in self-esteem) thrive in relationships. Given the
centrality of relationships for life happiness, the results of this research
should generate broad interest in the field of psychology and the general
public. In addition, the project involves the training of graduate and
undergraduate students who are underrepresented in advanced data analytic
techniques and psychophysiology. The university is part of an ethnically and
socioeconomically diverse community, which will be reflected in the participants
and graduate and undergraduate members of the research team.