* 1143429
* SBIR Phase I:  Social Media Platform for Structured Information Worker Communication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* David Brunner, moduleQ, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
test a cloud-based communication tool for managing handshakes between
information workers. Handshakes are goal-oriented interactions that occur
frequently in the course of collaborative information work, such as questions,
requests, or notifications requiring acknowledgement. Using email, workers must
track, organize and manage handshakes manually. For workers who handle hundreds
of messages per day, these routine tasks consume large amounts of time and
contribute to information overload. This project will test the feasibility of
using a cloud-based communication tool to automate the tracking, organization
and management of handshakes. By modeling the structure of worker interactions
as they unfold, the technology can determine how and by whom work is being
performed, guide worker attention to where it is needed, and reduce information
overload. Handshakes can be reused, further improving productivity. The research
will include development and pilot testing of a prototype system. During the
pilot test, data will be collected to measure the usability of the technology,
as well as the effects of the technology on worker communication patterns and
productivity. The results will establish the feasibility and effectiveness of a
handshake-based approach to structuring information worker communication.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to advance the state
of scientific and technical knowledge about computer-assisted information work,
thereby increasing information worker productivity and economic growth. The
technology area, tools for facilitating collective intelligence, currently
comprises three paradigms: messaging, business process management, and project
management. These paradigms model information work using messages, processes,
and tasks, respectively. The proposed innovation introduces a new paradigm that
models information work using structured handshakes. This paradigm defines a new
unit of analysis for scientific study of information work and enables the
automation of routine handshake management tasks. The target market sector for
the technology is high-end information workers such as corporate lawyers,
management consultants, and financial advisors. Based on the revenue generated
by leading information worker communication tools in this technology area, the
commercial potential of the technology exceeds one billion dollars per year.
Many high-end information workers have more business opportunities than they
have time to pursue, so increasing information worker productivity will lead
directly to improved business performance and faster economic growth. Increasing
the marginal product of high-end information workers will also lead to higher
demand for such workers, and thereby to creation of high-value jobs.