* 1143585
* EAGER: Exploring and Linking Widely Distributed Data on the Semantic Web
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* James Hendler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 197,407.00

The goal of this project is to explore key algorithms, technologies and
protocols that will lead to the next level of development of the original
Semantic Web vision of the 'Web of Data', a Web in which the unstructured texts
of the current Web are integrated in a seamless way with information currently
locked in structured databases. While a huge amount of open data is being made
available on the Web, especially in the 'Open Government Data' arena,
traditional computing techniques are inadequate for finding this data, for
linking it to other data, and for reusing and repurposing the data resources.
The project aims to show that an innovative combination of Semantic Web
technologies will provide the basis for a new approach to large-scale, on-line,
data integration and use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
demonstrate our techniques by showing their efficacy on a combination of Open
Government datasets being released around the world. There are already hundreds
of thousands of these databases made available in machine-readable formats by
countries, municipalities and cities, and the number is growing exponentially.
This makes Open Government Data a large-scale testbed for Web-based data
integration. The research team has collected the metadata for close to 400,000
datasets from more than 60 catalogs, from 20 countries, which are published in
fourteen different languages. The project will show how the combination of
linked-data representations, machine-readable metadata and Semantic Web
ontologies will provide an ability to federate data across these catalogs,
domains, and cultures. The researchers will develop the foundational algorithms
that make it possible for researchers to find, access, integrate and analyze ad
hoc combinations of these many datasets integrated on the fly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the outcome of this project will be to demonstrate
techniques, and develop a proof-of-concept demonstration, showing that the
integration of multiple data sources across the Web can be accomplished by the
application of a combination of semantic information of different kinds. The
researchers will show that it is possible to build search and reuse tools that
function across large distributed data collections, and we will explore the key
research challenges in creating Web-scale linked-open-data repositories. The
success of this project will demonstrate that by bridging the gap between
structured and unstructured sources, it is possible to develop techniques that
set the stage for a second generation of more powerful Semantic Web tools. Such
tools will allow scientists, engineers, and eventually end users to perform a
range of analyses without needing the large proprietary data resources currently
available to only a small set of researchers working in companies with access to
'big data'. Additional information about the project can be found at:
http://data.rpi.edu