* 1143406
* SBIR Phase I:  Lynchpin Global:  An Immersive Massive Multi-Player Environment for Learning Effective Team-Based Project Management for Information Technology in Manufacturing Envi
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Lia DiBello, Workplace Technologies Research Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project enables users to
rehearse the Project Management skills in the context of implementing enterprise
business IT systems, such as ERP, using 3D Virtual World platforms. Participants
interact with virtual replicas of actual manufacturing processes and products.
They must solve a number of interacting problems, in a team setting, amidst real
world production and performance demands (e.g. gathering information through
site visits, developing ERP reports, delegating roles and negotiating scope
changes). The method has shown success with IBM project managers as a model of
immersive, simulation based, outcomes driven learning and training for
organizations tackling large IT implementation efforts. However, these
participants were already near expert level learners. Our objectives for this
grant are to apply the method in an educational setting, deploying the method
among novice to advanced beginner learners, as well as resolve a number of
questions about the value of delivering such an experience within emerging
Virtual Worlds platforms. We anticipate that Virtual Worlds will provide an
optimal simulation-based rehearsal environment for training the next generation
of project managers who will be facing increasingly complex implementation
efforts that require agility and skill sets that go beyond current training
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project addresses the long-standing problem of high IT implementation failure
rates among large organizations. Using an immersive, simulation-based, outcomes
driven rehearsal methodology, this product has the potential to 1) increase the
success rate of ERP systems in manufacturing environments, 2) by allowing users
to rehearse and test deployment plans without risk and 3) and by providing
students new to project management and IT implementation an opportunity to
encounter real world problems and develop solutions under pressure in an
immersive, experiential manner. Because we use Virtual Worlds as the rehearsal
platform, this product will also test a number of questions about the
feasibility of using Virtual Worlds technologies for rehearsing IT
implementation efforts.