* 1143895
* Collaborative Research: Dayside Field-Aligned Current (FAC) Source Regions of Extreme Poynting Flux Events and the Response of the Magnetosphere-Ionosphere-Thermosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Joachim Raeder, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2017
* USD 175,135.00

Most studies of the magnetosphere have been carried out by considering primarily
the north-south (Bz) component of the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) and
most of those have considered intervals with southward IMF (Bz&lt;0). Recent
discoveries have revealed anomalous thermospheric neutral density signatures
caused by intense deposition of Poynting flux delivered over very localized
regions under conditions that are normally considered benign. These studies have
shown that relatively modest IMF By-driven localized heating at storm-onset
generates neutral thermospheric disturbances that had not previously been
explained. In addition studies using data from DMSP satellites demonstrated
large yet localized dayside energy input. MHD simulation results for one case
suggest that the localized enhanced Poynting fluxes in the southern hemisphere
map to a flank magnetopause reconnection region. Most of these events are
associated with dominant in-the-ecliptic interplanetary magnetic field (IMF)
values, often, but not exclusively, while the IMF Bz is northward (Bz&gt;0). The
objectives of this proposal are to verify the source region (magnetopause
merging versus bow shock) of the Poynting flux-related dayside field-aligned
currents (FACs), determine their ionospheric distribution, and examine the
relative local and global impact of the Poynting flux energy input on the
magnetosphere-ionosphere-thermosphere system. The influences of solar ejecta and
high-speed streams will be distinguished and investigated for seasonal and
hemispheric differences. The study will employ both data analysis from multiple
satellites, ground based observations from radar and the AMIE technique and tie
all the observations together with global magnetohydrodynamic
simulations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research potentially transforms the way
the space science community views the effects of non-southward IMF on the
geospace environment. It is at the forefront of system science in exploring the
influence of non-southward IMF on the field-aligned currents that deliver
focused energy to dayside regions. This is an understudied area of space
physics. It also has practical application to problems related to satellite
drag.