* 1143548
* PC3: Collaborative Research: Foundation for Trusted and Scalable Mobile Healthcare
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2015
* David Kotz, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 156,178.00

This award provides funding for a collaborative project between Dartmouth
College, Rice University and the Indian Institute of Technology in New Delhi.
Soon, technology for mobile health (mHealth) will enable individuals to wear one
or more sensing devices to better monitor their health conditions, or enable
rural health workers to make periodic visits to villages that may not have
access to routine healthcare services. The investigators in this project are
developing the scientific foundations for a modular kit of mHealth components --
portable, inexpensive, and usable by patients or healthcare workers with limited
training -- that can be assembled into a variety of combinations for different
circumstances or healthcare purposes. Scientifically, they are addressing two
fundamental questions: (1) how to construct secure, self-aware sensors that can
attest to the provenance of the sensor data and its context; (2) how to design a
system for computational triage that can provide real-time on-site feedback to
the patient, avoiding the need for every patient visit, every data point, to be
examined by skilled health professionals. The intellectual merit of this project
is in (1) developing a new breed of portable medical sensors with the
intelligence to identify and securely attest to the origin and quality of the
data, and (2) developing computational triage algorithms that guide individual
subjects to a medical facility when tests reveal a high chance of potential
health problems. The research should result in broader impacts including (1)
technology that could radically improve preventive health, (2) students trained
on healthcare technologies in a wider global context, and (3) technologies that
will have applications beyond healthcare, such as in critical infrastructure
monitoring. This project is part of the Pervasive Communications and Computing
Collaboration (PC3) initiative.