* 1143093
* SBIR Phase I:  Shape memory alloys with large latent heat low fatigue for solid-state refrigeration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Ichiro Takeuchi, Maryland Energy and Sensor Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 159,493.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on developing
thermoelastic materials with long fatigue life, suitable for refrigeration and
cooling applications. Thermoelastic cooling (TC) is a new technology based on
the latent heat generated and absorbed during the stress-induced phase
transformation in a shape memory alloy (SMA). The efficiency of the
thermoelastic cooling process is high, with a coefficient of performance (COP)
estimated at 11.8, which is double that of state-of-the-art vapor compression
technology. This technology, however, has drawbacks in its current preliminary
form; these include a relatively low latent heat (~12 kJ/kg) and a limited
fatigue life. The objective of this project will be to develop a new SMA
material for TC applications, which features long fatigue life and small thermal
hysteresis. Novel methods, such as thick-film synthesis and micro-indentation,
will be used to prepare samples. The resulting materials will then be
characterized based on hysteresis, latent heat, and stress-strain
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is huge, with the resulting products having the potential to
displace vapor compression technology in a variety of residential and commercial
cooling and refrigeration applications. If successfully commercialized, this
technology could reduce U.S. annual primary electricity consumption by up to
3.73 quads in 2030. Since the thermoelastic cooling method completely eliminates
the need for an entire class of high global warming potential (GWP) greenhouse
gases, namely hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
the total CO2 savings could be as high as 368 million metric tons. A successful
commercialization and deployment of products based on the TC method could create
hundreds of quality domestic jobs, with most coming in the manufacturing sector.