* 1143926
* EAGER: Visual Analytics for Ontology Matching
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Maria Cruz, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 166,000.00

Ontologies are developed to provide semantics for a particular domain and to
support information retrieval, reasoning and knowledge discovery. However, as
separate groups develop ontologies, there is a need to combine or match
ontologies to support connecting information across heterogeneous sources.
Ontology matching is a complicated process that stems from the need to involve
several types of matching algorithms that take into account syntactic, lexical,
structural, instance, and logic features of the ontologies. The current support
provided to users to understand and evaluate the results provided by ontology
matching systems is very limited; therefore ontology matching is an arduous and
time consuming task. This exploratory project focuses on development of a novel
approach to ontology matching that employs visual analytics to guide the users
in the process. It is expected to result in increased quality of resulting
ontologies while also reducing the time and effort of experts involved in
ontology matching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visual analytics is at the confluence of
information visualization, data analytics, and data transformation. This project
explores the potential of visual analytics to effectively assist real-time
decisions by domain experts and ontology researchers alike during the ontology
matching process. The project is organized around three key research
challenges:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Visualization: Data and analytically extracted
features need to be encoded into rich visualizations that can be effectively
manipulated. In particular, visualizations should lend themselves well to
complex transformations that facilitate the discernment of trends or
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Architecture: The interaction between the automatic
matching and the visual analytics modules is central to the proposed approach.
The envisioned architecture will support a quality-controlled feedback loop in
which users will intervene to change the analytic and visual parameters of the
system.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Performance evaluation: Performance measures will be
developed to objectively identify the obtained gains in terms of the effort
saved by users and of the quality of the matching results as enabled by the
proposed visual analytics approach to ontology matching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this proof-of-concept project is expected to make a significant
contribution in effective ontology matching that in turn will enable
semantically enriched access to complex, heterogeneous, and distributed data to
an increasing number of users in a variety of domains. Research results,
including developed software, will be made available via the project web site
(http://agreementmaker.org/wiki/index.php/Visual_Analytics). The project
provides research experience to students and results from this research will be
included in the computer science curriculum.