* 1143543
* Ordered Array of Uniformly Sized Quantum Dots for High Efficiency Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Haeyeon Yang, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 16,716.00

0854313&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Achieving the
predicted efficiency over 60% from the third generation solar cells based on
Intermediate Band (IB) has been troublesome due to the defects and low light
absorption by Self-Assembled Quantum Dots (SAQD) via the Stranski-Krastanov
(S-K) growth mode. The nature of the SAQDs fabricated by the S-K mode is
randomness in size and position. This randomness broadens the IB structure
formed between p- and n-junctions, which reduces the absorption at a given
spectrum, reducing the efficiency. Another problem in applying SAQDs for solar
cells is the difficulty in realizing defect-free layers of high concentration of
dots when the stacking of SAQDs is more than ~20 layers. In order to overcome
the problems related with controls of size and site, and the defects in the
SAQD-stacks, this project will develop low cost and direct in-situ patterning
processes to guide the self-assembly of uniformly sized, multi-stacked SAQDs for
high efficiency solar cells. Interferential irradiation of high power laser
pulses will be employed to create thermal modulations on surface in order to
produce defect-free, uniform and ordered nanoscale patterns on surfaces.
Atomistic understanding will be pursued on the patterning processes and the
stacking SAQDs more than 50 layers. The atomistic optimization, using in-vacuum
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM), will provide ways to scale-up the arrays of
desired sizes and shapes of SAQDs. In particular, the project will study how the
size and periodicity influence the electronic structure of IBs formed by SAQDs.
In-situ optical characterizations will be used to analyze optical defects, the
correlation between IB structure and the properties of QD arrays such as size
and density so that the patterning and growth processes maximize the efficiency
of QD-based solar cells. Gained insight will be used to fabricate SAQD-based
solar cells with target efficiency over 50%. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact:
To generate electricity at $0.02/kWh, solar cells efficiency over 50% are
crucial. When used with concentrator designs, the developed high efficiency
solar cells will have huge impact on society. Also the project will advance
understanding on nanoscale thermal processes to produce defect-free high quality
nano lines and dots on various substrates. Students will be trained in design
and fabrication processes of solar cells through research based education. This
will be accomplished by exposing them to the cutting edge research on atomistic
studies on the patterning using STM, the optical properties of IB solar cells,
and heteroepitaxial growth techniques such as Molecular Beam Epitaxy and Pulsed
Laser Deposition. Demonstrations of the solar cells and quantum size effects
will be used to enhance public understanding on solar energy and nanoscale
science and engineering through public demonstrations in annual Physics Day in
Lagoon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was supported by the Energy for
Sustainability Program of the CBET Division of the Engineering Directorate and
the Electronic/Photonic Materials Program of the Division of Materials Research
(DMR) of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.