* 1143116
* SBIR Phase I:  Batch Wafer-Scale Fabrication of Improved Probe Tips for Scanned Probe Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Scott Lockledge, Tiptek, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
development and scale-up of a new process for fabricating probe tips for atomic
force microscopy (AFM). In AFM, images of surfaces with atomic-scale resolution
are created by rastering a probe across the surface. The probe itself consists
of a tip (which interacts with the surface) and a body (which supports the tip
and provides an externally-readable signal). The tip radius of curvature
determines the size of the smallest surface feature that may be imaged, and the
tip composition establishes its hardness and thus its wear resistance. One of
the main impediments to wider adoption of AFM has been the poor durability of
probe tips. This project will lead to the first batch process to fabricate tips
that are both extremely sharp and hard. The new process involves two steps.
First, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is used to coat the tips with a
chemically inert and extremely hard material. Second, field directed sputter
sharpening (FDSS) sharpens the probe tip to atomic dimensions.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project are significant. At
present, the CVD/FDSS process has been implemented for coating and sharpening
only one tip at a time in a laboratory setting. The current project, which will
develop batch wafer-scale processing so that dozens or hundreds of tips can be
coated and sharpened at once, will form the basis for a process to manufacture
and sell AFM probe tips that are ultra-sharp, very hard, and relatively
inexpensive. The availability of such probe tips could lead to a significant
expansion of the market for AFM probe tips, which is currently approximately $35
million per year and growing rapidly. The results will significantly enhance the
capabilities of all probe microscopy methods, including AFM and related
techniques such as scanning spreading resistance microscopy (SSRM) and
electrochemical imaging (ECAFM). The research will also be of benefit to those
who image insulating surfaces, such as polymers and other soft materials where
static charge build-up limits efficacy. In addition, the results of this project
could be extended to multi-tip probe arrays for lithographic and
nanomanufacturing applications, and to the on-board testing of integrated
circuits for delay faults, a capability of great interest to the
microelectronics industry.