* 1143635
* RI: EAGER: Exploratory Research on Acquiring and Adapting Sentence Planning Resources for Generating with Discourse Combinatory Categorial Grammar
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Michael White, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,937.00

Natural Language Generation (NLG) systems aim to improve the accessibility and
impact of information by turning data into coherent and fluent text or speech,
automatically. Developing high-quality NLG systems, however, remains a difficult
and costly undertaking, in large part because bridging the gap between content
planning and surface realization---a task known as \textit{sentence
planning}---continues to require extensive knowledge
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early Grant for Exploratory Research
investigates ways of bridging this gap by employing machine learning together
with Discourse Combinatory Categorial Grammar (DCCG). Using a restaurant
recommendation application as a proof-of-concept, the project explores methods
of (1) adapting previous work on acquiring lexicalized grammar entries for
semantic parsing to learn mappings from domain-general semantic dependency
representations to application-specific representations of messages; (2)
extending the approach to learn rules for combining messages; (3) employing the
acquired resources to map content plans to disjunctive logical forms (DLFs),
which compactly specify the range of possible realizations of the selected
content; and (4) improving the efficiency of realizing DLFs with OpenCCG through
grammar specialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will evaluate the
success of these novel methods and assess the portability of the approach. By
demonstrating methods for radically simplifying the construction of NLG systems,
the project promises to transform the way NLG systems are built, from today's
knowledge-intensive approach to one that relies primarily on assembling a
parallel corpus of input-output pairs. Ultimately, it will facilitate the
development of generation components in data-to-text systems as well as dialogue
systems, including ones for the visually impaired.