* 1143342
* SBIR Phase I:  Targeted Nanoparticle Delivery Agent for Treatment of Adult Leukemia
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jon Nagy, NanoValent Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 164,848.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to explore
the application of a targeted nanodelivery system for both treatment and
efficacy monitoring in patients with adult leukemia. Unlike solid tumors, for
which surgery, radiation, and conventional treatments are an option, leukemias
are cancers of the blood, which have very poor prognosis due to the fact that
they are disseminated diseases from inception. In this project, the targeted and
drug-filled nanoparticle will be optimized for effective tumor killing in cell
culture, followed by validation using established in-vivo methods for adult
leukemia in a mouse model. It is expected that this targeted nanodelivery system
will increase the therapeutic window and minimize systemic therapy related
toxicity, demonstrating the superior margin of safety compared to the standard
methods for treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of
this project will be the potential to provide a technology that is capable of
delivering a wide array of drug molecules (hydrophilic and hydrophobic) or drug
cocktails using multiple tissue targeting ligands. The specific focus of this
project is adult acute leukemia for which there is currently no curative
treatment, and the adult survival rate is only 30%. Highly robust, customizable,
stable, and easy to manufacture, this particle delivery system is anticipated to
make a major impact on the treatment of adult leukemia.