* 1143454
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Learning Tool for ADHD that Enhances Memory During Sleep
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Alexander Butterwick, Sheepdog Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 144,717.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project supports the work of
Sheepdog Sciences to develop novel methods to enhance learning for people
diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This project is
focused on developing low-cost devices that safely enhance cognitive function in
K-12 students. The innovative tools being developed are based on a foundation of
high-profile, peer-reviewed academic research in humans and animal models. The
Sheepdog Sciences neuroenhancement technology uses multiple sensors to classify
cognitive state and provides direct biofeedback to improve memory function. The
device and related software under development will be used to assess the
method?s efficacy in an education setting for students with ADHD. The
engineering and early development tasks described here will overcome key
technology and commercialization hurdles, including market-specific challenges
to make the system amenable for use in K-12 settings and determine whether the
method is sufficiently robust to be applicable for children.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop safe and
inexpensive tools that permit children with learning disabilities to achieve
their full potential. The effect of learning disabilities that limit cognitive
performance can be particularly devastating to students in early formative years
when educational environments and scholastic opportunities are most rich. The
estimated prevalence of ADHD is 3-5% and rising. In the year 2000, the total
cost related to caring for and treating persons with ADHD exceeded $27 billion,
and the societal cost of ADHD (including healthcare costs and lost economic
productivity) was between $36-52 billion. By improving learning and memory, the
neuroenhancement device under development by Sheepdog Sciences has the
opportunity to revolutionize how students with ADHD manage their symptoms and
achieve in the classroom. Moreover, this technology has similar potential in
other markets characterized by reduced memory function?including reduced memory
function due to normal aging, neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer?s
disease, and neurodevelopmental disorders such as Down syndrome and autism
spectrum disorders, each affecting millions of Americans. The long-term
development path for this technology recognizes numerous additional potential
markets for memory enhancement for students of all ages and abilities.