* 1143484
* SBIR Phase I:  Identifying Drug Leads via 3D Pharmacophore Space Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Christian Lang, Acelot, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
that chemical compound activity/binding prediction can be significantly improved
by applying geometric mining to the Joint Pharmacophore Space (JPS).
Activity/binding prediction is of immense importance to the pharmaceutical
industry as it allows evaluating biological properties early on in the drug
development process. The proposed technique applies novel 3D clustering and
statistical analysis to model configurations contributing/preventing binding
between potentially large numbers of compounds and pharmacophoric targets (the
JPS) and uses these models to search for other compounds with similar activity.
In addition, the technique allows the interactive study of ?binding clusters? in
order to design new compounds with specific binding properties and
physicochemical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts
of this research are (1) improved efficiency of drug discovery pipelines,
opening new opportunities, accelerating time-to-market of new drugs, and cutting
R&amp;D costs for pharmaceutical and biotech companies, and (2) the furthering
of the understanding of basic compound properties, such as blood-brain-barrier
permeability. This could have far-reaching consequences in the fight against
diseases. Yet another outcome of the successful completion of this project is
(3) the specific identification of new lead compounds antagonizing the toxic
compounds causing Alzheimer's. Consequently, the project has a significant
market potential as well as important ramifications for the improvement of human
health.