* 1143921
* EAGER:  Automatic Document and Record Disposition and Retention
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* C. Lee Giles, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Record and document retention (document disposition) has become a serious
problem for both organizations and individuals since most documents now created
are digital. Digital documents offer both problems and advantages. Digital
documents are easily versioned, copied and disseminated. Thus, there can be
several similar copies or versions of important or relevant documents in many
locations. Document or record disposition can be applied to or is needed by
individuals, organizations and domains (such as law, science, policy, etc.) for
effective information management over long periods of time. This problem is of
epic proportions and is becoming a major problem in organizations and for
individuals throughout the world where effective record disposition is either
required by law or by the organization or by practical limitations in
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory project investigates possible
automatic document disposition methods based on algorithms for text inspection,
mining, and search. The challenges lie in finding scalable, adaptable algorithms
that can be used in several if not all application domains. In addition,
variability in users presents many problems. A disposition method or procedure
may vary depending on the user, organization and domain (e.g., law, health
records, etc.). The approach explored in this project applies and extends
machine learning methods to these problems since these methods adapt to
variability in data, areas and domains. Using such approaches, automated
disposition methods can be readily applied to these different areas such as
science, email and legal records. This research lays the groundwork for adaptive
methods for a variety of domains in terms of applicability, performance and
scalability. this proof-of-concept project initially focuses on the Enron email
data set that is publicly available and is be used to demonstrate the
feasibility of the approach since email can be considered a special case of
document disposition. If successful, other disposition domains such as science
and government data will be explored. This work will show the viability of
developing and applying machine learning methods to an important and diverse
problem domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this exploratory project
together with insights gathered from methods used in large scale document search
are expected to yield understanding as to how we can better manage our digital
past and the rapidly expanding digital future. The results are expected to
introduce this important problem to other researchers and document disposition
professionals and lead to collaborations with industry. Data and research
results will be made available through a publicly available website
(http://clgiles.ist.psu.edu/disposeseer/) and research papers will be published
and presented in appropriate venues. The project provides research experience
for graduate and undergraduate students.