* 1143229
* SBIR Phase I:  NanoSilver-Silicon Based Substrates for  Chemical Sensing by Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Shanthi Subramanian, LoTEC, Inc. (dba Vesta Sciences, Inc.)
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,814.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel substrate for sensing of biomolecules by Surface Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy (SERS). The substrate is expected to be stable, low cost ,
reproducible and can be functionalized to improve selectivity. Sensing of
biomolecules and other chemicals has become increasingly important for point-of-
care diagnostics in medical applications, controlling and monitoring
environmental pollution, as well in improved detection of chemical warfare
agents and explosives in homeland security applications. SERS is a vibrational
spectroscopy and can provide chemical-fingerprint like information that is
highly specific. This enables detection of many different species and also
permits detection of multiple species in a single measurement. The lack of high
quality, stable, low cost substrates, reproducibility of the enhancement and
selectivity are all challenges that need to be overcome before commercialization
can be sucessful. The type of structure developed in this project where SERS
active nanoparticles are dispersed on the surface of a high surface area support
is unique and can provide fundamental insights into SERS mechanisms as well as
yield a substrate that can enable the development of commercial SERS based
sensors and sensing mechanisms for a range of applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
that it has the potential to be a be a key enabler for commercial sensors or
platforms based on Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS). Development of
chemical sensors is critical for industrial, medical and homeland security
applications. A rapidly aging population, increased spending in the healthcare
sector, increasing demand for point-of-care testing &amp; monitoring solutions,
shift towards alternate sites of healthcare, and increased occurrences of a
number of chronic diseases drive the requirements for innovation in sensors.
SERS is an emerging technique for optical sensors that has been shown to have a
wide range of sensing capabilities, for example, &lt;br/&gt;The SERS based
sensors currently under development have impact on homeland security and medical
diagnostics applications and thus the technology proposed here can have a broad
impact on these areas.