* 1143479
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost, Flexible Electronic Paper
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Mateusz Bryning, Zikon Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project responds to the
ubiquitous and growing demand for electronic displays by investigating the
feasibility and performance of a low-cost, flexible electronic paper solution,
targeting high contrast, fast response, and low power consumption. The
intellectual merit of this investigation is the advancement of a new display
technology that will change the way information is viewed and presented, and the
manner in which electronic displays are produced. A key technological innovation
is the development of a paper-like porous matrix to control the motion of
charged nanodroplets under applied electric fields. The two specific research
objectives are: (1) to develop a low-cost, nanodroplet-compatible porous matrix,
and (2) to integrate the porous matrix into a flexible display. Research
activities for the first objective involve formulating the matrix, establishing
deposition method, quantifying material characteristics, measuring ink
interactions, and testing basic (single-pixel) operation. Research activities
for the second objective involve integrating the porous matrix and ink into a
flexible display, testing multi-pixel operation, and determining optimal
performance limits. Anticipated results of this Phase I project are a
quantitative understanding of this innovation and identification of some key
manufacturing processes leading into further development in Phase II.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project include the creation of
a disruptive new display technology, mitigation of environmental factors
associated with manufacture and disposal of thin-film transistor (TFT) displays,
energy efficiency, reduced paper consumption, and expanded yet economical use of
electronic displays for visual communication. This project has high potential
for significant commercial impact because it addresses the need for a high-
performance, low cost, energy efficient display solution within the rapidly
growing global display market, which is currently valued in excess of $150B. The
enhanced scientific understanding that will be gained from the study of matrix
and nanodroplet interactions will contribute to aggregate knowledge of nanoscale
systems, and has potential for synergies beyond the realm of electronic
displays, with commonalities encountered in fields such as bioseparation
processes and photovoltaic devices. Another important aspect of this research is
its impact on education through the engagement of a faculty member and graduate
students at one of the nation's minority serving universities in a joint
research endeavor. This partnership fosters integration of contemporary
industrial relevance with academic learning for a diverse audience of future
engineers and scientists.