* 1143892
* EAGER: Computing With Cells
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Oscar Ibarra, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 74,995.00

Natural Computing is computing inspired by nature. Examples are evolutionary
algorithms, neural networks, molecular computing, and quantum computing.
Membrane computing is a branch of natural computing that was recently initiated
by G. Paun in his seminal paper, "Computing with Membranes". Membrane computing
identifies an unconventional computing model, namely a P system, from natural
phenomena of cell evolutions and chemical reactions. A membrane system is a
computing model, which abstracts from the way living cells process chemical
compounds in their compartmental structure. Regions defined by a membrane
structure (or cells related by communication channels) contain multi-sets of
objects that evolve according to given rules. The objects can be described by
symbols or by strings of symbols. By using the rules in a nondeterministic (or
probabilistic) maximally parallel manner, transitions between the system
configurations can be obtained. A sequence of transitions is a computation of
how the system is evolving. Various ways of controlling the transfer of objects
from a region to another while applying the rules (as well as possibilities to
dissolve, divide or create membranes) are considered in this area. Due to the
built-in nature of maximal parallelism inherent in the model, P systems have a
great potential for implementing massively concurrent systems in an efficient
way that would allow us to solve currently intractable problems, in much the
same way as the promise of quantum and molecular computing.

More recently, spiking neural P systems (SN P systems) were introduced with the
aim of incorporating into membrane computing specific ideas from spiking
neurons. In short, an SN P system consists of a set of neurons placed in the
nodes of a directed graph and sending signals (spikes) along the arcs of the
graph which are called synapses. The objects evolve by means of spiking rules
placed in the nodes and enabled when the number of spikes present in the nodes
fulfill specified patterns. When a spiking rule is executed in a neuron, spikes
are produced and sent in parallel to all neurons connected by an outgoing
synapse from the neuron where the rule was applied. SN P systems are a good
model of neural computing. The focus in the proposed project is on fundamental
topics such as computational complexity and characterizations of several
variants of SN P systems, universality/non-universality of the different models,
determinism versus non-determinism, various modes of parallelization,
synchronization, synchronous versus asynchronous computations, relationships to
well-known models of parallel computation, and verification problems.