* 1143081
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel 1 kW Micro-turbine for Distributed Generation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Jason Ethier, Dynamo Micropower
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
create a novel low-cost micro-turbine engine that will revolutionize small-scale
distributed power generation. The end goal is to install the generator onto
residential HVAC systems to provide combined heat and power (CHP) for single-
family homes. The engine will generate 1kW of electricity and the excess heat
will be used for space heating and water heating, resulting in more efficient
use of thermal energy. Currently there are no commercially available low-cost
micro-turbine CHP systems that operate in this power range. The objective of
this Phase I work is to demonstrate the feasibility of building a low-cost yet
efficient micro-turbine by combining innovative morphologies with conventional
materials and manufacturing technologies. The broader/commercial impacts of this
research is to enable distributed generation at unprecedented power density and
cost effectiveness, making it accessible for residential consumers. Customer
adoption of combined heat and power (CHP) technologies is very low due to the
lack of systems with a reasonable payback period. CHP systems powered by the
proposed micro-turbine have a 75% reduction in upfront cost and 90% reduction in
volume compared to existing systems. A small, cost effective and efficient CHP
system will help families reduce monthly utility bills, provide peak hour load-
leveling for power grid utilities, and reduce annual CO2 emissions by 1 ton per
household. The proposed technology has significant market potential; beyond a
multi-billion dollar residential CHP market with an enormous customer base are
other applications in distributed generation.