* 1143151
* SBIR Phase I:  High Efficiency Near Isothermal Rotary Compressor for Improved Efficiency in Industrial Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Jeremy Pitts, OsComp Systems
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,955.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to further develop
a breakthrough compression technology for industrial compressed air
applications. We have developed an innovative hybrid-rotor geometry which leads
to extremely high power density and enables the use of a proprietary liquid
injection system that can directly cool the gas as it is compressed, leading to
near isothermal compression. This combination can result in an increase of over
30% in efficiency and an order of magnitude higher compression ratio than is
achievable with conventional compression technology. The key objectives of this
effort are to verify the technology's applicability in industrial compressed air
applications and build and test a full-scale prototype to validate performance
models. The successful completion of this project will lead to the
commercialization of a product that will provide a step-change in the
performance of industrial compressed air systems.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is widespread.
Industrial users are responsible for approximately one-third of all power
consumption in the US, or around one trillion kilowatt-hours per year. Ten
percent of all industrial power use, or roughly 100 billion kilowatt-hours per
year, is consumed in the production of compressed air, with that percentage
going as high as 20% in certain process-intensive industries. The technology
being investigated in this proposal has the potential to improve the efficiency
of air compressors by over 30%. Combining these savings with other system-level
improvements could reduce the power required to run compressed air systems by a
factor of two. Along with the dramatic potential for energy savings, there is
also an enormous market for compressors, with 2007 worldwide shipments of air
and gas compressors approaching $10 billion. New compressors used in industrial
air applications were worth $600 million in the US alone in 2009. A higher
efficiency compressor has the potential to capture a large share of this market.
Finally, this technology could also be applied for other compression and
turbomachinery applications, with far-reaching impact and enormous commercial
potential.