* 1143053
* EAGER: Dually Photocrosslinkable and Photolabile Polymers for Fabricating Heterogeneous 3D structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Ryan Toomey, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2012
* USD 80,000.00

This EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award will fund the
development of polymers that are dually photo-crosslinkable and photolabile. A
series of functional terpolymers will be synthesized that can be photo-
crosslinked at long UV wavelengths and photo-chemically modified at short UV
wavelengths. The terpolymers will be synthesized from three types of units: A
structural unit, a photo-crosslinkable unit, and an acid unit with a photo-
cleavable protecting group. The photo-crosslinking unit permits structural
patterning of the polymer, and the photo-cleavable unit permits region-selective
development of acidic regions in the pattern. The structural units to be tested
include methylmethacrylate, N-isopropylacrylamide, and
N,N-dimethylmethacrylamide. The kinetics of polymerization will be studied to
establish the controllability of the final composition. Moreover, the efficiency
of cross-linking and deprotection will be studied in thin film
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will provide polymers that are both structurally definable and photo-
addressable. A major goal is to then combine conventional photolithography with
assembly-based methods for the heterogeneous integration of nanoparticles into
MEMS devices. Through the use of two different wavelengths of light, the photo-
crosslinkable and photolabile polymers can be incorporated into MEMS devices and
subsequently acid patterned through conventional photolithography. The regions
of acidity, in turn, can direct the assembly of nanoparticles from solution to
nanomanufacture multi-functional structures and surfaces.