* 1143716
* MCTP:  The Center for Women in Mathematics at Smith College
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Ruth Haas, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,500,010.00

This grant will fund the Center for Women in Mathematics at Smith. The overall
goal of the Center is to increase the number of U.S. citizen women earning
doctorates in the mathematical sciences by helping women make the transition
from casual mathematics student to committed woman in mathematics. The main
activity of the Center is to offer the nation's first post-baccalaureate program
in mathematics previously established by NSF award 0602110. The post-
baccalaureate program enables women who have graduated college without the
necessary course work in mathematics to continue to graduate school. A secondary
activity of the Center is to enrich the lives and careers of women in
mathematics in the northeast through its annual WIMIN conference and additional
outreach and community-building programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The post-
baccalaureate program taps into the largest underutilized source of mathematical
talent in the country: American women. Women earn 43% of bachelors degrees in
mathematics, and yet still make up only 29% of mathematics graduate students and
17% of tenured graduate faculty. This grant funds a program that intervenes at a
critical point, the transition to graduate student. The program helps women who
graduated from college without the coursework and confidence necessary to
succeed in graduate school. The Center maintains a stimulating and supportive
environment of students, faculty and alumnae. In addition to comprehensive
mentoring and a rich curriculum, the Center gives students the opportunity to do
research with faculty throughout the year. The grant will also provide community
and support for mathematical women at all levels. Smith College is a regional
center for women mathematicians. Each year, the Center for Women in Mathematics
hosts Women In Mathematics In the Northeast (WIMIN), showcasing research and
offering women in the area a chance to renew ties, to network, and to seek and
offer mentoring and advice. The Center also runs a growing number of outreach
programs and a weekly seminar featuring northeast women mathematicians.