* 1143049
* A Proposal to Support Student Travel for the ACM CoNEXT 2011 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* T. S. Eugene Ng, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

The 7th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies (CoNEXT) will be held from December 6th to December 9th 2011 on the
campus of the University of Tokyo in Japan. This award funds 10 US-based
graduate students to attend this conference. Participation in conferences such
as CoNEXT is an extremely important part of the graduate school experience as it
provides students with an opportunity to interact with more senior researchers
and exposes them to leading-edge research in the field. ACM CoNEXT is unique in
its emphasis on interactions between networking researchers at an international
level; and attending CoNEXT is an excellent opportunity for US graduate students
to connect with a thriving international research community. A special student
workshop will be organized in association with CoNEXT that will enable students
to present and obtain feedback on their work in progress. The support from this
award will enable students to attend the main conference and associated
workshops at CoNEXT 2011. The travel grant chair is committed to encouraging the
participation of women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This award provides support
for graduate students to attend CoNEXT 2011 and the associated workshops, which
include the student workshop, the Workshop on Internet of Things and Service
Platforms, and the Special Workshop on the Internet and Disasters. This rich
program will expose students to new ideas, and allow them to interact with other
researchers. In particular, the student workshop is geared to provide students
an opportunity to present their work in progress, receive feedback on their
work, and obtain valuable experience in writing and presenting technical
papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project integrates research
and education of students through exposure to a premier technical meeting in
computer networks and communications. Students will have the opportunity to
observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior researchers in the
field both in the main conference and the associated workshops. The proposed
student participation will have a positive impact on the quality of their
research. Women and other minorities will be encouraged to participate. A
distinguishing feature of the CoNEXT conference is its truly international
flavor which presents a tremendous opportunity to students to expand their
breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical perspective.