* 1143506
* IAI Interdisciplinary Training Program
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Marcella Ohira, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 09/30/2016
* USD 820,000.00

This grant supports an IAI training program consisting of five Training
Institutes and Colloquia on interdisciplinary themes of global environmental
change science and its applications. As part of the training institutes, Seed
Grants will be provided to successful participants to actively follow-up the
training events and integrate the recipients with existing IAI research teams.
Participants will be natural and social scientists, policy-makers, environmental
practitioners and other stakeholders. Regionally important themes will be
addressed: climate &amp; public health, governance, risk, vulnerability and
adaptation, water resource management, and research analysis tools including the
modeling of complex human/natural systems. Seed grants will provide an
opportunity for participants to stay engaged, to build networks and to apply the
training provided to real-world issues. The program will strengthen and foster
multinational and multidisciplinary collaboration and may also increase the
participation of small countries in IAI research programs. These activities will
be developed in collaboration with other IAI science programs so that current
IAI research enhances the institutes and generates cross-program
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI) was created by an international agreement concluded among
representatives of American States, namely the Agreement Establishing the Inter-
American Institute for Global Change Research, done at Montevideo on May 13,
1992 (the IAI Agreement). The IAI Agreement created an intergovernmental
organization for the purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research
related to global change. The Institute has an evolving Scientific Agenda
identifying particular areas for research. Full membership in the IAI is limited
to States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute is governed by an annual
Conference of the Parties, and by a subsidiary Executive Council (EC). The US
Government currently chairs the EC. The IAI possesses the fundamental
institutional characteristics of an international organization: it was created
by international agreement, is composed of States and is governed by bodies
composed of representatives of States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US Government
participates actively in the IAI. The United States played a leading role in the
creation of the IAI, and has been an active participant in the IAI since its
creation. Senior US Government officials have served on the Executive Council
and held other responsible positions related to IAI activities. Furthermore, the
IAI has been listed by the State Department and by the Office of Personnel
Management as an international organization within the meaning of the Federal
Employees International Organization Service Act, covered by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and 5
U.S.C. 3581.