* 1143070
* Physics Bridge Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2019
* Erika Brown, American Physical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,004,137.00

Physics ranks at the bottom of science disciplines in educating the growing US
population of African-, Hispanic-, and Native-Americans. The situation is not
improving, as the fraction of PhDs in physics awarded to underrepresented
minorities (URM) among US citizens, about 5-6%, has not increased over the past
decade. We propose to increase, within the next decade, the fraction of physics
PhDs awarded to URM students toward levels more representative of the fraction
of URMs that currently receive physics Bachelor?s degrees. We will do this by
creating a national network of sustainable research-focused programs that bridge
the transition from institutions where URM students receive their undergraduate
education to top research universities. The American Physical Society (APS)
occupies a unique position in the community to catalyze action and leverage
resources to succeed in these goals and to bring about sustainable change in
physics graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish
"Bridge Experiences" that will help diverse students prepare for and make the
transition to doctoral studies in physics. These Bridge Experiences will adopt
best practices from existing programs, and follow either a Master?s degree or a
post-Baccalaureate example. We have brought together Doctoral Granting
Institutions (DGIs), Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs), and concerned
organizations to inform and help build a national effort that will offer
sustainable solutions to improved support, mentoring, and progress monitoring to
ensure that students make the transition smoothly and complete their studies.
Physics offers an ideal test-bed for Bridge Experiences, as only modest numbers
of students are required to demonstrate success in mitigating the losses that
currently occur in the transition to doctoral studies. We choose to focus on
doctoral students because these students will become a cadre of future leaders
who can catalyze national change in science education. In addition, the research
and assessment components of this project will identify, document, and
disseminate best practices that can serve as a model for other disciplines to
encourage more of the nation?s capable underrepresented minorities (URM)
undergraduates to pursue doctoral degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit This program will use existing knowledge of Bridge Experiences that have
demonstrated effectiveness in increasing minority participation at the doctoral
level. Our project incorporates strong evidence about support structures that
predict academic success of URM students, and establishes links between MSIs and
DGIs through research activities, collaboration, and visits. We will conduct
research on admissions and retention in physics doctoral programs, and the
correlation of GRE scores with successful completion of a PhD. The program will
utilize our 30+ year experience in supporting minorities through our Minority
Scholarship Program and its associated mentoring efforts, our long-standing
connections with the physics research community, and our decade-long efforts in
working with individuals and universities to promote teacher education through
the Physics Teacher Education Coalition (PhysTEC) project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts This project will provide a model of
graduate education for URM students that can be applied to other Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields as well as improved links
between MSIs and DGIs. In addition, physics is taken by nearly every STEM
student, and significantly increasing the number of minority PhDs in physics
will enhance the diversity of the physics academy and professional workforce.
This project is intended to meet the challenges posed by the National Academy?s
report Rising Above the Gathering Storm, including ensuring that the workforce
brings a diverse perspective to scientific and technological challenges. Since
many doctoral students we prepare will become tomorrow?s academic, industrial
and government leaders, educating more minority PhDs will have a multiplicative
effect in educating and inspiring students at all stages in the system, and will
help address disparities that persist today.