* 1143483
* SBIR Phase I:  Tunable 1550-nm VCSEL Integrated on Silicon-Photonics Platform for Energy-efficient Broadband Data Communications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Christopher Chase, Bandwidth10 inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
problem of high bandwidth (100+ Gb/s), low power, low cost wavelength division
multiplexed (WDM) optical communications links of distances up to 2 km inside of
data centers. These links are necessary for next generation
internet/cloud/supercomputing applications. Specifically, this project will
examine the lasers, which make up much of the cost and power requirements. The
project will address the problem by improving an existing low cost, low power
laser structure, vertical cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSELs), to be
suitable for uncooled WDM operation. Specifically, this project will study
tunable VCSELs and their combination with a high contrast grating (HCG) optical
coupler, which can couple surface-normal VCSELs to an in-plane waveguide with
very high efficiency. The chip will include a directly modulated wavelength-
tunable VCSEL and a surface-normal to in-plane waveguide coupler, which can be
extended into an array for WDM multiplexing an array of VCSELs into one single-
mode fiber. The Phase I goals include a theoretical model and design tools for
tunable VCSELs with efficient coupler design suitable for WDM applications, and
experimental demonstration and characterization of a 1550-nm VCSEL with 10 Gbps
direct modulation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a drastic reduction
in the cost and energy requirements of optical links inside of data centers and
supercomputers. Companies such as Google and other large data-centric companies
have been asking for this type of product in the last year to maintain the rate
of growth in their data center facilities. Present WDM laser array solutions
using DFB lasers require 10X the power and 10X the cost of a VCSEL-based
approach. Present 850-nm VCSEL-based links, on the other hand, cannot be made
into a WDM source without power-hungry TEC coolers due to their lack of precise,
gridded, wavelength control. Additionally they cannot easily be combined into a
single mode fiber using present device structures, so they cannot be
multiplexed. Using a tunable VCSEL solves both the problem of gridded wavelength
control, and an efficient coupler can combine the laser outputs without
significant loss. The realization of tunable VCSELs in WDM systems will result
in a 10X reduction in both cost and energy requirements in high-speed optical
links for data centers, enabling the further scaling of computational power for
next generation data center and supercomputer applications.