* 1143586
* Conference:  Foundations of Molecular Modeling and Simulation (FOMMS 2012); Welches, Oregon; July 22-26, 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Edward Maginn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 33,000.00

This grant provides funding for the Foundations of Molecular Modeling and
Simulation (FOMMS) 2012 conference to be held in Welches, Oregon July 22 - 26,
2012. The conference will emphasize the latest developments in computational
quantum and classical simulation methods, as well as their application to
discovery and data driven applications in science and engineering. The grant
will be used to support participant costs for the meeting, facilitating
attendance by researchers who might otherwise be unable to attend the
conference, including junior faculty, postdoctoral researchers, graduate
students, and under-represented minorities. The conference features an
outstanding and diverse slate of 18 renowned innovators in and practitioners of
molecular modeling and simulation from the US, Europe, and Japan who have
accepted invitations to present plenary talks over the 4.5 day conference.
Additionally, workshops on open source molecular simulation codes and on the use
of molecular simulation methods in education will be conducted. Participants
will be encouraged to present their latest work in one of two poster sessions.

The FOMMS 2012 conference will broadly impact researchers and students who
develop or use molecular-based modeling and simulation tools in academia and
industry. The conference format and venue provide ample time and opportunity for
interaction among participants, cross-fertilization of disciplines, and
mentoring of young researchers.