* 1143745
* EAGER: The 17O-excess of dissolved O2 in the deep-sea: A possible tracer of Little Ice Age oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Wallace Broecker, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,912.00

From previous work, it is known that oxygen isotope measurements of dissolved
oxygen (O2) in seawater make it possible to distinguish between two types of
oxygen, one derived from gas exchange with air O2 and the other produced by
photosynthesis in the ocean. The excess of 17O in dissolved oxygen (del 17O)
makes it possible to estimate the proportions of each type of oxygen in a parcel
of seawater. And importantly, del 17O of dissolved O2 is a unique conservative
tracer that is not affected by respiration and thus preserves the signature
acquired at the upper water source regions of deep water masses. In general, del
17O is high in upper waters situated in the photic zone but that are not
affected by gas exchange with the atmosphere. Such water is found in the
seasonal thermocline all over the ocean.

With funding from this Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER),
researchers at the Lamont Dougherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University
will measure del 17O in seawater of the deep North Pacific and NE Atlantic in
order to evaluate the extent of sea-ice cover in the North Atlantic during the
Little Ice Age (LIA). They hypothesize that the del 17O of seawater under sea
ice will also be high due to light penetration and absence of air-water gas
exchange. This hypothesis can explain new observations showing high del 17O in
Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) that originate from regions where sea ice is
abundant, but not in North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) originating from sea-ice
free surface water. A surprising observation is that NADW in the South Atlantic
is high in del 17O, and it is suggested that the high values in the south are a
remnant from the Little Ice Age when the North Atlantic had more extensive sea
ice.

If the hypothesis is correct, then the deep North Pacific would contain
dissolved O2 with high values of del 17O. Likewise, old deep water in the east
basin of the North Atlantic would also have high del 17O. This project will
determine whether or not that is indeed the case.

Broader Impacts: If the hypothesis above is proven, this work will open a way to
gaining new insights on climatic history of the recent past. As such, it will
benefit the broad oceanographic community by introducing a unique way to trace
the history of water masses. Likewise, it will benefit researchers dealing with
paleo-climatology by providing a new way to reconstruct conditions of the North
Atlantic during the Little Ice Age