* 1143655
* PC3: Designing a Smarter and Greener Electric Grid: A Sensor-data Driven Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Weisong Shi
* 08/31/2014
* USD 434,275.00

This award provides funding for a collaborative project between University of
Massachussetes, Amherst and Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India. There
has recently been an increasing focus on developing new technologies for a more
sustainable future for our society. In this context, the design of new
Information and Communication technologies hold particular promise for designing
the sustainable systems of tomorrow. This project will address key research
challenges in the design of a smarter and greener electric grid, specifically
focusing on pervasive computing and communication issues that arise both in the
?core? and on the "edge" of the smart grid. The intellectual merit of the effort
is to bring a multi-disciplinary approach to addressing problems in data
collection, dissemination, monitoring, and demand-response for the grid, with a
common theme being a data-driven methodology using data obtained from
measurements to drive actuation/control, optimization or resource management to
address problems for the smart grid and smart homes that interface with the
grid. The project's activities span three inter-related topics: (i) measurement
and monitoring for the smart-grid, (ii) data dissemination architectures for the
smart grid and (iii) demand-response for smart residential and office buildings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include (i) industrial
internship opportunities with industrial collaborators for student researchers,
enabling them to work on practical problems in this area, (ii) developing a
three-credit course on computing and networking technologies for the smart grid,
offered jointly between UMass and IIT Bombay and building on the smart-grid
reading group that has been jointly conducted for the past year, and (iii)
organizing a smart grid workshop in Holyoke MA, an economically disadvantaged
gateway city with a large minority population, and a municipally-owned
hydroelectric utility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured as, and
will result in, an international collaboration between India and the US. Smart
grid, smart homes and sustainability are important areas of research in both
India and the USA; however there are numerous context-specific geographical
issues that must be addressed in each country. Through collaboration and by
leveraging each other?s insights, project participants will be able to develop
research methods that are broadly applicable in international settings. US and
Indian industry partners, which include utilities, research labs and power
generation companies, will bring a real-world perspective to this project. This
project is a part of pervasive communications and computing collaboration (PC3)
initiative.