* 1143760
* EAGER: Gene expression patterns in high C02-adapted Trichodesmium
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2011,03/31/2013
* David Hutchins, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2013
* USD 48,955.00

The potential for biogeochemically-critical marine organisms, such as the
N2-fixing cyanobacterium Trichodesmium, to adapt to a rapidly changing
environment is a poorly understood but key determinant of future ocean food webs
and elemental cycles. Despite an exponential increase in the sophistication of
molecular tools available to the ocean science community, no study has yet
applied these methods to relevant marine organisms in conjunction with microbial
evolution experiments such as those pioneered by R.E. Lenski and colleagues for
the model enteric bacterium Escherichia coli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;In this EAGER project, the PIs will conduct an exploratory
approach that uses tiled microarray methods to evaluate changes in the
expression of both coding and non-coding regions of the genome in Trichodesmium
cultures that have been maintained in long-term (&gt;3 years) high CO2
adaptation experiments. The objective of this work is to demonstrate that a
novel combination of evolutionary experimental techniques and state-of-the-art
gene expression methods can be used to yield unique insights into adaptive
changes in keystone marine micro-organisms such as Trichodesmium in response to
selection by environmental change variables. The over-arching goal is to
increase our mechanistic understanding of the ways that evolution could shape
the responses of marine biota to future changes in ocean chemistry and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project will help
support and train a new USC Ph.D. student, and research activities will include
USC undergraduate biology majors. Public education and communication efforts for
this project will be greatly enhanced by an annual series of public outreach and
professional colloquia sponsored by a USC-funded "2020" initiative to integrate
scientific and societal responses to climate change in the Southern California
region. Any evolution-driven shifts in the growth and N2 fixation patterns of
Trichodesmium, a keystone oceanic functional group, have large consequences for
marine ecology, carbon cycling, and the food chains that support important
living resources. The biggest scientific impact of this EAGER project could be
to offer verification of a pioneering new approach to help determine how the
microbes that are fundamental to today's ocean biogeochemical cycles will adapt
to anticipated and unprecedented rates of change in marine ecosystems.