* 1143566
* Advanced Placement Computer Science:  Principles - Summer 2011 Professional Development for UC Berkeley Cluster of High School Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Daniel Garcia, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 02/28/2013
* USD 220,430.00

The University of California Berkeley proposes to build on the work of their
pilot of the proposed College Board AP CS Principles course, working with and
training an initial group of high school teachers during the summer of 2011. The
PIs piloted their course -- called the Beauty and Joy of Computing (BJC)-- at
the college level in 2010-2011; with this work, they will adapt it for high
school students and provide professional development for their teachers. BJC
invokes passion, beauty, and awe by engaging students in a rigorous computing
curriculum that promotes creativity and collaboration using Snap's visually rich
programming environment, while also provoking thought around current events and
how computing relates to people's lives. This summer effort will conduct and
evaluate team-based professional development for in-service teachers and it will
enhance the development of the Snap software (an extension of Scratch formerly
known as "Build your own Blocks (BYOB)"), which combines technical
sophistication with an attractive drag-and-drop interface. Specifically the
project will (1) develop a core group of mentor teachers in the Berkeley area
who will in later years help to scale the professional development around BJC to
new locations, (2) conduct and evaluate intensive summer professional
development for teachers, and (3) reimplement the Snap programming language and
development environment to improve its speed and to create a version that does
not require local software installation. This project is designed to continue
the momentum developed around the pilot BJC course and establish a firm base for
a larger project that has been separately proposed to NSF.