* 1143948
* Winter Precipitation Microphysics with Polarimetric Radar and Explicit Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Alexander Ryzhkov, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 05/31/2017
* USD 370,256.00

The advent of more routinely available dual-polarization radar measurements
available both via a variety of research radars and operationally (e.g., to be
provided by NOAA's upgraded WSR-88D network) offers an important emerging
opportunity for cross-comparison of these observations and associated modeling,
especially in cool-season environments involving frozen or mixed precipitation
that have not been thoroughly studied. The goals of this effort are to document
and interpret dual-polarization radar signatures in winter storms and to
quantify the impact of various winter microphysical processes on observed
patterns of polarimetric radar variables. These goals will be attained by
synthesizing polarimetric radar observations and thermodynamic data, 2-D video
disdrometer measurements, electromagnetic scattering calculations, and output
from spectral (bin) microphysics models. S everal unique datasets of winter
precipitation events scanned contemporaneously with polarimetric radars
operating at S-, C- and X-band wavelengths have already been collected that
reveal new signatures which hold great scientific and practical promise. One of
these signatures, heretofore undocumented but repeated in several winter storm
cases, involves development of a "secondary" bright-band signature that is
apparently caused by ice crystals generated or associated with the refreezing of
melted or partially-melted hydrometeors into ice pellets. Additionally, future
winter storms will be observed using the polarimetric prototype WSR-88D radar in
Norman, Oklahoma (KOUN), the newly-installed narrow beam University of Oklahoma
Polarimetric Radar for Innovations in Meteorology and Engineering (OU-PRIME),
and a mobile X-band polarimetric radar (NOXP) shared by NOAA's National Severe
Storms Laboratory and the University of Oklahoma. Two major objectives will be
addressed in the study. First, polarimetric observations of winter storms from
multiple radars operating at diverse wavelengths will be combined with
thermodynamic data from soundings and numerical weather model analyses to
describe and interpret observed polarimetric signatures, and repetitive
signatures will be documented to develop a more complete polarimetric portrait
of winter storms. Second, one- and two-dimensional explicit "bin" and bulk
microphysics models will be constructed to explore and quantify the role of
microphysical processes such as depositional growth, aggregation, riming,
melting, and refreezing in winter precipitation, and in-turn to better determine
their representation by radar-observed variables. These bin models will be
applied in an effort to quantitatively reproduce observed winter storm structure
by pairing model output with electromagnetic scattering calculations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this effort will rest in
improved understanding of the roles of dendritic growth, particle riming and
aggregation aloft, processes including melting and re-freezing near the surface,
which will contribute to improved bulk microphysics parameterizations used in
numerical models. In turn, this will lead to better quantitative precipitation
forecasts and forecasts of winter weather hazards. Improved interpretation of
ground-based remote sensing of winter clouds and precipitation physics,
including the melting layer, may help NASA satellite precipitation estimation
and climate studies. Additionally, a better understanding of polarimetric radar
measurements in winter storms may lead to an improved hydrometeor classification
algorithm for winter weather. Broader impacts will include improved diagnosis
and discrimination of contrasting winter precipitation types and their diagnosis
via both ground-based and satellite-borne remote sensing techniques. These
advances will in-turn have considerable value to the surface and aviation
transportation communities, and thus contribute toward improved public safety.