* 1143990
* Workshop: Wind Farms Underperformance &amp; the National Wind Resource Center, Lubbock, Texas, Winter 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Luciano Castillo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Proposal Number: 1143990&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Castillo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support for the workshop
titled "Wind Farms Underperformance &amp; the National Wind Resource Center."
The National Wind Resource Center (NWRC), in collaboration with its partners in
the United States, Europe and Australia, will offer the two-day workshop at
Texas Tech University in February of 2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
underperformance of wind energy farms can be addressed by fundamental
understanding of the role of turbulence on wind turbine arrays at different
scales, including the performance of single blades in an array, as well as their
wake-to-wake interactions. In order to advance fundamental understanding of
these issues, the objectives of the workshop are to 1) Promote international
collaborations between the United States, Europe, Latin America and Asia in wind
energy underperformance; 2) Identify major pressing questions on wind farm
underperformance; 3) Promote technology transfer by means of collaborations with
industry and national laboratories, 4) Demonstrate the connection between
fundamental knowledge and performance issues faced by the wind energy industry;
5) Provide metrics for in-flow characterization that plays a role in wind farm
underperformance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is expected that contacts established between participants from US and
international institutions, industry, and US national laboratories will lead to
student/faculty visits, and ultimately, collaborative research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future of wind energy will depend in part on graduate
students trained with the multi-disciplinary knowledge and leadership skills
needed to be successful in this emerging field. To address this challenge, an
international team of leaders in the wind energy field will conduct a series of
educational activities on wind energy underperformance. The workshop will aim to
have more than 50% of student participants from underrepresented groups. Key
activities will consist of lectures, panel discussions, informal group
discussions, and poster sessions. Topics to be covered include wind energy
design and layout optimization, economics of wind energy, offshore wind energy,
wind energy arrays, and the effect of advanced blade design on wind energy
performance. This information will also be made available to develop wind energy
course materials in order to improve the quality of instruction in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The level and content of the lectures will be
designed to serve as a permanent record. The presentations and video recordings
from the lectures will be available on the website of the NWRC, and will also be
disseminated through an article addressing key outcomes from workshops in USA
and Europe.