* 1143513
* Workshop: Graduate Student Consortium at the 2012 Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction (TEI'12) Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Orit Shaer, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 24,920.00

Recent technological advances have enabled digital applications to move away
from purely desktop and office settings to gain greater relevance in our
everyday lives and spaces: homes, classrooms, public and cultural places,
scientific laboratories and beyond. This has given rise to an increasing number
of creative practices and research areas that seek to overcome the long-standing
separation between the physical and digital worlds. The ACM Conference on
Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction (TEI) serves as a gathering place
for an interdisciplinary community of computer scientists, engineers, artists
and designers working in the emerging field of new interfaces that bridge the
physical and virtual worlds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is in support of
the third annual TEI 2012 Graduate Student Consortium, to be held at the ACM TEI
2012 at Queen's University in Ontario, Canada. The ACM TEI 2012 Graduate Student
Consortium will promote national and international exchange of research, methods
and ideas at the intersection of this diverse field of engineering and
creativity. The consortium is an opportunity to develop the research and design
skills of a new generation of scientists, engineers, and designers who will
shape the technological and socio-cultural landscape of the future of computing
as it integrates physical objects and virtual spaces seamlessly. The consortium
program aims to increase participation in the tangible, embedded and embodied
interaction academic community by providing mentorship for young scientists,
researchers, and designers in this field, and by giving them the opportunity to
meet and engage with more senior TEI researchers at the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students from a range of fields, including
industrial design, digital media arts, human centered computing and computer
science will convene and share research projects that will help to broaden their
perspectives on transformative practices and methods in the field. Consortium
participants will be invited to present their work and receive constructive
critique from a panel of faculty mentors. And, they will present their work in a
poster session during the conference, and their accompanying papers will be
published in the ACM Digital Library.