* 1143836
* Collaborative Research: Totten Glacier System and the Marine Record of  Cryosphere - Ocean Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Amy Leventer, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 08/31/2017
* USD 181,212.00

This project will investigate the marine component of the Totten Glacier and
Moscow University Ice Shelf, East Antarctica. This system is of critical
importance because it drains one-eighth of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet and
contains a volume equivalent to nearly 7 meters of potential sea level rise,
greater than the entire West Antarctic Ice Sheet. This nearly completely
unexplored region is the single largest and least understood marine glacial
system that is potentially unstable. Despite intense scrutiny of marine based
systems in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, little is known about the Totten
Glacier system. This study will add substantially to the meager oceanographic
and marine geology and geophysics data available in this region, and will
significantly advance understanding of this poorly understood glacial system and
its potentially sensitive response to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Independent, space-based platforms indicate
accelerating mass loss of the Totten system. Recent aerogeophysical surveys of
the Aurora Subglacial Basin, which contains the deepest ice in Antarctica and
drains into the Totten system, have provided the subglacial context for measured
surface changes and show that the Totten Glacier has been the most significant
drainage pathway for at least two previous ice flow regimes. However, the
offshore context is far less understood. Limited physical oceanographic data
from the nearby shelf/slope break indicate the presence of Modified Circumpolar
Deep Water within a thick bottom layer at the mouth of a trough with apparent
access to Totten Glacier, suggesting the possibility of sub-glacial bottom
inflow of relatively warm water, a process considered to be responsible for West
Antarctic Ice Sheet grounding line retreat. This project will conduct a ship-
based marine geologic and geophysical survey of the region, combined with a
physical oceanographic study, in order to evaluate both the recent and longer-
term behavior of the glacial system and its relationship to the adjacent
oceanographic system. This endeavor will complement studies of other Antarctic
ice shelves, oceanographic studies near the Antarctic Peninsula, and ongoing
development of ice sheet and other ocean models.