* 1143408
* SBIR Phase I:  Scale Manufacturing and Lifetime Study of Nanostructured Composite Transparent Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Whitney Gaynor, Sinovia Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,800.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
flexible transparent conductor with better performance and lower cost than
indium-doped tin oxide (ITO). The approach is to produce smooth films composed
of sparse meshes of silver nanowires, which are highly conductive and flexible,
yet transmit light with high efficiency. Films prepared on a laboratory scale
have demonstrated higher conductivity for a given transparency, and higher total
conductivity than the most conductive ITO available. This project will focus on
process development for the production and patterning of large-area conductive
films at high throughputs required by industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this project
will be the potential to provide transparent conductive films with better
performance than ITO at significantly lower cost and better mechanical
flexibility. Transparent conductors are crucial parts of optoelectronic devices,
including liquid crystal displays (LCDs), light emitting diodes (LEDs),
capacitive touch screens, solar cells, electronic ink readers, and others. ITO
is the primary transparent conductor currently in use that meets the performance
required by these devices. However, the price of ITO has been increasing
steadily as the supply of indium dwindles and demand for optoelectronic devices
grows. Furthermore, ITO is a brittle material and cannot be used in flexible
devices. Silver nanowire films do not suffer from these limitations, and thus
are expected to be a low-cost alternative to ITO and an enabling technology that
allows the flexible electronics market to emerge.