* 1143761
* RAPID VOSS: Understanding the challenges inherent in the design, execution and participation in governance challenge platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Marco Janssen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 239,998.00

There is growing interest in the use of information and communication
technologies for community engagement and for crowd-sourcing solutions to
difficult problems through challenges and prizes. Governmental and
nongovernmental organizations are being encouraged to design, deploy, manage and
support appropriate online platforms to address both goals and improve economic
competitiveness. These governance challenge platforms can create novel pathways
for citizen participation, increase openness of governance activities, and
increase both the effectiveness and legitimacy of the governing organization.
Arizona State University is developing a new University-wide challenge platform
to enhance community engagement and to solicit ideas from its 50,000-member
University community to solve eight broad challenges, but little is known about
the design, use and effects of such platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will engage the platform design team to incorporate the
affordances required to improve the overall user experience and to test
applicable theories of team composition, governance structures, legitimacy, and
team capacity and commitment. Once these features have been developed, they will
be used in a series of field studies designed to identify theoretical extensions
and potential boundary conditions in online community engagement. The studies
will initially map community participation, trace how participation spreads
through the community, and test the effects of real-time feedback on the
community?s participation patterns. The next phase will explore the impact of
voting mechanisms on community dynamics, on perceptions of governance
accountability, and on more sophisticated forms of community involvement.
Finally, relationships between team formation, structure, diversity and
effectiveness will be investigated focusing on the quality of the solutions
generated.