* 1143568
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ychsma Community Construction: Dietary Practices, Rituals and Group Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Kelly Knudson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

Communities are dynamic phenomena created through the social practices and
interactions of diverse individual members. Ancient communities, however, often
are portrayed as internally uniform social groups linked to specific
archaeological sites. Under the supervision of Dr. Kelly Knudson, Sara
Marsteller will use bioarchaeological evidence of social practices associated
with specific individuals to investigate the complexities of community identity
formation within the Ychsma society of the central Peruvian coast during the
period between AD 900-1470. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across the world today
communities both act as decision making entities and serve to influence
individual member's behavior. Given their central role they constitute an
important object for scientific study. This proposed research will provide
insight how such entities can be understood in a cross cultural perspective and
how they developed over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project
will examine three important aspects of community formation: (1) the
relationship between geographic space and symbolic community boundaries, (2) the
influence of diverse subgroups within the community on community boundary
formation, and (3) the negotiation of community boundaries by outsiders. Using
the Ychsma society of Peru as a case study, Ms. Marsteller's analyses will focus
on dietary practices and mortuary rituals as social practices potentially used
to signify Ychsma community identity. She will reconstruct dietary practices
through osteological analyses of patterns of dental disease and tooth wear and
through chemical analyses of stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes from
archaeological human tissue samples. Ms. Marsteller will reconstruct mortuary
rituals associated with specific individuals through the analysis of body
treatment and positioning, grave goods and structure, and burial
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current archaeological research on communities
argues that individual members were responsible for the creation and
transformation of past communities. Ms. Marsteller's project will build on this
research to demonstrate how diverse community members' actions can be revealed
with bioarchaeological data from human skeletal remains and their associated
burial contexts. At a regional level, the project seeks to develop a more
holistic perspective of Ychsma social relationships during the Late Intermediate
Period (AD 900-1470). Such a perspective will further understanding of the
degree to which later sociopolitical changes brought about by Inka imperial
expansion and Spanish colonization impacted local indigenous groups.
Additionally, Ms. Marsteller's study will examine the role of Ychsma commoners
in sociopolitical interactions, and thus will complement previous investigations
of Ychsma social organization that focus on ethnohistoric and archaeological
data associated with the Ychsma elite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Marsteller's
project will have broader impacts beyond its research goals. The research will
generate and synthesize multiple types of bioarchaeological data for use by the
anthropological community. All results will be made available via English and
Spanish publications in peer-reviewed journals and online for public use. In
addition, one Peruvian and two North American undergraduate students will
receive research experience and hands-on training in bioarchaeological field or
laboratory methods for use in their future careers. Finally, the project will
initiate international collaborations among researchers from two Peruvian
institutions--the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos and the Museo
Nacional de Antropología, Arqueología e Historia del Peru--and Arizona State
University.