* 1143690
* RAPID: Predicting Trajectories of Post-Disaster Adjustment from Pre-Disaster Assessments of Risk and Resilience Factors
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2013
* James Hamilton, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 02/28/2013
* USD 54,288.00

Most Americans will experience a traumatic event at some time in their lives.
Five to ten percent will have persistent and disabling psychological and
physical problems a year or more later. In light of this fact, this project
focuses on the psychological and physical (health) consequences of one kind of
traumatic event, namely a natural disaster. It focuses on how different
preexisting personality traits and social experiences (measured before a
disaster) influence the way in which people cope with a natural disaster over
time. People who adjust poorly to traumas (e.g., those who develop unexplained
phsyical symptoms) have a general tendency to experience strong negative
emotions. In contrast, people who adjust well have high self-esteem, are
comfortable in their close relationships, and have others in their lives they
can count on for physical and emotional support. However, most research
documenting these findings used personality and social information gathered
after a major trauma took place. Thus, it is hard to know whether the personal
and interpersonal strengths listed above caused positive coping or whether
positive coping allowed people to develop or maintain these positive personal
and interpersonal strengths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a large sample of
undergraduate students at the University of Alabama, shortly before the area was
struck by tornadoes in the spring of 2011, Dr. Hamilton happened to measure
basic personality variables, emotional tendencies, and social variables that are
all highly relevant to coping with trauma. Thus, Dr. Hamilton is in a unique
position to follow-up on this initial survey to see if the personality and
social measures collected prior to the time the tornadoes struck will predict
changes in well-being over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural, random variation
in the extent to which people were personally affected by the tornado (e.g.,
whether someone's home was destroyed, whether a person knows someone who was
killed or seriously injured) offers a unique opportunity, in combination with
the measured social and personality variables, to see if the severity of events
people experience in relation to the traumatic event plays a role in adjustment.
Differences in the perceived quality of participants' social support networks
will also allow the researchers to test the idea that social support can protect
people from the negative consequences of stressful events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important outcome of the study will be a better
understanding of how traumatic events influence well-being. This information
will help scientists and educators to develop strategies to promote positive
long-term adjustment following trauma, and to improve the effectiveness of
social services deployed in response to large-scale disasters. In addition, the
project will bring together student and faculty researchers who approach trauma
and adjustment from a social psychological perspective with those who approach
these problems from a clinical psychology perspective. This collaboration will
enrich the education of both the undergraduate and graduate students involved in
planning the study and in the collection and analysis of the project data.
Ultimately these experiences will improve the quality of their future efforts to
understand social and personality aspects of stress, coping, and adjustment.