* 1143839
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Modeling and Analysis of Molecular Programming and Nanoscale Self-Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Patricia Singer, Simpson College
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 9,720.00

Pioneering work of Seeman, Winfree, and Rothemund has raised the prospect of
engineering useful structures and devices that autonomously assemble themselves
from molecular components. Developing this capability will have transformative
benefits for medicine, information technology, manufacturing, energy production,
and other enterprises of twenty-first century society. In this project a team of
scientists with expertise in self-assembly, software engineering, formal
verification, programming languages, theory of computing, biochemistry, and
molecular biology will explore the power and limitations of this "programming of
matter" at the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central thesis of this
project is that methods that software engineers and theoretical computer
scientists have developed for creating, controlling, and reasoning about
software, hardware, networks, and environments of immense complexity will be an
essential starting point for dealing with the greater challenges that
nanotechnology will confront. The project will investigate applications of
computational modeling, algorithmic randomness, requirements engineering,
product lines, software verification, and software safety to DNA tile assembly,
DNA origami, and DNA strand-displacement reactions. The project will conclude
with a clear assessment--hopefully a compelling proof of concept--of the
applicability and adaptability of software engineering methods in molecular
programming and nanoscale self-assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
contribute to a rigorously reasoned, verification- and safety-oriented approach
to the social benefits of nanoscale self-assembly. It will strengthen software
engineering methods as it adapts them to challenging new domains. It will
enhance interdisciplinary science education at Iowa State University and nearby
Simpson College, and it will provide web-accessible educational materials for
such activities elsewhere.