* 1143605
* SHF: Small: Coordinated Performance Optimization within a Power Budget for Chip Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Xiaorui Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 255,353.00

Since power consumption has become a major constraint for the further throughput
improvement of chip multiprocessors (CMPs), a key challenge is to optimize the
performance of a CMP within a power budget limited by the CMP's cooling,
packaging, and power supply capacities. This project aims to develop a
coordinated power control framework for CMPs. The proposed framework has the
following novel features. 1) It can dynamically and explicitly shift power among
the CPU cores and other components in a CMP based on measured workload
characteristics for optimized CMP performance within a power budget. 2) It
adopts an online model estimator to dynamically measure the performance
contributed by each component and then partitions the chip-level power budget
among the components. 3) It can achieve fair or differentiated cache sharing
under the impacts of dynamic cache resizing used in CMP power control. 4) It
also coordinates components within a core for core-level power control and
coordinates CMPs with main memory and disks for optimized system performance. 5)
Our framework is based on a control-theoretic foundation for systematically and
rigorously developing power control strategies. While basic control theory has
already shown great promise in microprocessor power management, an important
feature of our framework is that it relies on advanced optimal control theory to
coordinate multiple control and optimization loops in different layers of a CMP
in a holistic way for optimized performance and guaranteed stability.

In addition to integrating research with education and outreach programs, the
outcome of this research is expected to provide effective mechanism and a rich
set of tools fer performance and power optimization in CMPs.