* 1143693
* Testing the Hypothesis that Detachment Faults are Active and Generate Microearthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Paul Bodin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2016
* USD 57,986.00

Since low-angle normal, or detachment, faults and their role in accommodating
large-scale extension were recognized in the 1970's, these enigmatic structures
have captured the attention of a wide community of structural and tectonic
geologists. Outstanding questions concerning detachment faulting include the
putative mechanical impossibility of slip on gently dipping normal faults at and
near the Earth's surface and if some detachment faults are active, why has not
seismicity been observed? Are the faults slipping aseismically, or are
recurrence intervals of large earthquakes longer than historic records? To
address these questions, University of Washington researchers will install a
ten-station, portable temporary network of seismometers in Death Valley for a
period of six to nine months. Data recorded in the field will be analyzed to
yield the locations of earthquake hypocenters. The seismometers will be situated
on alluvial fans on the west side of Death Valley about 8 km above the projected
positions of detachment faults at depth. West-dipping, geologically and possibly
seismically active detachment faults are well exposed on the east side of Death
Valley along the foot of the Black Mountains, as are range-front scarps of
normal faults that formed due to slip during late Quaternary or Holocene
earthquakes. The experiment will test the hypotheses that: (1) the gently
dipping detachment faults are seismogenic, and (2) that rupture and slip
nucleating at seismogenic depths produces microearthquakes. A positive result
would challenge the hypothesis that slip on detachments is either mechanically
impossible or aseismic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-angle normal, or detachment,
faults are important tectonic elements in that they accommodate large-scale
stretching in extensional regimes, such as the Basin and Range in western United
States. However, these faults are paradoxical because mechanical analysis
suggests movement should not occur at such low angles and earthquakes are rarely
observed even though geological evidence suggests the detachments are active.
This experiment, the first of its kind directed toward detachment faults in
western North America, will explore these paradoxes. Observation of
microearthquakes would challenge the widely-held idea that fault movement on
detachments is either mechanically impossible or aseismic.