* 1143344
* SBIR Phase I:  Self-Compensating Ultra-Wideband Direct Digital-to-RF D/A Converter
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Oren Eliezer, XW, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project attempts to overcome
fundamental limitations that are currently inhibiting the realization of much
needed low-cost high-performance digital-to-analog converters (DACs), which can
accommodate the wide bandwidths of current and future communication systems,
software-defined-radios (SDR), and a wide range of other applications.
&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is the development of circuitry and signal
processing and control algorithms that would effectively address impairments
experienced in a complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) implementation
of a novel DAC topology designed to accommodate ultra-wide bandwidths. While the
CMOS fabrication process may be tailored for digital processors and memory, it
is a most challenging environment for the design of high-performance, wide
dynamic range analog circuitry. The solutions being developed essentially
provide the DAC with ?self-healing? capabilities that allow it to overcome
inevitable impairments such as device mismatches, non-linearities, and timing
misalignments. &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results indicate the validity of the
proposed architectures and approaches and it is anticipated that a fabrication-
ready design will result from the Phase 1 research.&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of
researchers and PhD candidates from academia in this research allows them
exposure into most challenging research topics that are of great interest to the
semiconductor industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is in allowing ultra-high-
performance data-conversion capabilities to be integrated into low-cost CMOS
system-on-chip (SoC) solutions that are widely used in commercial applications
of various types ranging from communications and multimedia to instrumentation.
In particular, the technology being developed will allow for the integration and
low-cost realization of this most critical function in a true SDR.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovation, targeting the self-sufficient-compensation
for the effects of inevitable impairments, such as fabrication-process
variations, mismatches, non-linearities, and timing misalignments, through the
employment of novel built-in calibration and compensation circuitry and
algorithms, will allow integrated DACs to deliver ultra-high performance (e.g.,
16-bit resolution at rates above 10GHz) without requiring costly testing at
fabrication, production-yield losses, laser trimming, or any other consequence
of traditional design and manufacturing of high-performance analog integrated
circuits. The approach to be developed has a broader impact on chip
manufacturing, as these impairments represent limiting factors in other
functions as well. &lt;br/&gt;As an enabling technology, the proposed innovation
can potentially greatly increase the size of the existing market for data
converters, currently at $3B, and allow for various new consumer applications
where wide bandwidths of operation are needed and cost is a constraint.