* 1143389
* EAGER: Brain Responses to Visual Stimuli in Sharks Using Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (FMRI)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Lawrence Frank, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

The University of California at San Diego is awarded a grant to develop methods
for performing functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) experiments in
living sharks in order to study their brains as a complete neural network and
provide information on how vertebrate neural systems have both structurally and
functionally evolved. Understanding this organization and its relationship to
shark behavior and ecology has major implications for our understanding of the
evolution of vertebrate nervous systems, and the relationship between form and
function in the vertebrate brain. In recent years, great advances in human
neuroscience have been made using FMRI, where localized changes in brain
activity are detected within a sequence of MR images, thus allowing brain
activation as a function of time to be measured. In conjunction with advanced
methods for non-invasive, high-resolution MRI for quantitating form in
chondrichthyan brains, the goal of this project is to develop FMRI capabilities
that facilitate the study of the relationship between form and function in these
fishes. However, while FMRI in humans is now routine, performing it in sharks
requires the development and refinement of both software and hardware to collect
reliable, high quality anatomical and functional MRI data in a living partially
submerged aquatic specimen. Hence our key objective is to develop these
technological advances, and demonstrate the capability of performing FMRI
experiments in the shark nervous system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide a unique set of methods for studying the relationships
between form and function in the shark nervous system, as well as other aquatic
model systems, and thus has broad implications for many researchers for whom the
link between morphology and function is of great importance, but difficult to
explore simultaneously in a well-controlled experimental platform. This project
also promotes interdisciplinary collaboration and training in imaging,
computation, and data analysis for the morphology, physiology, and marine
biology communities. The outcomes of this award including methods, equipment
design, and data analysis software will be disseminated to the research
community through the Digital Fish Library website
(http://www.digitalfishlibrary.org).