* 1143514
* Collaborative Research:  Jicamarca Radar Studies of Gravity Waves from D Region to Lower F Region
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Gerald Lehmacher, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 02/28/2019
* USD 245,001.00

The work will use the 50 MHz radar at Jicamarca, Peru to observe high-frequency
gravity waves in the equatorial mesosphere and lower thermosphere from about 60
to 170 km. The radar will be used in an extension of an existing MST-ISR mode.
Besides transmitting long and coded pulses for interlaced detection of
mesospheric echoes and ionospheric incoherent scatter radar returns (so-called
MST and ISR signals), short and uncoded pulses will be transmitted to probe the
turbulent equatorial electrojet height region (E-region proper) with high
temporal and spatial resolution. Short-pulse data from the electrojet will be
used to provide gravity wave signatures from the equatorial E region to
complement the D-region and upper E-region (above 140 km) gravity wave data
acquired in the MST-ISR mode. The overall objective will be to improve the
current understanding of gravity wave propagation and guiding in the equatorial
mesosphere and lower thermosphere and the role of gravity waves in the
structuring of the region via neutral and plasma instability processes. Gravity
waves are known to play a crucial role in the dynamic coupling of atmospheric
regions. Waves that propagate upward through the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere (or that may be generated as secondary waves) may grow to
significant amplitudes in the E and F regions of the ionosphere. The fast
continuous sampling by the Jicamarca radar provides important information on
short period (5-15 minute) gravity wave oscillations and instabilities of the
neutral atmosphere at low latitudes. Short period waves are always present in
the equatorial mesosphere as evident in Jicamarca vertical wind data and also in
the equatorial upper E-region as evident in enhanced backscatter from the 150-km
altitude region observed at Jicamarca. The connection of these wave systems and
their relation to gravity waves in the intervening E-region altitudes remain
unknown and unexplored. Above Jicamarca, this region is occupied by a turbulent
equatorial electrojet (EEJ) causing strong radar backscatter. The modulation of
this backscatter signal is what will be exploited for a novel study of the
gravity wave content of the region and its relationship to gravity waves
observed in the mesosphere and the upper E-region.