* 1143717
* III: EAGER - Expressive Scalable Querying over Integrated Linked Open Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 141,828.00

Linked Open Data (LOD) is rapidly developing into an open data movement to
connect a large variety of data across the World Wide Web using standards
adopted by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Driven by researchers,
government agencies and companies, the resulting Web of Data has grown to over
25 billion RDF triples and is showing exponential growth. However, simply
putting collections of data on the Web will be of very limited value. The key to
unlocking the value for developing more powerful search, browsing, exploration
and analysis is to richly interlink or semantically integrate components of LOD.
Given the size, growth rate, heterogeneity and growing areas of coverage, manual
semantic integration or interlinking is not practical. Furthermore, current
techniques focus on 'same-as' relationship, which is much abused due to limited
expressivity. This calls for ways to represent and identify richer and more
explicit relationships between different entities that reflect the richness of
relations that exist in the real world.

This project develops exploratory techniques to richly interlink components of
LOD and then addresses the challenge of querying the LOD cloud, i.e., of
obtaining answers to questions which require accessing, retrieving and combining
information from different parts of the LOD cloud. Techniques for overcoming
semantic heterogeneity include: semantic enrichment through Wikipedia
bootstrapping; semantic integration through abstraction by means of upper-level
ontologies; and, massively parallel methods for tractable ontology reasoning.
Specifically, this research will: (1) identify richer, broader, and more
relevant relationships between LOD datasets at instance and schema level (these
relationships will promote better knowledge discovery, querying, and mapping of
ontologies); (2) realize LOD query federation through an upper level ontology;
and, (3) enable access to implicit knowledge through ontology reasoning. The
project involves significant risk as it treads new paths in a new terrain,
primarily due to the lack of descriptive information (schema) about the data
provided by highly autonomous data sources, the significant syntactic and
semantic heterogeneity among data originating from independent data sources, and
the significantly larger scale, as well as unforeseeable obstacles associated
with a rapidly changing and expanding environment.

This project aims to advance the state of the art in semantic integration of
large amounts of heterogeneous and autonomously developed or managed data. It
seeks to fundamentally transform the landscape of LOD usage because successful
LOD querying is a key enabler for a variety of applications. The results of this
project could set the stage for the development, and the far reaching adoption,
of Semantic Web. The project is integrated with education and research-based
advanced training of graduate and undergraduate students. Additional information
about the project can be found at:
http://knoesis.org/research/semweb/projects/ESQuILO.