* 1143198
* SBIR Phase I:  Application of a Self-sealing Composite Structural Material for Hemodialysis Blood Access
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* James Hong, Solinas Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 179,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a novel self-sealing material to be applied to the design of durable
blood access systems for hemodialysis patients. Current access systems are
neither designed for repeated access nor managing bleeding after hemodialysis
treatment, and as a result commonly lead to secondary complications. The
research aims of the proposal are to: 1) Develop a self-sealing hemostatic
material, 2) Create designs suitable for vascular access applications, and 3)
Assess safety and efficacy of the designs in a chronic animal model. The
research will draw upon knowledge in cross-disciplinary fields to complete the
aims of the proposal, and demonstrate enhanced performance relative to
commercial predicate technology.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will yield a unique and
novel material that will create a paradigm shift from the treatment of
complications to prevention to create better clinical outcomes and contain
costs. Nearly 580,000 people in the United States alone have end stage renal
disease (ESRD), and over 400,000 people are treated using hemodialysis as the
primary mode of treatment. This materials technology will lead to vascular
access devices suitable for the entire hemodialysis patient population, thereby
creating an estimated market size of more than $400 million. And this materials
technology platform may be applied to a broad range of applications beyond
hemodialysis where repeated access and reliable sealing is required.