* 1143361
* SBIR Phase I:  Photonics Enabled Extreme Bandwidth Wireless Communications Receiver
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Kristian Merkel, S2 Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,844.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will use and
adapt a photonic signal processor for extreme bandwidth spread spectrum wireless
communications. The intellectual merit of the proposed project focuses on
applying prior knowledge and the core photonic analog optical signal processing
technology with new approaches and extensions of spread spectrum techniques to
an important emerging commercial application, namely high bandwidth wireless
communication at high frequencies. The widespread demand for wireless
communication has created contention for RF spectrum, and has motivated
extending communications to unlicensed bands and higher frequencies. The
objectives of the project are to 1) perform transmitter analysis and encoding
schemes, 2) to show spread spectrum communication functionality in laboratory
hardware based demonstrations over the frequencies of 3.1-10.6 GHz, and 3) to
study desired parameters and tradeoffs for the implementation and
commercialization of communications links. The anticipated results of the
research are demonstrations that show these capabilities, with increased
knowledge of the requirements and tradeoffs of the proposed
technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact / commercial potential of
this project are in the field of wideband, wireless communications. From this
technology development effort, there are significant market opportunities for
the emerging 60-90 GHz E band wireless market. The enabling photonic signal
processing technology has applicability for commercial, military and
intelligence community in the form of full spectrum surveillance, spectrum
analysis, direction finding, navigation, and imaging, along with the proposed
communications approach proposed. Benefits of the proposed communication
approach include transmissions at high data rates, asynchronous burst mode
operation, providing secure, low probability of intercept transmissions and
overcoming multipath issues.