* 1143278
* SBIR Phase I:  New Chitin/Alginate Biocomposites by Homogeneous Processing in Ionic Liquids: Disruptive Technology for Wound Care Application
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Gabriela Gurau, 525 Solutions Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 175,499.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR) Phase I project will utilize
patent pending technology that allows direct dissolution and reconstitution of
natural biopolymers to prepare chitin/alginate composite fibers with embedded
additives for use in wound care products. The technology allows for solution
blending and spinning of alginate and chitin (both known to speed wound healing,
stimulate cell recovery, and be antibacterial) with therapeutic additives to
produce composite fibers. This unique technology embeds the additives into the
fibers during spinning, leading to slow release of the additives into the wound
as the fiber absorbs water and becomes less rigid, and thus allowing the
delivery of physiologically relevant doses of a therapeutic agent to the wound
over an extended period of time. These fibers will a) possess the inherent
properties of the biopolymers that increase wound healing and cell recovery, b)
localize delivery of beneficial additives, and c) slowly release the additives
over an extended period of time. In Phase I, the goals are to develop an
understanding of the relationship between the relative chitin/alginate/additive
composition and spinning conditions on mechanical and rheological properties
(strength, elasticity, viscosity), water absorption, and additive release rates
under simulated conditions as needed for the diabetic skin ulcer
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be the potential to reduce the duration (by ~40%) and cost (by
20-50%) of wound care treatment by developing a unique composite fiber with
additives both on the surface and evenly distributed within the fiber, thereby
allowing not only for extended release of the additives, but also less frequent
dressing changes and decreased healing time compared to the current spray-coated
fibers. The targeted skin ulcer treatment market is predicted to generate
revenue of $7.4 billion by 2013, an increase caused by the rising diabetic
population. A subset of this market where produced fibers are most applicable,
the moist dressing treatment, achieved revenue of $315.4 million in 2008 and is
expected to grow to $424.8 million by 2013. There is an urgent need for products
that can improve healing rates and novel dressings incorporating innovative
fibers that can be applied less frequency, last longer, and contain additives to
promote healing, thus reducing patient care cost. The successful development of
these specialty fibers for the diabetic ulcer market will provide scientific
insight allowing for the customized production of composite fibers for other
wound care and health markets.