* 1143533
* Toward Parallel and Distributed Computing into Core Curriculum of CS/CE Undergraduates
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Rajshekhar Sunderraman, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,890.00

Parallel and Distributed Computing (PDC) now permeates most computing
activities. The penetration of this technology in the daily lives has resulted
in common users relying on its effectiveness and reliability. The mass marketing
of multicores and general-purpose graphics processing units in home and office
PCs and laptops has a potential for empowering even common users to become a
technology contributor. Certainly, it is no longer sufficient for even basic
programmers to acquire only the conventional programming skills. All this
phenomena point to the need for imparting a broad-based skill set in parallel
and distributed computing t various levels, impacting Computer Science (CS) and
Computer Engineering (CE) programs and related computational disciplines.
However, the rapid change in computing hardware platforms and devices,
languages, and supporting programming environments, and the research advances,
more than ever challenges the educators what to teach in any given semester.
Students and their employer face similar challenges on what constitutes basic
expertise. The proposed activity includes all stakeholder experts working
together and periodically providing guidance on restructuring standard
curriculum across various courses and modules related to parallel and
distributed computing. Immediate benefit would be for CS/CE students and their
instructors with periodic guidelines on what aspects to cover in what
courses.&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to revise the preliminary version of the
curriculum, and to hold a second round of competition for Fall-11 for early
adopter status, supported by NSF and Intel. It is planned to have early adopter
status competitions for Spring-12 and for Fall-12. EduPar-12 workshop to be
organized at IPDPS-12 in Shanghai in May 2012, with expanded scope.