* 1143666
* PC3: Collaborative Research: Pervasive Computing for Disaster Response
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,05/31/2014
* K. Mani Chandy, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2014
* USD 183,997.00

The objective of this research is to develop key components of community-based
pervasive systems which will allow citizens to respond to disasters. The systems
will make use of inexpensive networked sensors and communication devices
distributed among families and communities. The sensors/devices will enable the
collection of situational information and the dissemination of alerts, by use of
fault and delay-tolerant networks, and through the use of Cloud computing and
crowd sourcing techniques. The Indo-US partnership in this effort will study
these issues in the context of the Indian subcontinent where urban and rural
landscapes are unique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensor-based detection technologies
will be studied to help identify events, e.g. abnormal ground motion, and fault-
tolerant networks will be designed to connect the sensor systems together and to
a resource-rich cloud infrastructure. Methods for performing sensing analysis
and data fusion in the cloud will be incorporated so as to address tradeoffs
among rates of false positive alarms, false negative alarms, and time to
detection. The existing infrastructure will also be used to design systems for
delivering actionable alerts/information to responders and communities using
multiple networks. The community-based sensing and alerting techniques developed
will be evaluated in campus testbeds at UCI/Caltech, culminating in a pilot
study/drill at one of the Indian institutions with regional experience in
disaster management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dealing with disasters effectively is
a global concern and techniques to leverage communities for data collection and
alerting is an effective strategy, especially in nations with diverse
populations with varying degrees of technological sophistication. The research
will enable a new generation of community-based cyber-physical systems in
emerging markets, in which the community helps to detect, communicate and
respond to rapidly evolving events such as earthquakes, tsunamis, fires, floods
and epidemics. Students at different levels (graduate, undergraduate, K-12) will
gain experience with developing real-world applications in a global context via
courses and independent study projects. Students will benefit tremendously from
exposure to the next generation of community-based cyber-physical systems
technologies that will help design safer living environments for the future,