* 1143108
* SBIR Phase I:  A Tunable Supersaturating Drug Delivery System for Cocrystals of Poorly Soluble Drugs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Scott Childs, Renovo Research LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
drug delivery platform for drugs with poor water solubility. Poor water
solubility significantly hinders the delivery of some drug compounds into the
body, which leads to poor drug performance. Cocrystals are new materials that
can improve the water solubility of a poorly water soluble drug compounds. In
order to take advantage of the improved cocrystal properties, a suitable drug
delivery system is required. The current drug delivery approaches for cocrystals
are failing to control the parameters critical to optimizing performance of
poorly soluble cocrystallized drugs. By tuning the effective cocrystal
solubility using the innovative approaches proposed here, a robust delivery
system for highly soluble cocrystals will be developed.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are the potential to create a
tunable drug delivery platform that can result in improvements in drug product
performance. This technology will also create new product opportunities for
existing drug products (e.g. rapid onset of pain relieving drugs), which can
provide society with improved medicines. Cocrystal technology has significant
advantages over competing technologies including: 1) the physical properties of
cocrystals are superior to the physical forms used in competing technologies,
and 2) intellectual property protection is stronger, which creates an increased
commercial incentive for adopting cocrystal technology.