* 1144869
* EAR-PF:Reconstructing Western Atlantic Holocene Hurricane Impacts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Davin Wallace, Wallace                 Davin          J
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2015
* USD 127,500.00

Dr. Davin Wallace has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct
research and develop an integrated educational plan at the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution/MIT. He will
investigate hurricane impacts over the past 10,000 years in the western Atlantic
basin by conducting a paleotempestological study on the island of Bermuda.
During modern times, the historic record tells us that a significant amount of
Atlantic hurricanes recurve basin ward and never make landfall on coastlines,
with the exception of Bermuda. Previous paleohurricane studies have been located
along the Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean Sea, and Atlantic Oceans, and the addition
of this site would therefore shed light on the total paleohurricane frequency in
the western Atlantic Basin over the Holocene. Dr. Wallace will collect sediment
cores in several coastal ponds and analyze them for grain size variations, as
coarse sediment represents storm-induced transport from nearby beaches. To
establish an accurate chronology of these events, he will analyze these cores
using radiocarbon and short-lived isotope analyses. Finally, he will model both
the paleointensities of each event and the response of hurricanes to past
climate variations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, hurricanes annually impact
Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean, and Atlantic coastlines. However, we have only a
short reliable historical record of hurricane impacts. By understanding the
interaction between paleohurricanes and past known climate changes over the
western Atlantic Basin, we can use this information to predict hurricane
formations and impacts in the future. Also, establishing a long-term hurricane
record for the western Atlantic will help bridge the gap between field and
modeling based paleoclimate studies, as models become better calibrated with
additional data. Further, this work can be used to interpret changes over
historic time in the context of a longer geologic record. Dr. Wallace will
participate in the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Sea Grant program, in
addition to leading several workshops for K-12 educators for this group. This
outreach effort will focus on activities and learning approaches associated with
the results of this project. He will also participate in videoconferences with a
group of science teachers in a cohort of teachers from Texas to discuss this
work.