* 1144123
* Workshop on the Boundary Element Method (BEM): Bridging Education and Industrial Applications; Minneapolis, Minnesota; 23-26 April 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Steven Crouch, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 03/31/2013
* USD 87,508.00

The grant will support a workshop on the Boundary Element Method (BEM),
"Bridging Education and Industrial Applications," to be held on the University
of Minnesota campus from April 23-26, 2012. Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) have been identified by many agencies as key areas in
research innovations that will help the US maintain its leadership in the 21st
century. The BEM is a numerical method whose applications cover nearly all the
STEM fields. Yet, in the recent years, the center of activity in the area of BEM
has shifted away from the US. The objectives of the workshop include: to foster
an ongoing dialog among the researchers, educators, and practicing engineers
related to new areas in the field of BEM (such as nanotechnology, biotechnology,
and alternative energy); to enhance STEM education in the US via the BEM; to
train a new generation of researchers in computational science and engineering;
and to advance BEM applications to practical industry problems. It is
anticipated that 10 University of Minnesota students and 30 US students from
outside of Minnesota will take part in the workshop. The first two days of the
four-day event will include poster and oral presentations by
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of the workshop, the importance of
BEM in research, education, and applications will be significantly increased,
including its influence on STEM education in the US. It is expected that the
workshop will promote collaborative research and advanced applications of the
BEM to practical industrial problems. In selecting the speakers and other
attendees, the organizing committee will make sure that the audience will have
participants from academia and industry. Efforts will also be made to include
participants of different levels (junior, senior) and from underrepresented
groups. To disseminate knowledge, the outcomes of the workshops will be
published in an edited book. The presentations and notes will be available for
download from the workshop's website. In addition, a website on Green's
functions and the BEM will be designed.