* 1144894
* Improving Representations of Snow-Vegetation Interactions in Land Surface Models
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Adrian Harpold, Harpold                 Adrian         A
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Adrian Harpold has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to develop a research and education program with the Institute of
Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAAR) at the University of Colorado and the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) in Boulder, Colorado. He will
investigate how forest structure controls the distribution of snowpacks and
hydrologic fluxes across gradients of elevation, topography, and climate. Dr.
Harpold will first quantify snow-vegetation interactions using high resolution
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) derived vegetation, terrain, and snowpack
information at three Critical Zone Observatories (CZO) in seasonally snow-
covered forests in California, Colorado, and New Mexico. This high resolution
data will also be used to inform and evaluate a land surface model, the NCAR-
developed Community Land Model (CLM), in highly-instrumented stands and
catchments. The overall goal of this study is to improve the predictions of
water and energy fluxes in topographically complex, forested landscapes across
the Western U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seasonal mountain snowpacks are the major
source of water for human and natural systems in the semi-arid Western U.S. The
interactions between vegetation and climate play a central role in the
accumulation, ablation (evaporation, sublimation, and melt), and ultimate
partitioning of snowpacks to the atmosphere versus soils and runoff. Seasonal
snowpacks are difficult to measure and model in complex forested terrain,
however, which compromises our ability to reliably predict weather, climate, and
water resources. Improving how vegetation structure is represented in land
surface models is timely, as evidence suggests massive changes in vegetation
structure due to tree-dieoff and earlier snowmelts from warming temperatures
will alter snow-vegetation interactions in western North American forests. Dr.
Harpold will develop a series of lectures on assimilating LiDAR information into
snowpack models for a course at the University of Colorado, as well as design
and run a short-course on LiDAR analysis targeted to young earth scientists.