* 1144590
* Training the next generation of learning scientists: CSCL 2011 workshop support
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Christopher Hoadley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This project is providing support for travel and registration for U.S.
participants in a key global venue for research and training in the learning
sciences via the Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshops at the Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2011 conference in Hong Kong. Prior
versions of these workshops have had a significant impact on the career and
research of pre- and post-PhD scholars in the learning sciences from diverse
domains such as computer science, information science, education, psychology,
and cognitive science. The intellectual merit of this project rests in its
selection of top-quality pre- and post-doctoral candidates whose research in
computer-supported collaborative learning addresses the conference theme of
connecting theory and practice in the learning sciences. Their participation in
the conference provides opportunities to improve the dissertations of
approximately twenty graduate students and the research agendas of approximately
twenty early career, post-doctoral scholars. As such it is an important
capacity-building project that leverages the expertise of the CSCL community and
the outcomes of previous workshops held with the International Conference of the
Learning Sciences (ICLS). The broader impacts of this project include
multiplying opportunities to develop international collaborations in the field
of CSCL, and supporting the career development of some of the best and brightest
researchers in multiple disciplines who work in the CSCL area.