* 1144846
* Critical Raindrop Characteristics: Fall Speed, Shape, and Size Distributions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2015
* John Saylor, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 504,150.00

The prevailing paradigm in radar meteorology, and precipitation science more
generally, has been the assumption that raindrops fall at terminal velocity.
However, recent research suggests this is not always the case, revealing an
important new aspect of rain that requires further exploration. Under this
project a field study designed to uncover new fundamental physics of raindrop
fall characteristics will be conducted. More specifically this effort seeks to
develop an improved predictive capability for raindrop fall velocity, chord
ratio, and size distribution. It is hypothesized deviations from more
traditionally-computed terminal velocities may induce deviations from
equilibrium chord ratios and in turn introduce errors in inferred drop size
distributions. This raises several new questions, the two most important being:
(1) What are the actual raindrop fall velocities, chord ratios, and size
distributions?; and (2) What are the governing environmental factors and
processes responsible for deviations of these quantities away from their
equilibrium values, and how can such deviations be predicted for specific
conditions (e.g., rainfall rates)? Supported investigators will measure raindrop
fall velocity, diameter, and shape using a state-of-the-art high-speed camera
and digital image analysis system to seek answers to these and other questions.

The intellectual merit of this effort rests in development and interpretation of
a unique microphysical dataset that will exploited to uncover raindrop fall
characteristics, with a focus on providing relationships with varying rainfall
conditions. This approach should lead to improved parameterizations for the
drop-size distributions and chord ratio (i.e. drop oblateness, to which
polarization-diverse radars are particularly sensitive) in falling precipitation
of various types and intensities. This work is thought to be the first
systematic study of the actual fall velocity of raindrops and its effects on
raindrop geometry and size distribution. Broader impacts will include improved
predictive capability for precipitation fall speeds, chord ratios and size
distributions, as well as their relationship to rain rates as commonly derived
from dual-polarization radar data. These efforts are anticipated to lead to
improved retrievals of rainfall rates and accumulations, which may in turn
benefit flood prediction, management of water resources, and related inputs to
weather, hydrologic and climatological models. Additionally, knowledge gained
will serve to improve interpretation of data from a large installed base of
Joss-Waldvogel type disdrometers, which typically require a priori assumption of
fallspeed to accurately infer rainfall rate. Precipitation research
infrastructure at Clemson University will be enhanced through development of an
instrumented field site, which will serve as an educational platform for
undergraduate and graduate students. Related results will be disseminated via
students' dissertations and the peer-reviewed literature.