* 1144879
* Ecosystem Response to Disturbance from Decadal to Millennial Timescales: Support for the PROBE Workshop - at Konza Prairie Biological Station near Manhattan, Kansas - April 2012
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Kendra McLauchlan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 29,917.00

Increased frequency, severity, and extent of disturbances such as beetle
outbreaks, catastrophic fires, windstorms, and droughts, have caused widespread
concern about ecosystem health. Because the consequences of disturbance can take
many years to play out, evaluation of their potential impacts is difficult
without a baseline record of ecosystem processes that spans decades to a few
thousand years. Two groups of scientists, ecosystem ecologists and
paleoecologists, study these processes, but they typically examine events and
consequences on different time scales. Researchers from each group will be
brought together to characterize past ecosystems in a PROBE (Paleo
Reconstructions Of Biogeochemical Environments) workshop, where several
datasets, including sediment records, tree-ring records, soil records, and long-
term instrumental measurements will be examined to assess how ecosystem
processes (particularly carbon and nitrogen cycling) have responded to
disturbance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PROBE workshop will benefit society and
the larger scientific community. The workshop will include early career
participants, providing opportunities to train young scientists how to conduct
collaborative and interdisciplinary research that is needed for the 21st
century. Several participants have developed specialized techniques such as
charcoal analysis and stable isotope interpretation and knowledge of these
techniques will be shared at the workshop. Finally, several participants are
working with government agencies and NGOs to provide information about the
effects of disturbance, especially insect outbreaks and wildland fire
management. The workshop will provide information that will be helpful to
managers, particularly those trying to develop strategies for dealing with
disturbances.