* 1144663
* EAGER: The Climate CoLab:  A System for Very Large-Scale Model-Based Group Problem-Solving
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* John Sterman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a system that combines the strengths of
both human and computer capabilities to help solve a complex societal problem:
global climate change. The project will develop an on-line community called the
Climate CoLab, in which many thousands of people around the world create,
analyze, and ultimately select detailed plans for what humans can do about
climate change. At the core of the system will be an evolving collection of
user-created proposals based on computer simulations of the actions humans can
take and the predicted impacts of those actions. Users will also be able to
debate the pros and cons of different proposals and vote for the proposals and
arguments they find most credible and desirable. By integrating three
capabilities (computer simulation models, on-line debates, and electronic
voting) in a novel way, the system lets a very large group of people define and
evaluate alternative problem solutions while computers do the rapid calculations
needed to assess key consequences of each alternative. By including relevant
experts from different disciplines and members of the public who have novel
points of view, the community can consider a wide range of plausible
alternatives. And by involving policy makers and large numbers of citizens, the
eventual political adoption of the most promising alternatives is facilitated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The primary intellectual contributions
of this work will be generalizable lessons about how to design large-scale, on-
line communities that use computational models to help solve difficult societal
and managerial problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will
help educate the general public about the issues involved in global climate
change. In addition, by constructively engaging a broad range of scientists,
policy makers, and concerned citizens, this system may help develop plans and
policies that are actually better than any that would have otherwise been
developed.