* 1144668
* Extended Defects in Olivine and their Impact on Diffusive Reaction Kinetics
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2018
* Reid Cooper, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2018
* USD 320,663.00

This project comprises an experimental study examining (a) the effects of
thermodynamic potentials?temperature, pressure and, particularly, chemical
potentials of oxygen, oxides and halides?on the formation and persistence of
extended defects in olivine and (b) the effect of such extended defects on
transport coefficients of rare earth cations and halide anions. The analytical
techniques to be employed for characterization of the defects emphasize high-
resolution, energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy (TEM; HRTEM) and
(local-electrode) atom-probe tomography (APT; LEAPTM). The proposed APT work is
developmental: we are among the earliest investigators in the petrology
community attempting to apply this promising technique?in which one can
characterize the location within a crystal of specific atoms (and potentially
isotopes)?to the characterization of minerals (which are, to first order,
electronic insulators) and of mineral reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
capability of the Earth and planetary sciences community to understand the
thermomechanical and thermochemical evolution of the terrestrial planets
requires a deep and supple understanding of ionic diffusive dynamics in silicate
and oxide mineral and their melts. Because of the number of chemical components
in geological systems, there are a variety of kinetic paths available for
diffusion-effected reactions, particularly under conditions of a high driving
potential, i.e., where phases out of equilibrium with one another are suddenly
placed in contact. This situation happens frequently in nature; it happens
almost always in experiments used to understand mineral dynamics. For example,
this research addresses directly a current controversy in petrology where the
transport coefficient for rare-earth cations in ferromagnesian olivine has been
measured in different experiments?both considered authoritative and ?good??and
yet indicate a kinetics difference of almost 104! Metastable (and perhaps
transient) defect structures in olivine in the faster case are anticipated; we
will characterize these structures, their thermochemical persistence and their
impact on dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will (a) educate a
graduate student in these particular aspects of petrology, mineral physics and
ionic materials science and (b) discern the possibilities and develop the
approaches of APT/LEAPTM for application to minerals and synthetic,
multicomponent oxides. The research has application, also, to the design and
characterization of new materials for use as oxide electrodes in batteries and
fuel cells. Our work will emphasize petrology; we are, however, aware of the
potential of the research for societal needs with regards to energy technology.