* 1144418
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Studies of Continental Triple Junction Tectonics, Northern Central America
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2019
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 427,075.00

A research team from University of Wisconsin and California State University
Stanislaus, in collaboration with scientists from El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, France, Mexico, and Spain are carrying out an integrated study of
faulting and the earthquake cycle in northern Central America, at the deforming
western end of the Caribbean plate. The major emphasis is to better measure and
model deformation around a continental triple junction in southern Guatemala,
where the Motagua and Polochic fault system terminates the Caribbean-North
America plate boundary. Existing and new data from 110 campaign and continuous
GPS sites in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and southern Mexico will be
compiled and analyzed to create the first consistent regional-scale GPS velocity
field for the western Caribbean. The new velocity field will be used to study
four important topics, including: 1) how deformation is accommodated around the
continental triple junction; 2) the motion and internal deformation of the
Central America forearc sliver; 3) the manner in which the Jalpatagua fault and
other volcanic arc faults in Guatemala accommodate this movement and interact
with the magmatic arc; and 4) how extension is accommodated between the
sinistral Motagua-Polochic fault system and the dextral Jalpatagua fault and the
influence on subduction coupling and upper plate deformation of a 50 degree
change in the dip of the subducting Cocos plate. Complementary outcrop, gravity,
paleomagnetic, radiometric, and geochemical data will be collected in Guatemala
and Honduras to provide a geological framework for interpreting and modeling the
GPS velocity field. Forward and inverse modeling that integrates the available
geodetic and structural observations and suitable earthquake constraints will be
used to better understand the factors that dictate deformation in the region and
optimize estimates of block rotations, fault coupling and locking depths, and
strain rates and directions within quasi-rigid blocks.

Estimates of interseismic strain rates and long-term fault slip rates that will
result from this work will inform risk analysis in El Salvador, Honduras, and
Guatemala, where destructive earthquakes have occurred in the past 35 years. The
study complements publicly funded studies of natural hazards in neighboring
countries (i.e. Mexico, Nicaragua, Costa Rica) and together will substantially
advance understanding of these hazards in much of Central America and southern
Mexico. Training workshops to be held in Guatemala and El Salvador will target
one or more techniques and will constitute a mini-forum for presenting project
results and educating students, scientists, and the broader public in the host
countries.