* 1144757
* NeTS:Small:Collaborative Research: Protocols and Analysis for Predictable Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* William Griswold, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,216.00

The next generation of wireless sensor networks will monitor critical
infrastructure, collect vital signs from patients, and disseminate medical and
planning information during emergency responses. In contrast to earlier wireless
sensor networks for which best-effort services were sufficient, such systems
require predictable performance and high reliability. Failure to meet these
requirements may have significant adverse effects. This project aims at the
development of an engineering methodology for predictable wireless sensor
networks. A predictable wireless sensor network is a system for which it is
possible to check that its requirements are met under reasonable assumptions
regarding its workload and network properties. This project enables the
development of predictable wireless sensor networks by providing developers with
analytical tools to characterize and optimize the performance of sensor network
systems. The intllectual merit of the project includes: (i) Statistical methods
for assessing the properties of wireless sensor networks and for provisioning
resources to achieve robustness in spite of node failures or temporal
variations; (ii) Novel transmission scheduling techniques that ensure a system
meets its reliability and real-time requirements; (iii) A new schedulability
analysis that bounds network capacity and message latencies under realistic
interference models; and (iv) A wireless architecture that instantiates proposed
transmission scheduling techniques and the schedulability analysis. In terms of
broader impacts, this project will help advance our national capability to
develop performance-critical wireless systems. The PIs will teach the developed
design and analytical techniques as part of wireless sensor network curriculum
and share them with the research community through tutorials.