* 1144974
* Historical naming traditions and cryptic speciation bias biodiversity estimates in transatlantic agaric fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Ronald Petersen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 393,074.00

The Eastern United States is an area of exceptional biodiversity. But for fungi,
a critical component of environmental health, this biodiversity is significantly
underestimated for two reasons: 1) there is a significant but unknown level of
hidden diversity underground and 2) traditional mycologists incorrectly used
European names for North American species, assuming that fungal species were
widely distributed. This study uses morphological examination, molecular data
and mating studies to estimate levels of hidden diversity in agaric fungi and to
evaluate the extent to which European and North American fungi are different
species. The American study area focuses on one of the biodiversity hot spots in
the United States, the southern Appalachian Mountains including the Great Smoky
Mountains National Park. The European study areas focus on two essential
locations for traditional European names. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will
provide estimates of hidden diversity in the southern Appalachians and determine
if molecular data and methods for estimating species boundaries can be
effectively used to evaluate biodiversity in agaric fungi and accelerate
taxonomic discovery. By further evaluating and documenting fungal biodiversity
in the southern Appalachians, this project will contribute towards understanding
the origins and maintenance of the exceptional biodiversity of the region and
will contribute to the All Taxa Biodiversity Inventory in the Great Smoky
Mountains National Park. Understanding patterns of biodiversity has become
increasingly urgent with the onset of global climate change. Land use and
conservation decisions rely on estimates of biodiversity and endemism which are
tied to species names. If these are inaccurate, conservation decisions may fail
to protect native biodiversity.