* 1144591
* IGERT: Soft Material Robotics
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Barry Trimmer, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 12/31/2018
* USD 2,709,035.00

IGERT: Soft Material Robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Integrative Graduate
Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award creates an interdisciplinary
graduate program to develop advances in the field of soft robotics. These
machines, inspired by animals, will be capable of complex tasks that are
difficult to achieve with conventional robots, suitable for close interactions
with humans, and able to work in environmentally sensitive locations. The
research will cross traditional disciplinary boundaries, employing novel
biomaterials, exploiting cellular processes and tissue engineering methods, and
using control strategies derived from evolutionary principles ? approaches that
are comparatively rare in conventional robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The development of this new technology provides an exciting opportunity
to train inventive and entrepreneurial future science and engineering leaders.
IGERT trainees will train in multiple disciplines, including materials science,
neuromechanics, mechanical control systems, computer science, artificial
intelligence and product design. Novel collaborative training approaches include
the formation of mentorship teams and an innovative problem solving-based model
of education. IGERT trainees will exploit bioengineering approaches to machine
design, fabricate and control new robotic devices to address a wide range of
current medical, social and environmental challenges. For example, soft robots
could be developed for internal medical diagnosis and delivery of therapeutics,
or for search and rescue operations and bioremediation. The international
partners, leaders in the emerging field of soft robots, will help trainees form
collaborations and affiliations across the world. These students will bridge
emerging areas of biology and engineering to create revolutionary new
technologies including robots for human assistance and environmentally-friendly
biodegradable robots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to establish new models for
graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage
students in understanding the processes by which research is translated to
innovations for societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;