* 1144158
* III: EAGER: Accelerated Filtering of Spatiotemporal Archives Using Reconfigurable  Hardware
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Walid Najjar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

The wide adoption of GPS and sensor technologies has created many applications
that collect and maintain very large repositories of data in the form of
trajectories. To better analyze such data, a user can pose complex pattern
queries using a high level region-based representation that abstracts
trajectories by the temporally ordered sequence of spatial regions (or
areas/points of interest) they visited. For example: "find moving objects that
first passed by the train station, then by the town center and were always
within a mile from the harbor". Temporal and counter constraints, as well as
region variables and region hierarchies can be added to create very powerful
queries. Similarly, one can formulate join queries that identify pairs of
trajectories with similar behavior, etc. While such pattern-based queries are
critical in analyzing vast trajectory archives, traditional methods fail to
scale due to the large computational effort and size of the data. Adding more
resources (i.e., many processors) will not eliminate the bottleneck (each
processor still uses multiple clock cycles per operation) and may also create a
large communication overhead between the processors. Instead, this project takes
a different, high risk-high payoff approach by using reconfigurable hardware,
namely, Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs). FPGAs are code accelerators
where a portion of the application is mapped as a circuit on the FPGA; thus they
avoid the traditional load/store operations in the datapath that traditional
CPUs perform. Such processing has the potential to provide orders of magnitude
performance improvement, leading to further discoveries from vast amounts of
data. The intellectual merit of this project emanates from the novel solutions
needed: efficient FPGA designs to support region variables, time and counter
constraints, region hierarchies, as well trajectory joins. If successful, this
project has the potential to revolutionize the way queries over large trajectory
data archives are processed. There is a broad range of applications (scientific,
educational, and economic activities) that will be impacted from the fast
processing provided by the FPGA filtering approach. Providing orders of
magnitude speed improvement will have a profound effect in these applications.
The combination of two distinct technologies (Databases and FPGAs) is an ideal
vehicle for training graduate/undergraduate students and for transferring gained
experience into relevant courses. For further information see the project web
site at the URL: http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~tsotras/fpga/index.html