* 1144213
* EAGER: Exploring the biochemical principle of allostery for algorithm development
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Christopher Langmead, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 17,349.00

EAGER: Exploring the biochemical principle of allostery for algorithm
development&lt;br/&gt;PI: Judith Klein-Seetharaman, Department of Structural
Biology, University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Christopher J. Langmead,
Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Motivation: Computer
science and biology have inspired each other by drawing analogies leading to new
classes of algorithms such as neural networks and genetic algorithms and new
fields such as computational biology and biocomputing (computing using
biomolecules). The ever increasing data streams in everyday life as well as
biology are most often characterized by networks, such as the internet,
telephone network, disease transmission networks, social networks to name just a
few. Networks consist of nodes connected by edges and only the nodes vary with
the application areas. The network structures are conserved: the edges allow
communication and information flow. Due to the size, complexity and dynamic
nature of such networks, their control is challenging. As environments change,
the structures of these networks change and are subject to numerous
perturbations and failures. Nature faces these same types of challenges and has
evolved robust strategies for ensuring that information is transmitted and that
the system appropriately responds to changes in the environment: for example,
the oxygen transport protein in the blood, hemoglobin, changes its affinity to
oxygen in response to small molecule ligands favoring oxygen release where
needed. The strategy that Nature employs in hemoglobin is called
allostery.&lt;br/&gt;Opportunity: Allostery is a biochemical term that refers to
the ability of biomolecules, in particular proteins, to achieve action at a
distance in the atomic network through a small, localized perturbation. Proteins
can be viewed as networks of atoms interacting in three-dimensional space.
Allostery is a classical text-book example of an experimentally well studied and
firmly established mechanism of control of this atomic network. Here, PIs
propose the hypothesis that one can share the biochemical principle of allostery
with other domains such as disease transmission, social networks, economics,
surveillance applications and cloud computing. Understanding how Nature performs
acquisition, transmission and processing of information at the molecular level
may lead to future enabling technologies in other domains.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: While the proposed hypothesis is potentially
transformative, in-depth pursuit requires obtaining a proof-of-concept outlining
(1) what kinds of mechanisms might exist in proteins that could be transferred
to other domains and (2) develop an understanding of what are the requirements
for such a transfer. Although allostery in proteins is an established
biochemical principle, little is known how it works and how to predict it. Some
proteins are regulated through allostery and others are not. Unfortunately,
there is no simple property that determines whether a given protein is (or can
be) allosterically regulated. While experimental methods provide direct evidence
for allostery, they generally do not reveal the detailed physical and biological
mechanisms for it. PIs propose to reveal these mechanisms through the
combination of computation and experiments: a predicted path of communication
between two distant sites can be validated or refuted by disrupting this path.
The deliverables of this work will be a list of fundamental principles of
allostery in proteins, and an analysis of their suitability for future extension
to non-protein related networks. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This grant will
support investigators and train graduate students from the areas of computer
science, chemistry, biology &amp; biomedicine. Convergence of technologies, here
between protein allostery modeling and network control, is expected to speed up
scientific progress in potentially many disciplines. Thus, one may in the future
be able to push the field of biocomputing forward, predict disease outbreaks or
identify action at a distance in economic networks.