* 1144946
* Collaborative Research: Late Cenozoic Vertical Crustal Motions and Erosional Mass Transfer in the Southern San Andreas Fault Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Rebecca Dorsey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2016
* USD 232,472.00

Vertical crustal motions are widely recognized in continental strike-slip fault
zones, yet the underlying controls and surficial response to 3-dimensional
strain in these settings are poorly understood. Observed patterns of uplift and
subsidence often do no match the predictions of numerical models for oblique
strain, suggesting that existing models for strike-slip faults are incomplete.
Structural controls on development of sedimentary basins in strike-slip fault
zones are similarly complex and incompletely understood. This project is
addressing these problems with a multi-disciplinary, multi-investigator study of
3-dimensional strain and related surface processes in the San Andreas fault zone
of southern California. The research team will use a diverse suite of methods to
document rates and geometries of vertical crustal motions through time, and test
two hypotheses for the evolution of the San Andreas fault: (1) that plate-motion
obliquity exerts the primary control on the 3-dimensional and temporal evolution
of the fault zone; and (2) that the fault zone experienced a major change at
approximately 1.1 to 1.4 million years ago in response to tectonic
reorganization of the plate boundary. Each hypothesis makes unique predictions
about space-time patterns of uplift, erosion, subsidence, and sediment dispersal
within the fault zone, that will allow the team to test the hypotheses with a
systematic program of fieldwork, data analysis, and modeling. This project
integrates diverse research methods including geologic mapping, stratigraphic
and structural analysis, paleomagnetic studies of sediment age and block
rotations, provenance analysis, detrital zircon dating, low-temperature
(U-Th)/He dating of bedrock sources, geomorphic analysis, study of seismic and
gravity data, and numerical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to
fill large gaps in the understanding of the geologic evolution of the southern
San Andreas fault system, a complex network of seismically active faults that
define the Pacific-North America plate boundary in California. The history of
deformation over geologic timescales (millions of years) is relatively poorly
known, despite its critical role in shaping the crustal architecture and fault
geometries that control earthquakes in this setting. This project's approach
benefits from a unique collaboration of academic researchers and students from
four universities with earth scientists at the U.S. Geological Survey. The team
is also collaborating with geophysicists investigating processes of continental
rupture beneath the Salton Sea, and scientists studying paleoseismology and
fault slip rates on the San Andreas fault over shorter timescales. These
collaborations provide an important avenue for engaging with and contributing
new knowledge to the vibrant geoscience community in southern California.
Lessons learned in this research will be used to develop new lab and teaching
exercises that will reach thousands of students over the course of the project.
Ultimately, the results of this study will shed new insights into dynamic
linkages between crustal deformation, fault-zone complexity, growth of
topography, erosion, and sediment dispersal within continental strike-slip fault
zones at active plate boundaries.