* 1144357
* Evolution of the Small Galaxy Population From High Redshift to the Present
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Fabio Governato, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 05/31/2017
* USD 26,528.00

This award facilitates scientific research using the large new computational
resource named Blue Waters scheduled to be deployed at the University of
Illinois in 2012. It provides travel funds to support technical coordination
between the principal investigators, the Blue Waters project team and vendor
technical team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cold Dark Matter (CDM) paradigm for
structure formation has had many successes over a large range of scales: from
Cosmic Microwave Background fluctuations on the scale of the horizon to the
formation and clustering of individual galaxies. However, at the low end of the
galaxy luminosity function, the agreement between the CDM theory and
observations is somewhat at odds. In particular, the existence of bulgeless,
cored small galaxies is not a natural prediction of CDM. However, these are the
scales where the baryonic physics of gas cooling, star formation and feedback
can significantly impact the overall mass of the galaxy. Furthermore, accurately
modeling the star formation process requires spatial resolution of order 100
parsecs or less and mass resolutions of less than 10000 solar masses in order to
resolve the molecular star forming regions of the interstellar medium. The
planned simulations will use the Blue Waters petascale system to model space
telescope survey volumes consistent with addresssing small galaxies from high
redshift to the present with sufficient resolution to make robust predictions of
the luminosity function, star formation rate and morphologies appropriate for
these surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be involved in these
computational advances in cosmology research. The project team is successful in
attracting a diverse population of students. Morever, the simulations will be
represented visually in public outreach forums as well as in instruction in
undergraduate courses, increasing public understanding of galaxy and star
formation which is fundamental to our knowledge of the Universe as a whole.