* 1144502
* Three New DIMACS Special Focus Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 698,995.00

DIMACS, the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science,
has a long history of bringing together groups of researchers with different
interests and backgrounds, to study and advance the state of the art in discrete
mathematics, theoretical computer science, statistics, operations research, and
related areas, as well as their applications in a wide variety of domains
including telecommunications, homeland security, the physical sciences,
engineering, and public health. DIMACS's signature activity is a "special focus"
(SF), a multi-year program of coordinated activities involving hundreds of
diverse participants and addressing a broad, important topic that is poised for
rapid advancement and has high potential for scientific, industrial, and
societal impact. The project consists of the following three interacting
SFs:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1). Information Sharing and Dynamic Data Analysis: The
ability to instrument, monitor and collect data provides huge potential to
improve life: designing better systems, better managing interactions between
large complex systems, identifying subtle problems and bad outcomes. More work
is needed to realize systems that span multiple, diverse, noisy data sources and
use them to correctly draw conclusions and make decisions. The SF addresses data
preparation and quality, privacy and security, continual and distributed
processing, and fusion and inference, exploring applications in areas including
web search engines and online social networks, healthcare, urban planning and
traffic management, and homeland security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2). Algorithms
and Energy: It has become a major national and global priority to maintain a
robust supply of energy that meets the demands of a growing economy and balances
costs and environmental constraints. Themes of the SF are multiscale temporal
models, multiscale spatial models, risk and reliability measures, data
representation and model sharing, and stochastic optimization that can
contribute to our ability to analyze new dynamic energy pricing algorithms,
optimize investments in energy generation, storage and transmission, manage a
dynamic new power grid, and analyze plans and protocols for electric vehicles
and green information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3). Cybersecurity: New
emerging networks and applications raise more than ever the challenge to provide
security and privacy in a world where everything is connected via wired or
wireless networks. SF themes address critical infrastructure systems such as the
power grid, applications with a high societal, industrial and governmental
impact such as the changing landscape of cyber attacks, mechanisms for identity
management, security for new paradigms like cloud computing, and fundamental
studies such as cryptography, information &lt;br/&gt;theory, and coding
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These three SFs will lead to a great deal of
research activity, including significant new scientific accomplishments and
significant new directions of scientific research. The project has significant
potential benefit to society: improved capabilities to handle diverse, dynamic
data in turn enables advances in medicine, homeland security, commerce, and
other areas; improving and diversifying the energy infrastructure helps maintain
affordable access to energy while mitigating the environmental costs of doing
so; and improvements in cybersecurity are needed to ensure that we can
justifiably rely on systems we use throughout our daily lives. The project also
enhances educational programs for students and faculty from K-12 to graduate
students.