* 1144922
* OPUS: Trophic Interactions, Plant Quality, and the Integration of Above and Belowground Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Mark Hunter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2014
* USD 185,214.00

Plants, animals, and microbes vary in features such as their physical structure
and their chemistry. This kind of variation in important because it influences
how organisms interact with each other and how they affect the environment
around them. Plants are a good example of this because they vary dramatically in
their structure and in the chemistry of their tissues. This is why, for example,
humans can eat corn but not oak leaves. Variation in plant quality determines
what tissues can be eaten and by whom. All animals and microbes on land either
consume plant tissues or consume other organisms that do. Consequently,
variation in the quality of plant tissue is central to ecological processes on
land. Plant quality can influence two kinds of ecological processes. First,
plant chemistry influences the growth and abundance of herbivores and predators.
Second, plant chemistry influences the rate at which nutrients such as nitrogen
and phosphorus become available in the soil. Therefore, plant chemistry links
processes above ground (like herbivory) with processes below ground (like
nutrient availability). A critical point here is that these links are dynamic.
When herbivores chew leaves, leaf chemistry changes, influencing how nutrients
become available in soil. Conversely, soil nutrients influence the chemistry of
plants and therefore interactions between herbivores and predators. These are
key pathways of feedback that link together ecological processes above and below
ground. The proposed work will integrate over 25 years of research on this topic
by the PI. By synthesizing and integrating work across many environments
(forests, prairie, deserts, agricultural fields), the PI will help to unify
studies of ecological processes above and below ground, and examine common
features among habitats. A new synthetic framework will be developed for future
work that links ecological processes at different
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis will be published in volumes broadly
accessible to researchers and students of ecology. Links will be emphasized to
issues of societal importance including crop pest management, invasive species
management, and conservation biology. New courses will be developed for graduate
and undergraduate students and workshops will foster participation by under-
represented groups.