* 1144937
* Timescales of Deep and Shallow Magmatic Evolution of Mt. Mazama (Crater Lake)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2016
* USD 249,215.00

Timescales of deep and shallow magmatic evolution of Mt. Mazama (Crater
Lake)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Arc magmatism is a major process
whereby continents form, and caldera-forming eruptions can have substantial
impact on global climate. Crater Lake is a representative example of arc-related
calderas and is very well studied in terms of the geologic history and nature of
eruptive products. However, such caldera-style eruptions seldom occurred at
other Cascades volcanoes, and this study aims to understand why this is the
case. This project aims to increase understanding of two aspects of arc
magmatism: [1] the role of the lower crust, and particularly young mafic crust,
in moderating and attenuating the ascent of magmas; and [2] the rate at which
large magma bodies develop in the upper crust. Feedbacks between lower and upper
crustal magmatic processes will be explored at Mt. Mazama (Crater Lake), with
the goal of understanding differences in magmatic evolution at Mazama viz a viz
other Cascades stratovolcanoes. Research will follow three approaches: [1] Use
of U-Th and Re-Os isotopes, coupled with Sr-Nd-Pb isotopes and trace elements,
to evaluate magma interactions with mafic lower crust. This approach is
sensitive to involvement of garnet and can help constrain thermal and
compositional characteristics of the lower crust. [2] Use of U-Th and O isotopic
data to evaluate young volcanic deposits erupted in the last ~100 kyr. U series
data are sensitive to hydrothermal processes, and will be used to constrain the
size of the hydrothermal system associated with the pre-climactic magma chamber.
[3] Use of U-Th isotopes to determine residence times of the crystal cargo in
evolved eruptive units associated with the climactic caldera-forming eruption.
These approaches will be used to estimate overall dimensions of the magma
chamber that fed the climactic eruption at Mt. Mazama and formed the summit
caldera, and to better understand the plumbing system and magmatic processes
operating at this volcano. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The proposed
work will foster collaborations between UW-Madison, USGS, Carnegie-DTM, and US
National Park Service on a volcanic system that potentially poses significant
geologic risk. Outreach activities will include K-12 teacher workshops at Crater
Lake National Park.