* 1144759
* Collaborative Research: Plutons as ingredients for continental crust: Pilot study of the differences between intermediate plutons and lavas in the intra-oceanic Aleutian arc
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Steven Goldstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,105.00

Felsic plutonic rocks formed in arcs are buoyant with respect to mantle
peridotite over the entire range of relevant pressures and temperatures. They
tend to remain at the Earth?s surface, to form the fundamental building blocks
of continental crust. In the Aleutians, most felsic plutonic rocks have
compositions that overlap estimates for the bulk composition of the continental
crust, and that are distinctly different from spatially associated lavas.
Understanding the genesis of Aleutian felsic plutonic rocks is a key to
understanding continental genesis and evolution via arc magmatism, a key science
goal for the MARGINS and GeoPRISMS Initiatives. The PIs will address the
following questions: (1) Do Aleutian plutonic rocks have an isotopically
distinct source composition, compared to nearby lavas? If they do, this is
vitally important since it is commonly assumed that erupted basalts are
representative of the magmatic flux from the mantle into arc crust. If not, we
will evaluate how they can be explained as the result of different
differentiation processes operating on the same parental melt. (2) Has there
been compositional variation in the Aleutian arc over time? Do differences
between plutonic and volcanic rocks represent temporal evolution of the arc, or
different modes of magma transport and emplacement for different magma
compositions? And (3) are high viscosity felsic magmas preferentially emplaced
in plutons, while low viscosity, mafic magmas preferentially form lavas? What
biases does this introduce, when lavas are presumed to be representative of arc
magmatic processes and compositions?&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Aleutian arc
poses numerous hazards to society. Understanding subduction processes helps to
predict, avoid, and/or mitigate the hazardous consequences of volcanic
eruptions, landslides and earthquakes. During this project, a graduate student
will be trained in research, and will likely be able to help design and
participate in a larger field research program based on this pilot project.