* 1144483
* The Subduction Margin Carbon Cycle: A Preliminary Assessment of the Distribution Patterns of Multicycle Carbon
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Neal Blair, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2016
* USD 264,535.00

The role of recycled fossil C in elemental budgets and organic C behavior on
active margins is not known beyond the mid-slope. Fossil C would be expected to
persist longer in surface environments than younger materials because of its low
reactivity. Its persistence would influence the global C and O2-cycles, product
formation during deep burial, and the interpretation of sedimentary organic
geochemical records. This exploratory study of the three GeoPRISMS Subduction
Cycles and Deformation (SCD) primary focus sites, the Alaskan, Cascadia and
Hikurangi Margins, has the specific objective of developing a preliminary
assessment of the distribution of multicycle C at the sites. Samples will come
primarily from archives held by the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric
Research of New Zealand and the Deep Sea Drilling Project/Ocean Drilling Project
repositories in the US. In addition, sample collection and analysis is proposed
for the planned Integrated Ocean Drilling Program expedition to the Alaskan
margin in 2013. Analyses of samples will include Raman and FTIR microscopy,
stable carbon and radiocarbon isotopic measurements, and elemental (H/C)
determinations. The survey to be generated by this project will be a first look
at multicycle C across several active margin environments beyond the mid-slope.
The baseline information will be used to plan future C-cycling and
paleoenvironmental studies.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project and
participation in the GeoPRISMS program will be valuable educational and
professional experiences for the graduate student involved. Supplemental REU
funding will be sought to engage an undergraduate in the research. A GIS-based
education tool for the high school study of the global C-cycle will be developed
in collaboration with Northwestern?s Office of STEM Education Partnerships.