* 1144173
* Workshop: Sketching in Hardware 2011
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2011
* Philip vanAllen, Art Center College of Design
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2011
* USD 24,700.00

Sketching in Hardware is a three-day workshop from July 28-31, 2011 on the
design, use and teaching of physical computing toolkits. It is the only annual
gathering devoted exclusively to the discussion of digital hardware tools for
non-specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of digital hardware
toolkits has motivated significant academic research in the past decade.
However, though powerful, these toolkits are still in early stages of
development, akin to the earliest Web authoring programs. This annual workshop
brings together key researchers, designers, developers, manufacturers, users and
educators for an intimate, hands-on discussion of tools for physical computing
prototyping. Its goal is to create a dialogue between disciplines and thereby
lower the barrier to entry to working with digital hardware for people without a
formal engineering education into.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2011 workshop will
focus on how tools build on each other, and how they work together to spawn new
ideas. More specifically, it will aim to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Encourage
development of new tools and expansion of existing ones;&lt;br/&gt;* Support the
interconnection of existing toolkit technologies;&lt;br/&gt;* Create software
that support explorations of electronics hardware exploration; by non-
specialists through interfacing with familiar software creative
tools;&lt;br/&gt;* Identify common challenges and create opportunities for
collaboration in solving those challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every
participant will give a 20 minute presentation, with an emphasis on topics that
have not been presented publicly before. In the past these have introduced new
and improved tools, demonstrated new techniques for teaching physical computing,
and identified non-traditional areas where physical computing prototyping is
important. In addition, there will be several guided discussions of major issues
(determined in advance through email discussions). Several hours will be spent
in breakout groups to introduce new toolkits and
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The devices, software,
techniques, and social connections presented and created during the workshop are
highly influential across a broad range of disciplines and audiences. By
bringing together individuals from a wide range of disciplines and career stages
and emphasizing the relevance of work over seniority or background, the meeting
brings talented young people and people outside the usual social networks into
those networks. The published talk slides are downloaded thousands of times and
passed around the Internet, while connections made at the event create lasting
bonds and collaborations between researchers in disparate fields.