* 1144616
* IGERT:  Solar Utilization Network (SUN)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Cesar Torres, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 3,006,642.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
focuses on the energy transition from the current fossil-fuel-based economy to
one where solar energy harvested by means of photovoltaics, solar-thermal, and
photosynthesis-driven bioenergy approaches will become a keystone in global
human energy use. Scalability, efficiency and economy of these three technical
solar energy conversion approaches, along with societal components such as
sustainability policy and responsible energy use, will all be necessary for
success. This program supports the interdisciplinary training of diverse student
cohorts in multiple solar energy conversion areas at different scales,
integrated with a policy and social understanding, thus educating the next
generation of citizen-scientists, innovative thinkers and enlightened policy
makers who can guide society toward a sustainable energy future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In order to further enhance inclusion of
students from all backgrounds, the SUN IGERT project will leverage agreements
with schools and programs with significant enrollment of underrepresented
groups, particularly Hispanics and Native Americans, to lower barriers for
underrepresented minorities. Effective mentoring and use-inspired, application-
oriented, integrative research projects will enhance retention in the program.
This program will also provide the groundwork for a novel Energy Ph.D. program.
Successes from our program can be emulated and adapted at other institutions
nationally and globally, thus catalyzing the training of a much larger group of
students who can shepherd society to a new, sustainable energy
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;