* 1144258
* EAGER: A Multi-User Communication and Information Theoretic Approach to the Sparse Signal Recovery Problem
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Bhaskar Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2014
* USD 297,230.00

This research project examines the theoretical, algorithmic, and computational
issues that arise in compressed sensing (CS) and signal processing problems
where there is a need to compute solutions to problems in which the solution
vector has many zeros. In addition to the exciting compressed sensing area, this
research will benefit numerous signal processing applications where the sparsity
constraint on the solution vector naturally arises. Brain imaging techniques
such as Magnetoencephalography (MEG) and Electroencephalography (EEG) are
currently important examples. Sparse communication channels with large delay
spread, high resolution spectral analysis, and direction of arrival estimation,
are other important examples. An effective solution to this problem will have
significant impact, by providing new and valuable tools to the practicing signal
processing engineer. In addition, the tools will be of interest to researchers
in cognitive science, neuroscience, and machine learning where sparsity issues
naturally arise, such as sparse coding of signals in the brain or learning from
data which is often assumed to lie on a low dimensional manifold.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a comprehensive and tighter
integration of the compressed sensing field and multi-user information theory.
This makes it possible to utilize the rich results available in network
information theory which have been successfully applied to the implementation of
communication systems. The theoretical tools necessary to enable this
integration are being developed by the investigators. This research enables
significant advances in both theory and practice in the CS field. The
information theoretic insights are leveraged to provide insights on performance
limits and guidance on practical CS-based system design. The implementation
experience gained from communication systems will be translated to practical
algorithm development and efficient CS-based system design.