* 1144376
* EAGER:  Confined Self Assembly of Fully Conjugated Rod-Rod Diblock Copolymers in Nanofibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Vibha Kalra, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 09/30/2014
* USD 132,886.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) provides funding to
study the confined self assembly in nanofibers of fully conjugated rod-rod
diblock copolymers. Nanofibers will be fabricated via a process called
electrospinning that uses a strong electric field to elongate and thin a polymer
solution jet enabling the formation of fibers with near nanoscale diameters
(50-500 nm). Rod-rod block copolymers combine the physics of liquid crystalline
ordering of rod-like polymers (at the length scale of 1-10 nm) and microphase-
separation of coil-coil block copolymers (at length scale of 10-100 nm) with the
potential of forming hierarchically ordered materials. The effects of solvent
evaporation rate and extensional deformation (during electrospinning) on self
assembly structures at both length scales will be studied. The assembly in
nanofibers will be characterized using transmission electron microscopy as well
as small and wide angle x-ray scattering. Similar studies on self assembly in
solution-cast films will be conducted as reference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this work will provide a novel active material for the design of
high efficiency organic solar cells. In particular, self assembly of conjugated
polymeric blocks (with appropriate electronic properties) will provide periodic
interfaces of electron donor and electron acceptor materials in the light
absorbing active layer of solar cells. This will ensure timely disassociation of
bound electron and hole (created on photo-excitation), necessary to produce
photocurrent efficiently. Confining fully conjugated rod-rod diblock copolymers
within nanofibers will have two benefits. First, it will provide the opportunity
to develop a new class of materials, namely, wearable fabrics of organic
semiconductors. Secondly, the strong extensional deformation and fast solvent
evaporation during electrospinning combined with the physical cylindrical
confinement in nanofibers will provide access to novel self assembled structures
that may not be possible in equilibrium systems or films.