* 1144584
* IGERT: Interdisciplinary Research Training in Rehabilitation Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2020
* Rory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* John Weishampel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 2,993,020.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports training in engineering and rehabilitation sciences to prepare future
scientists who have a deep understanding of human function and needs, and can
design innovative rehabilitation devices, systems, and techniques to help people
with disabilities more fully participate in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This program focuses on
technology innovations related to mobility, manipulation, and
cognitive/behavioral limitations. A key feature of this IGERT award is in-depth
technical and clinical training with each trainee being advised by a mentor team
with expertise in engineering and a clinical discipline. This program is
distinguished by its ability to attract high proportions of students with
disabilities and veterans. The relevance of rehabilitation engineering to real
life serves as an attractor for these students, allowing them the opportunity to
improve their own lives and the lives of other people. Additionally, trainees
will be introduced to entrepreneurship and commercialization through coursework,
invited speakers, and multidisciplinary team
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This program is intended to
make a contribution to a generation of a technically savvy, clinically astute,
and innovation-minded workforce in the field of rehabilitation science and
engineering. It will contribute to the basic understanding of how to create
deeper collaborations between the clinical science and engineering communities
to create enabling solutions for people with disabilities, how to structure
graduate programs so that they are more effective in attracting and retaining a
diverse set of graduate students, and how to take better advantage of the
multinational character of the rehabilitation communities to improve the quality
of graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to establish new models for
graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage
students in understanding the processes by which research is translated to
innovations for societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;