* 1144901
* IGERT: Biophotonics Across Energy, Space, and Time (BEST)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Michelle Khine, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,999,533.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
initiates a novel model for interdisciplinary graduate training in biophotonics
across the biomedical sciences, physical sciences, and engineering. Biophotonics
technologies provide powerful capabilities to probe and manipulate biological
components and processes. Their utilization in the life sciences and medicine
represents an estimated annual economic impact of $50 billion. This program aims
to produce the next generation of biophotonics leaders to make transformative
advances in the development and application of new tools for biological and
medical discovery and maintain global U.S. leadership in biotechnology,
pharmaceutical and medical device industries.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
IGERT award creates a hands-on training program that integrates physics,
chemistry, engineering, and life-science principles across spatial and temporal
scales. The interaction of, and collaboration between, biomedical scientists,
physical scientists and engineers throughout the graduate traineeship will drive
advances in biophotonics technologies, computational methods, and molecular
probes to solve important problems in bio-molecular, cellular, tissue, and whole
organismal systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The BEST IGERT project will
promote dissemination of an innovative education framework aimed towards a
diverse cadre of scientists and engineers. Moreover, IGERT faculty and trainees
will engage vigorously in a spectrum of outreach, dissemination, recruitment,
retention, and career development activities that leverages the commitment of
multiple units within UC-Irvine, industry in Southern California, and a
nationwide network of faculty contacts, including those at minority serving
institutions, to inform the public and broaden participation by students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to establish new models for
graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage
students in understanding the processes by which research is translated to
innovations for societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;