* 1144098
* RUI:  Characterizing Arctic lakes during greenhouse climates through an analysis of siliceous organisms: A glimpse of what the future may hold.
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Peter Siver, Connecticut College
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 379,756.00

Over 40 million years ago, long before anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions
was an issue, the Earth was engulfed in an extremely warm period known as the
Cenozoic hot house. The warming correlated with an ice-free Earth, lush forests
on land masses near the North Pole, and alligators, giant tortoises and tapirs
roaming the high Arctic. Indeed, the warmth experienced during the Cenozoic hot
house was strikingly similar to future warming estimates derived from climate
models. Thus, the Cenozoic hot house represents an ideal analog for
understanding future changes resulting from warmer climates. The goal of this
project is to document the remains of microscopic plant and animal organisms
from three extensive Arctic lake cores that collectively span the Cenozoic hot
house, and use the findings to evaluate the development and resilience of
freshwater ecosystems in a warm greenhouse world. Preservation and sheer numbers
of microfossils in the three cores are unprecedented and the project will also
yield a unique opportunity to address long-standing evolutionary questions for
ecologically important freshwater organisms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Global
warming, caused by higher concentrations of greenhouse gases, is advancing at an
unprecedented rate and is arguably the most pressing environmental issue facing
society today. Computer models predict significantly elevated warming in Arctic
regions, and all indications are that the warming will cause profound
reorganizations of biological communities. However, since there are no Arctic
ecosystems currently experiencing such warm conditions, we lack data that could
be used to verify the computer models. The project offers a unique chance to
understand how Arctic freshwater ecosystems did, and most likely will, respond
to warming.