* 1144871
* Integrating Observations and Modeling of Tremor and Slip in Subduction Zones  to Discern Controls on Fault Slip Behavior
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Harmony Colella, Colella                 Harmony        V
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Harmony Colella has been awarded and NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at Miami University of
Ohio. This study will employ complementary research approaches, observational
and modeling, to constrain the parameters and processes that cause the variety
of episodic tremor and slip (ETS) and earthquake phenomena observed in
subduction zones. More specifically, the project will identify and locate tremor
in south central Alaska (Alaska-Aleutian Subduction Zone) and the Oaxaca and
Jalisco-Colima segments of the Middle America Subduction Zone. The spatial and
temporal distribution of tremor and previously documented large and great
earthquakes will be used to constrain fault simulations to explore the range of
fault parameters that influence the frequency and segmentation of the variety of
earthquake types observed in subduction zones and to develop robust statistical
characterizations of great earthquakes and ETS events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction zones generate the world's largest earthquakes
(M8-9+). These seismic releases of stored-up elastic energy result in intense
ground shaking over large regions and often displace the sea floor, which
generates tsunamis like those of the great 2004 Sumatra and 2011 Japan
earthquakes. Recently discovered ETS events represents another way these faults
can relieve the stored energy, but the slip occurs more slowly over weeks to
months and is accompanied by weak tectonic (nonvolcanic) tremor. This research
will specifically target the impact of ETS on hazardous great earthquakes, with
particular interest in the potential for ETS events to trigger large or great
earthquakes and understanding the properties that may be related to why each
subduction zone demonstrates different behaviors. In addition, Dr. Colella will
develop tools to assess the learning experience in undergraduate geohazards
assignments and of undergraduate research success, and organize and lead
graduate seminars that will assist graduate students in the natural sciences
prepare for the transition into their careers.