* 1144079
* Collaborative Research: Diversity, Dominance &amp; Disturbance in Species-Rich Pine Savanna Groundcover
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Paul Gagnon, Murray State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This project will test two likely mechanisms for the maintenance of biological
diversity in natural habitats, the creation of fine-scale variation in the
environment by dominant plant species and by natural disturbance by fire. Some
of the most diverse plant communities in North America are found in the fire-
prone longleaf pine forest of the southeastern United States. Although the
forest canopy generally has only a few species of plants, and the plants beneath
are often dominated by one or two species of large, long-lived bunchgrasses, a
high number of smaller plant species can be found scattered between the grasses.
Researchers will experimentally alter interactions between bunchgrasses,
interactions between bunchgrasses and smaller plants, and environmental
conditions such as fire intensity to show how dominant plant species influence
the diversity and dynamics of high-diversity plant communities in environments
prone to disturbance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Longleaf pine ecosystems
historically covered most of the Atlantic and Gulf Coastal Plains, but human
activities such as fire suppression have reduced the area of the forests by more
than 98%. This project will inform efforts to manage and restore these
ecosystems. In particular, a workshop will bring together land managers,
conservation professionals, and ecologists to synthesize relevant information
about these ecosystems, identify important gaps in our understanding of these
floristic treasures, and translate the results into recommendations for
conservation, management, and restoration. In addition, the project will train
undergraduate and graduate students in science and provide educational outreach
activities for K-12 students and educators.