* 1144309
* Diffusion of Trace Elements in Garnet: Rates, Mechanisms, and Theory
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* William Carlson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2015
* USD 268,208.00

Metamorphic processes that take place deep in the earth's crust or in its upper
mantle cannot be observed directly, and they span time scales much longer than
human lifetimes, so knowledge of them must come from study of the rocks they
produce. To reconstruct geologic histories -- to learn, for example, how long it
takes for a mountain belt to form, how ancient it is, how rapidly it arose or
was eroded -- we must be able to read the record of those processes that is
encoded in minerals that formed at great depth and have been brought to the
surface by tectonic processes. The central goal of this research is to learn
better how to read such records in garnet, a mineral with a remarkable ability
to capture details of its history in its chemical composition. Garnet, during
growth, commonly develops differences in the concentrations of constituent
elements from the cores of crystals out to their rims, and these variations are
modified by diffusion, the movement of atoms through the solid crystal
structure. Diffusional modifications occur to varying degrees, reflecting the
various lengths of time that the crystals spent at different temperatures and
pressures during their post-growth histories. The key to transforming these
diffusional modifications into detailed information on geologic processes is
quantitative knowledge of the rates and mechanisms of diffusion of different
elements through the garnet structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work has
produced robust measurements of diffusion rates for elements that are abundant
in garnet, but a much more nuanced interpretation of geologic history would be
possible if comparable data were available for trace elements, those with very
low abundance. Some progress toward this goal has also been made, by measuring
and modeling the effects of diffusion in garnet crystals that have been
partially resorbed at very high temperatures. But data are needed at lower
temperatures, and for a broader suite of trace elements than have so far been
investigated. This project will obtain those data by developing and deploying
high-spatial-resolution methods of chemical analysis that will extend prior work
to crystals in which the effects of diffusion span a narrower range of distance
because they have been resorbed at lower temperatures. The research will
investigate various means by which trace elements are incorporated into the
garnet structure, and how different means of incorporation may affect diffusion
rates, both for individual elements and for pairs of elements that may diffuse
together in order to maintain local balance of electrical charges in the
crystal. New data on trace-element diffusion in garnet should add rigor to
applications as diverse as high-temperature heating/cooling histories and
timescales of high-temperature thermal and metasomatic events, Sm-Nd and Lu-Hf
garnet geochronology, understanding of metamorphic equilibration between garnet
and accessory minerals, and interpretation of rare-earth patterns of mantle
minerals and melts.