* 1144405
* RAPID: Critical transitions in at-risk Balinese subaks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* John Lansing, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 52,880.00

The usual state of affairs in nature is one of populations fluctuating around
some trend or stable average. Occasionally, however, this scenario is
interrupted by an abrupt shift to a dramatically different regime, as when the
populations of many species suddenly jump to different abundances in synchrony
in the open ocean. The obvious intuitive explanation for such changes in nature
is the occurrence of a sudden large external impact. However, theoreticians have
long stressed that this need not be the case. Even a tiny incremental change in
conditions can trigger a large shift in some systems if a critical threshold
known as "catastrophic bifurcation" is passed. Intuitively, this is like the
tipping over of an overloaded boat when too many people move to one side. A
question of interest is whether such tipping points also exist in actively
managed ecosystems, like irrigated rice paddies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spring
2011, a pilot study of traditional, small-scale irrigation systems (called
subaks) on the Indonesian island of Bali produced the first empirical evidence
for the presence of multiple regimes in an actively managed social-ecological
system. One group of four subaks responded confidently to economic and
environmental challenges, while a second group of four experienced a rapid
decline. Subaks have existed on Bali since the eleventh century, but most are
now at risk, and last year a thousand hectares of terraced fields went out of
production. Signs that the subak system is under severe threat led to a proposal
from the Government of Indonesia to create a UNESCO World Heritage Cultural
Landscape to support the subaks. For the World Heritage to succeed, it is vital
to understand what causes subaks to tip from one regime to another. This project
will train Indonesian researchers to use the new multi-scale analytical methods
developed for the pilot study, to investigate tipping points in 23 subaks. This
study will also evaluate the potential of the new methods for understanding
critical transitions in other social-ecological systems.