* 1144226
* Engineering the synthesis of natural and non-natural anthocyanins in Escherichia coli
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Mattheos Koffas, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 03/31/2012
* USD 120,755.00

CBET-0756601&lt;br/&gt;Koffas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop methodologies for
the synthesis of natural and non-natural chemical structures of polyphenols such
as anthocyanins that can be used as dyes but also have potential nutraceutical
and pharmaceutical applications. As the biosynthesis, applications and
biochemical mechanisms of the anthocyanins gain definition, the need for
standardized synthetic processes that can produce any natural anthocyanin as
well as non-natural anthocyanin derivatives efficiently and in high purity gains
in importance. Such syntheses would take advantage of advances in organic
synthesis and metabolic engineering in order to create unique synthetic
platforms for potentially thousands of compounds that mimic the natural
anthocyanin chemical structures. The convergent use of these disparate
technologies will enable one to synthesize common, rare and non-natural
compounds in high abundance and help understand the beneficial health effects of
plant polyphenols in carefully controlled studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact will result through an aggressive
outreach activity aimed at increasing the awareness of the general public on the
vast opportunities and promise bioengineering has to offer. By continuing
participation in summer workshops organized by the Center for Computational
Research, the Principal Investigator (PI) will provide a unique educational
experience to a wide pool of high-school teachers and students. In addition,
through the PI's continuing participation in various programs at the University
of Buffalo aimed at recruiting minority high-school students for summer
internships, this project will offer mentoring opportunities for minorities and
economically disadvantaged groups.