* 1144016
* CAREER: Fundamental Reaction-Diffusion Processes in the Formation of Mesoporous Films using Vaporized Precursors
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Bryan Vogt, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 299,989.00

PI: Bryan Vogt &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0746664&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER:
Fundamental Reaction-Diffusion Processes in the Formation of Mesoporous Films
using Vaporized Precursors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER grant to fund
research and educational activities aimed at examining the reaction-diffusion
processes controlling the synthesis of mesoporous films through a vaporized
precursor route. The PI plans to examine dominant synthetic reaction-diffusion
processes to gain a fundamental understanding of the formation mechanisms and
thus increase the potential for commercialization of the
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ordered mesoporous materials have been proposed for
many applications including hybrid photovoltaic devices, sensors, low-k
dielectric films, membrane separations, catalysts, optoelectronics, and
environmental mitigation. The challenge for these materials is spatial control
of the morphology and chemistry at the nanoscale across macroscopic dimensions
in order to provide optimal performance for the desired application. Decoupling
the self-assembly and reaction by utilizing preformed template films and
introducing the reactive precursors through the vapor phase enables improved
control of the formed nanostructures. However, the true potential of this
technique has not been fully realized due to a lack of fundamental knowledge
regarding the mechanism by which the reaction occurs. This work focuses on the
in-situ characterization of the reaction within a thin film. A combination of
tandem ellipsometry and quartz crystal microbalance measurements will be used to
elucidate the synthetic mechanism and to develop a predictive model for the
synthesis. These fundamental measurements and modeling will enable the rational
synthesis of novel mesoporous materials for specific applications. Moreover,
this fundamental knowledge will open up important commercialization prospects
for the vapor based processing technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this work will be demonstrated on three
fronts. First, the understanding of the synthesis mechanism will enable the
design of new mesoporous materials exhibiting desired properties for multiple
applications, and thus will increase the commercial potential of mesoporous
materials in new consumer products. Second, the research entails cross-
disciplinary skill sets (materials synthesis, materials characterization and
modeling), offering a highly interdisciplinary learning platform for graduate
and undergraduate students involved in the research. Undergraduate juniors and
seniors will be exposed to a nontraditional educational experience as they work
independently on a small subset of the project. The third component of this work
is outreach through assisting in the incorporation of nanotechnology concepts
into the chemistry curriculum at Estrea Mountain Community College, which serves
a significant fraction of first generation college students. Additional outreach
to the K-12 level will include an educational tutorial on nanotechnology in
consultation with a teacher at a central Phoenix elementary school. In this
outreach effort, the students will be exposed to the interdisciplinary nature of
modern research and use examples from research to highlight the relevance and
interrelationship of science topics such as physics, chemistry and mathematics.
Demonstrating connectivity and inter-dependency of these subject areas at an
early age will help to promote long-term student engagement in science and math
and the creation of a scientifically literate workforce. The materials developed
with the teacher will be further disseminated through ASU?s Mathematics,
Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) program for K-12 students. MESA provides
rigorous academic support to educationally disadvantaged students (in
particular, underrepresented minorities) so they excel and graduate with
baccalaureate degrees in math, science and engineering fields. The MESA program
serves thirteen school districts in central Arizona including Ganado and San
Carlos Reservations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;