* 1144039
* Conference Support: 'Coherent Flow Structures in Geophysical Flows at the Earths Surface'
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* James Best, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

This project will provide conference support to assist U.S.-based young
researchers (graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, pre-tenure faculty) attend
an international conference on 'Coherent Flow Structures in Geophysical Flows at
the Earth's Surface'. The objective of the conference is to bring together
research teams who are using numerical simulation, laboratory modeling, and
field observation to study coherent flow structures, their interaction with
sediment, vegetation, and benthic communities, the manipulation of such flow
structures for managing sedimentary environments, and the key role they play in
Earth surface dynamics.

Earth's surface is largely sculpted by the interactions between moving fluids
and the bed topography (in flows of air, water, and solids). Much work over many
decades has sought to link the detail of the turbulent flow structure to the
transport of sediment, to the development of bed topography, and to the
feedbacks between these three. Investigation of the linkages in this ?trinity?
of flow, form and transport have underlain much research over the past 20 years
and have revealed the pivotal role of ?coherent flow structures? in controlling
and modulating this trinity. The interaction between flow structure, mobile
sediment, and surface morphology has thus become of central importance to
understanding the dynamics of the Earth?s surface. Additionally, managing such
flows is a key component of both sustainable engineering design/construction
(such as flows around bridge piers, wing dykes and revetments) as well as in the
maintenance of ecological habitats. This interdisciplinary field of study is
developing new young researchers who are seamlessly integrating numerical,
laboratory, and field research to advance monitoring and modeling. A clear
impact of this project is thus to support the development of early career
interdisciplinary researchers in this area.