* 1144585
* Collaborative Research: ABR: Multiscale Dynamics in Explosive Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Josef Dufek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2016
* USD 202,387.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions are some of the most energetic granular flows on
the planet, the largest of which can have global impact. Even the more common,
smaller, events encompass scales of several kilometers. However, mass and energy
transfer in these flows are fundamentally controlled by processes at much
smaller spatial and temporal scales, where individual particles interact with
each other, with gas, or with the surface over which the flows travel. Our past
work on steam explosions, ash production, and heat transfer have shown that
subgrid models developed from experiments can be coupled to large-scale
numerical simulations. More importantly, these subgrid relations are critical
for predicting the dynamics reflected in volcanic deposits and in ash dispersal
patterns; models that neglect subgrid processes can fail to produce the energy
transfer manifest in volcanic deposits by several orders of magnitude. Our
ability to predict large-scale behavior of volcanic flows can ultimately be
limited by our understanding of very small-scale, or microphysical, processes.
In this study, the investigators will examine a suite of particle-scale mass and
energy transfer mechanisms in the laboratory with the aim of understanding the
physics of these processes and to incorporate them into large-scale simulations
of explosive volcanic eruptions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will support
an ongoing effort in predictive computational volcanology. Specifically they
team will focus on 1) heat transfer between particles and gas at high Reynolds
numbers and using clast cooling proxies to examine entrainment in pyroclastic
density currents, 2) particle deposition and resuspension, including the role of
particle impacts in generating depositional features, 3) large-scale experiments
of gas-particle density driven flows, and 4) and the production of fine ash
particles in the conduit and in pyroclastic density currents. All these
processes contribute to production and dispersal of ash and larger pyroclasts to
the immediate environment of the volcanic edifice and also to the wider
dispersal of ash in the atmosphere. Understanding the physics of these processes
is crucial in determining the potential aviation, climactic, and local hazards
of eruptions. All of the proposed experiments will be conducted with materials
and at conditions similar to those in natural flows, minimizing the potential
difficulties with scaling to large-scale multiphase flows. In the methodology
proposed, the numerical models are integrally connected to the experimental
data. The strength of numerical models is the ability to solve non-linear,
complexly coupled equations and determine emergent behavior, and the strength of
the experiments is to understand in detail the physical processes operating at
small scales.