* 1144637
* EAGER: Pulsed Laser Assisted Exfoliation of Single Crystalline SiC Thin Layers for Cost Effective Micro-Device Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Tugrul Ozel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 130,101.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant provides funding
for testing the feasibility of pulsed laser processing that would enable high
rate and cost effective exfoliation of thin single crystalline silicon carbide
(SiC) layers suitable for fabrication of micro-devices. The attractiveness of
single crystalline SiC in a variety of device applications is counteracted by
the very high cost of substrates. The main goal of this project is to exfoliate
multiple thin layers from one standard thickness SiC wafer using hydrogen ion
implantation and laser processing, and transferring such layers to silicon or
polycrystalline SiC substrates in order to enable a broader use of this
material. Hydrogen ion implantation into SiC can form a zone of voids and
microcracks at a depth approximating the implantation range, and lead to
exfoliation at subsequent very high temperatures. The proposed approach of
laser-assisted exfoliation would utilize a lower implantation dose and lower
annealing temperatures, thus reducing damage and allowing bonding of SiC to
temperature-sensitive substrates. Interactions between ion implantation
conditions, laser irradiation, and heating will be explored to gain preliminary
understanding of the path leading to exfoliation of continuous single
crystalline layers suitable for electronic devices. Feasibility studies of the
proposed process will be conducted and structural and electrical properties of
processed samples will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
concentrate on a 4H polytype of SiC, as it is of most relevance for power and
high voltage applications, but laser-assisted exfoliation should also be
extendable to other semiconductors and wide bandgap materials, such as gallium
nitride (GaN). If successful, the results of this exploratory research will lead
to development of a rapid and cost-effective method of exfoliating single
crystalline layers of SiC and bonding them to lower cost substrates that are
compatible with high performance electronic, photonic, sensor, or MEMS device
operation.