* 1144105
* Orographic Effects on Precipitating Cloud Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Robert Houze, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2016
* USD 560,999.00

A broad understanding of orographic precipitation processes is vital to the
forecasting of heavy rain, floods, and severe weather. Most precipitation on
earth occurs in connection with frontal systems, convective storms, or tropical
cyclones. The precipitation of these storms is enhanced, redistributed and
concentrated when the storms occur near or over mountains. This study tries to
advance understanding of these effects, for all three types of storms. The
research effort will be based on existing but not fully exploited datasets from
several field campaigns. High-resolution model simulations with several of the
latest ice-phase microphysical schemes will supplement the field observation
studies. The study leverages collaborations to facilitate examination of a range
of storm types near different mountain ranges (Alps, Cascades, Canadian Coast
Mts., Sierra Nevada, Andes, Himalayas, and Taiwan Central
Mts.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For frontal systems passing over mountain ranges,
this research will test hypotheses of precipitation enhancement suggested by the
MAP and IMPROVE II field programs and determine if these ideas have
applicability to storms in the vicinities of diverse mountain ranges. In
particular, data from SNOW-V10 will be used to determine the existence and
characteristics of decoupled flows, accompanying shear, and down-valley flows in
the mountain setting of the Canadian western coast. Comparison of data from
Alps, Coast Mountains, and Sierra Nevada range will be used to determine whether
the turbulence in these layers has the specific form of Kelvin-Helmholtz waves.
The development of decoupled layers by barrier jet formation will be explored by
model simulation of fronts approaching the Andes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
convective systems, we will examine the triggering and downstream development of
intense convective systems as a result of the impingement of low-level flow on
mountains and the enhancement of mesoscale convective systems passing over large
mountains. The triggering mechanism will be examined with model simulations and
data analysis in the Andean region. The modeling will test the hypothesis that
orographic subsidence holds back the deep convection by capping of the moist
low-level moist jet until the jet breaks the cap by striking a foothill.
Downstream evolution of the orogenic convection into a mesoscale system will be
examined with the model. The enhancement of a mesoscale convective system
passing over steep terrain will be examined by simulating the 2010 Leh flood
case over the Himalayas. The precipitation mechanisms in the orographically
triggered and modified convective systems will be examined using radar data from
operational and research radars in Taiwan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For tropical
cyclones, Taiwan radar data will be analyzed for Typhoon Morakot (2009), which
caused devastating flooding when its rain was orographically enhanced. We will
explore the hypotheses that warm-rain growth was crucial to the enhancement, and
model simulations will test the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: &lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will improve basic understanding of
the role of mountains in affecting all major precipitation systems across the
globe. The research will use existing but unexploited field campaign datasets
and the latest versions of high-resolution numerical forecast models to examine
the precipitation processes occurring in all major storm types (fronts,
convective storms, and tropical cyclones) when they occur near or over
mountains. Inclusion of all major storm types and examination over
geographically separated mountain ranges will achieve
generality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Improved
observations and understanding of how mountains affect precipitation will lead
to improved prediction of severe flooding, hail, tornadoes, and winds. The
storms investigated in this study have caused hundreds of casualties and great
property damage, and the research will incorporate investigation of their human
impacts.