* 1144286
* RAPID Social Computing and Political Transition in Tunisia
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Philip Howard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2012
* USD 45,625.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will study patterns of
learning, design, and repurposing in social computing by networks of activists
preparing for the upcoming Tunisian elections. Tunisia's popular uprising for
democracy inspired similar movements across North Africa and the Middle East.
New norms of interactivity and expectations for information access are being
encoded in constitutional drafts, senior public officials are imagining new ways
of shaping public bureaucracy around e-government tools, and the public debate
about election rules and politics candidates is booming online. Tech-savvy
activists and student leaders are designing new tools and repurposing existing
tools in ways unintended and unexpected by the original computer scientists and
engineers. Local activists are building maps for tracking electoral fraud by
means of open-source software developed by the non-profit Ushahidi organization,
using microblogging platforms for vibrant forums for debate about election
rules, and accessing content from Western news agencies, Al Jazeera, and citizen
journalists over social networking applications. Large numbers of people with
large numbers of devices on multiple digital platforms are behind these new
discursive practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team was already
prepared to undertake this general kind of research in Tunisia and its region,
but the specific focus on the Tunisian election takes advantage of a remarkable
confluence of political and technological innovations, in two stages. First, the
team will expand its ability to track blog and microblog conversations about
Tunisian political life, preserving as much geolocation data and link
information as possible. Second, it will ethnographically investigate specific
transmission acts whereby social computing strategies - understood as large
numbers of people using diverse devices - are developed in one civil society
group and diffused to others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this proposal is in (1) analyzing rigorous social science data about how social
computing is used during sensitive moments of political transformation, and (2)
advancing our knowledge of how to relate the evolution of opinion in a vibrant
blogosphere to political events on the ground. Even if democratic institutions
are slow to form, there is merit in explaining how modern publics conduct
constitutional conversations, arrive at preferences in political leadership, and
connect online conversations with offline action. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms
of broad impact, this RAPID project will: 1) generate real-time social science,
which entails actively disseminating research findings to journalists, other
researchers and foreign policy experts at the US Department of State, and 2)
cultivate and mentor a network of US and Tunisian experts in the study of social
computing, and 3) expand our understanding of a country that has suddenly become
important to the evolution of political institutions and technology applications
in the Arab world. This work will help foreign policy makers better understand
the relationship between technology diffusion and political processes. In
addition students are central to the team, and will gain a unique educational
experience from participating.