* 1144422
* Sulfur Partitioning between Solid and Liquid Iron at High Pressure
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2015
* USD 379,946.00

Sulfur Partitioning between Solid and Liquid Iron at High
Pressure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The Fe-FeS system, with
eutectic melting behavior and preferential S partitioning to liquid iron, has
been used as a model system to explain the basic observations of the Earth?s
core system, including the liquid outer core and solid inner core configuration
and the large density jump at the inner core boundary (ICB). In order to
evaluate the role of S during the core formation and evolution of the core, full
knowledge of the phase relations in the Fe-FeS system as a function of pressure
up to core pressures is needed. It is proposed to determine the melting
relations in the Fe-FeS system up to 30 GPa in the multi-anvil apparatus and to
extend the measurements up to at least 140 GPa in high-temperature diamond-anvil
cell using combination of in-situ observations and ex-situ characterization with
FIB/SEM crossbeam. A thermodynamic model will be developed to reproduce the
experimental data, and used to extrapolate the experimentally determined phase
relations in the Fe-FeS system to ICB conditions. Emphasis is placed on
obtaining reliable, high-quality data through innovative experimental design and
development of quantitative analysis with high spatial resolution. Although
designed for proposed work on the Fe-FeS binary system, the techniques developed
here will open a new class of experiments that can be applied to other systems
in the future (e.g., to investigate the roles of other light elements, such as
Si and O, in the Earth?s core). The thermodynamic model will be used to evaluate
the S contribution to the density jump at the ICB by calculating the S
partitioning between solid and liquid iron and its effect on the density change.
The calculated melting temperature as a function of the S content will serve as
a reference point for other multi-component Earth?s core
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts. The proposed research will open new
research directions in experimental petrology. It addresses a broad issue in
deep Earth study at the interface of petrology, mineral physics, geochemistry,
and geophysics. The experimental techniques and procedures developed through
this research will be available to the community. The PI will continue to
involve and train graduate students and postdoctoral associates in the proposed
research and provide them with broad, competitive research experience. Research
results will be disseminated primarily through publications in scientific
journals, participation at scientific conferences, and occasionally through
public news media. The proposed projects will produce high-quality data that are
necessary for understanding the interior of the Earth and developing new
frontiers for cutting-edge research. The expected results will have broad impact
in many different fields including experimental petrology, geochemistry,
geophysics, mineral physics, and geodynamics.