* 1144630
* Resolving rapid radiations and recent speciation in North American spiny lizards (Sceloporus)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Adam Leache, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2015
* USD 495,257.00

Understanding rapid bursts of speciation requires new phylogenetic methods as
well as large data sets. In this project, the investigators will study a group
of lizards (genus Sceloporus) to resolve rapid radiations and recent speciation
events in the tree of life. The accumulation of new species over brief time
intervals characterizes both of these events, which are challenging to elucidate
because they leave limited genetic signatures across the genome. The
investigators will apply new DNA sequencing technologies to investigate rapid
speciation; determine the feasibility of analyzing extremely large genomic
datasets using new models; and stress-test inference methods to identify the
analytical upper limits of dataset size and
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Promoting the progress of science and the
integration of research and education will involve four activities: 1) education
and public outreach at The Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture,
including a new public exhibit on the integration of genomics and natural
history research, 2) postdoctoral mentoring, 3) undergraduate and graduate
student training, and 4) the acquisition and dissemination of new comparative
genomics data. Lizards in the North American genus Sceloporus are prominent in
comparative studies of ecology, physiology, life history evolution, and
chromosome evolution. This organismal research will yield a robust new estimate
of the evolutionary history of these lizards, a valuable commodity for the
comparative biology community.