* 1144050
* ACM Recommender Systems Conference 2011 Doctoral Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Alexander Tuzhilin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 9,750.00

This is funding to support travel for a diverse group of US PhD students and
distinguished faculty mentors to participate in an international doctoral
consortium on research on recommender systems that will be co-located with the
2011 ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (ACM RecSys) in Chicago, Illinois.
RecSys is a leading forum that brings together faculty, students, research
staff, and industry researchers who share an interest in advancing the science
of recommender systems, both in terms of the underlying algorithms that predict
choices based on a variety of data (e.g., ratings, social links, context) and in
terms of the human elements of the process such as eliciting ratings or
presenting recommendations to users. The main goal of this Doctoral Colloquium
is to help train the next generation of researchers in this area.

The 2011 RecSys Doctoral Consortium will provide a group of approximately 6 PhD
students studying recommender systems with an environment in which they can
share and discuss their goals, methods and results at an early stage of their
research. It will take place on October 23, 2011, the first day of the
conference. By participating in the doctoral consortium, students will gain
feedback on their work from other students and six prominent faculty members,
allowing them to enhance their own research proposal. Students will also develop
a better understanding of the different research communities engaged in the
study of recommender systems, and learn how to position their own work within
this community. In addition, the consortium will provide students with
opportunities to make new professional connections beyond their own disciplines.

Students will be recruited for the doctoral consortium through advertisement on
the conference website, postings to relevant mailing lists and direct
solicitation to faculty working in the area of information science and related
fields. Particular attention will be placed on identifying participants from
under-represented groups. To apply for the consortium, students will submit an
extended abstract outlining their research goals and work to date, a curriculum
vita, a paragraph describing what they expect to get from participating in the
doctoral consortium, and a letter of reference from their primary advisor.
Applications will be rated by the consortium chairs in terms of originality,
importance of research topic, intellectual and methodological rigor, stage of
work, and advisor recommendation. Priority will be given to students who have
formulated their dissertation topic but are early enough in the process that
they can still benefit from feedback.

Broader impacts: The RecSys doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the
best of the next generation of researchers in recommender systems and related
areas, allowing them to create a social network both among themselves and with
senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional development.
Participation is encouraged from a broad range of relevant disciplines and
approaches, thereby broadening attendees' perspectives on their topics of study
and promoting advancement of the field. The organizers will try explicitly to
identify and include the broadest possible group of highly qualified
participants. As a consequence of these steps, the student and faculty
participants will constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions,
which will help broaden the students' horizons to the future benefit of the
field and to U.S. e-commerce, which relies heavily on recommender systems.