* 1144627
* Collaborative Research: Whole Ecosystem Experiments on Early Warnings for Regime Shifts to Cyanobacteria in Lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Jonathan Cole, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 187,738.00

While nature often changes slowly, sometimes large changes occur fast. Fisheries
collapse, rangelands decline, and invasive species expand rapidly often with
high costs to human society. Big changes in ecological systems are difficult to
forecast but recent theoretical studies and experiments indicate that they are
preceded by early warnings. These early warnings are like economic indicators
and can be detected in environmental variables that can be measured frequently.
In principle when early warning indicators are detected actions can either avert
unwanted changes, like responding to a check engine light in a car, or help
minimize risk, like responding to a tornado siren. This project will test the
potential to avoid unwanted changes in lakes by detecting early warning signals.
Several lakes will be experimentally fertilized with nutrients to create the
potential for massive growths of algae. Early warning signals will be detected
by continuously monitoring the lakes with modern electronic sensors. In a
further experiment, the researchers will respond to signals that indicate
impending changes and stop the nutrient additions to one lake in an attempt to
avoid algae proliferating to nuisance levels. Treatments to the other lakes will
continue so that all possible responses are included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will determine if methods for detecting early warnings signals can be
developed. The findings from this study will be extended to a network of
researchers who have established continuous measurement systems on lakes
throughout the world. If successful, the results should be widely applicable for
the management of a range of natural systems, not only lakes. The project will
train graduate and undergraduate students and contribute to teaching materials
for courses at universities in Virginia and Wisconsin, as well as advanced
special topics courses at the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies in New York.