* 1144760
* EAR-PF:Seasonal Variation in Suspended Sediment Source and Chemistry in a Shale Watershed
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Diana Karwan, Karwan                  Diana          L
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2015
* USD 127,500.00

Dr. Diana Karwan is awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to
implement a research and education program based at the University of Delaware.
The research will be conducted between multiple sites in the Critical Zone
Observatory network. Specifically, this study aims to quantify suspended
sediment composition and link geochemical differences in stream sediment to
their distinct watershed sources and the hydrologic paths by which sediments
move from the landscape to the stream. First, the stream and watershed sediments
will be analyzed for their composition with particular emphasis on elemental
mineral content, stable isotopes, such as Carbon-13 and Nitrogen-15, and
radioisotopes, such as Carbon-14, Cesium-137, Lead-210. This data will be used
in combination with statistical models and knowledge of the watershed hydrology
to assess the likely source of stream sediments and how this source varies
seasonally and with precipitation. Understanding variations in sediment source
and composition will lend valuable insights into the relative importance of
different mechanisms by which sediment reaches the stream, such as bank
collapse, surface erosion, and bank seepage. This insight will, in turn, allow
for the design of more effective and targeted watershed management and
restoration strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considerable environmental concerns
surround the watershed export of suspended sediment, such as drinking water
quality, stream habitat health, biogeochemical cycles, and estuarine and delta
function. In addition to studying the mechanisms behind sediment delivery, Dr.
Karwan will work with an established environmental education program to increase
the watershed literacy of school-aged children. By adding her study watershed to
the existing Model My Watershed project, urban and sub-urban students will be
able to explore the links between forests and stream water flows in an
interactive, online simulation game.