* 1144564
* EAGER: Detecting and Tracking Cyber Bullying on the Social Web
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Yi Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2013
* USD 163,332.00

As many children are connected to their peers and spend a significant amount of
time on social web sites (Facebook, Twitter, etc.), cyber bullying in social
media is becoming a severe problem that can lead to serious social,
psychological, and health effects. To alleviate the problem, intervention from
adults (teachers, parents, law enforcement, social web site moderators, etc.) is
the key. However, many victims do not report bullying to adults, and bullies can
use aliases and act anonymously, and thus they are difficult to identify. The
goal of this exploratory project is to eliminate or at least reduce these
problems by developing an intelligent system to automatically detect and track
cyber bullies on the social web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a
solution to cyber bullying based on a combination of machine learning, natural
language processing, information filtering, and recommendation and social
network modeling techniques. The expected results of the project include: (1)
algorithm(s) that can detect cyber bullies and bullying messages automatically;
(2) piloting results that suggest what prediction accuracy to expect; (3) a
preliminary social web bullying detection prototype system and (4) the first
labeled social cyber-bullying data set for testing of the prototype and future
research in this direction. The project has high risk, as whether such a system
can be developed is an untested idea and the task is challenging, largely due to
the diversity of bully behaviors, ambiguity, and the special language used by
bullies in social media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research
project are expected to create a foundation for future larger-scale projects
investigating the cyber-bullying problem in social media, which will eventually
make the social interaction much safer for hundreds of millions of children and
beyond. Teaching, training and learning will be promoted directly for the
graduate students who serve as research assistants and programmers, and several
undergraduates will contribute to the programming. The impact will be
strengthened by UCSC's ethnic and cultural diversity, its proximity to Silicon
Valley, and the PI's industry collaborations. Results of this research,
including data generated, publications, and demo software will be available via
the project web site (http://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~yiz/bullying/).