* 1144504
* Laboratory-Based Scaling Laws for Ice Shelf Evolution
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* David Holland, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 298,891.00

This award provides support for "Laboratory-Based Laws for Ice Shelf Evolution"
from the Antarctic Integrated System Science within the Office of Polar
Programs. Studies investigating the dynamics of ice shelves are arguably one of
the most, if not the most, important area of research if we hope to make
reliable predictions about future global sea-level rise. The dominant mass loss
in Antarctic ice shelves occurs in one of two ways: either via basal melt where
the ocean interacts with the bottom of the ice shelf, or via calving of
icebergs. This award will include studies of both these processes.

Intellectual Merit: The project will use laboratory and modeling studies to
better understand the processes associated with basal melt beneath the ice
sheets (ice-ocean interactions) and fracturing leading to calving of icebergs.
Specifically the investigator will perform a suite of experiments in cold rooms
available at CRREL (Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory) facilities
in New Hampshire. In conjunction with the scale-model ice shelf laboratory
studies, the team will use DNS (direct numerical simulation) to model the
processes. While others have done scale-model studies, such investigations are
rarely (if ever) coupled with numerical modeling. Combining the two is novel,
and should lead to important new insights into ice shelf dynamics. One
significant challenge will be to ?scale-up? laboratory results to processes
relevant to the real world- hence the proposed work is very much proof of
concept and appropriate for EAGER funding.

Broader Impacts: An understanding of the dynamics controlling the loss of mass
from ice shelves is critically important to understanding the future of global
sea-level change. The results will be communicated to both the glaciology and
modeling community. The project will train one graduate student and promote
interactions between CRREL (a federal lab) and NYU (an academic institution).