* 1144106
* CAREER: Probabilistic Methods for Addressing Complexity and Constraints in Protein Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Amarda Shehu, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2018
* USD 565,851.00

The proposed activity involves a research environment and educational curriculum
dedicated to dealing efficiently with the complexity and constraints that
protein molecules pose to computational studies. The emphasis is on elucidating
the motions that proteins employ for biological function. This is a fundamental
issue in the understanding of proteins and biology due to the central role of
proteins in cellular processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses
fundamental issues in protein modeling. Understanding proteins in silico
involves searching a vast high-dimensional conformational space of inherently
flexible systems with numerous inter-related degrees of freedom, complex
geometry, physical constraints, and continuous motion. Three core research
directions are identified. (1) Geometric constraints underlying protein motion
are not trivial to identify or address. The proposed research exploits
mechanistic analogies between proteins and robot kinematic linkages and
investigates inverse kinematics techniques to efficiently formulate and address
complex geometric constraints arising in diverse protein studies. (2) The
funnel-like protein energy landscape exposes physics-based energetic constraints
that are often demanding to address in silico. The proposed research pursues a
multiscale treatment of energetic constraints in the context of probabilistic
search, supporting coarse- and fine-grained levels of protein representational
detail and converting between them with information gathered during exploration.
(3) The conformational ensemble view of the protein state relevant for function
necessitates search algorithms capable of exploring the high-dimensional
conformational space and its rugged energy landscape. A novel probabilistic
search framework is proposed that gathers information about the space it
explores and employs this information to advance towards promising unexplored
regions of the space. Taken together, these research directions allow addressing
complexity in proteins by formulating and exploiting geometric and energetic
constraints, thus narrowing the search space of interest to regions where the
constraints are satisfied, and by employing a novel probabilistic framework with
enhanced sampling capability able to feasibly search the relevant regions of the
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity promises to advance discovery
and understanding both in the computer science and protein biophysics
communities. Since most problems of practical interest are high-dimensional and
often exhibit complex non-linear spaces, the proposed research cuts across and
spans multiple areas in computer science, such as robot motion planning,
optimization in complex non-linear spaces, and modeling and simulation of
complex physics-based systems. In particular, the research will reveal effective
probabilistic search strategies for continuous high-dimensional search spaces.
Analogies with articulated mechanisms will offer insight on how to generate
valid robot configurations in the presence of constraints. On the biophysical
side, the research promises to advance protein modeling and understanding across
diverse applications. The proposed activity involves interdisciplinary
collaborations with computer scientists, biophysicists, and chemists. Findings
and data will be disseminated broadly to enhance scientific understanding across
diverse communities. Specific educational objectives focusing on curriculum
design and outreach activities are formulated to employ the proposed research
for broadening the participation of college and pre-college students, with a
particular emphasis on underrepresented groups.