* 1144302
* Dynamics of the Midlatitude Circulation and Implications for a Changing Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Isaac Held, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2015
* USD 606,252.00

This project studies the dynamical processes responsible two fundamental aspects
of the general circulation of the atmosphere: the central latitude of the
midlatitude jet streams and their accompanying storm tracks and surface
westerlies, and the height and sharpness of the midlatitude tropopause. The work
considers both the climatological mean jet position and tropopause height, and
the changes in position and height that are likely to occur due to the overall
warming of the atmosphere by greenhouse gas increases. Research on the latitude
of the jet streams will consider, among other things, the interaction between
the eddy-driven jets associated with the storm tracks, and the subtropical jets
found on the poleward flanks of the Hadley cells. Research on the tropopause
will consider the importance of atmospheric radiation balance in determing its
height and sharpness, rather than the mixing effect of wavy atmospheric motions
associated with the storm tracks. Jet latitude and tropopause height are closely
associated, as previous research shows that each can influence the other.
Research will be conducted through a hierarchy of atmospheric models, starting
from the simplest possible numerical framework and progressing to comprehensive,
state-of-the-art climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will, if
successful, lead to improved understanding of the climate system and its
response to changes in forcing, and so contribute toward improved predictions of
the societal impacts of increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. The work will
also have broader impacts through the teaching and outreach activities of the
principal investigators. In addition, the project will fund and train a graduate
student, thereby providing for the future scientific workforce in the area of
atmospheric general circulation and climate dynamics.