* 1144936
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Laser Sintering of Nanolayered Carbon Nanotube Paper for Functionally Gradient Ceramic Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Jihua Gou, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 86,000.00

The research objective of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project is to study the processing-structure-property relationship of
functionally gradient nanolayered ceramic nanocomposite coating fabricated
through a new paper making - laser sintering process, and test the hypothesis
that the addition of carbon nanotubes can yield significant enhancement in
mechanical properties of the ceramic coatings. It is a high-risk but high-payoff
project because the new process is radically different from traditional
approaches to make ceramic nanocomposite coating. This project's approach
involves: 1) paper making process to manufacture nanolayered carbon nanotube
paper consisting of both ceramic nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes, 2) laser
sintering of the paper layer by layer to fabricate the functionally gradient
coating, and 3) characterization of microstructures and mechanical properties of
the fabricated nanocomposite coating. In the paper making - laser sintering
process, good dispersion and controlled alignment of carbon nanotubes will be
achieved in a suspension under an electric field. A suitable functionally
gradient multilayered coating can be realized by laser sintering of the paper
layer by layer, with varied and controlled compositions in each layer. The
developed functionally gradient coating can potentially decrease the possibility
of cracks and delamination at the coating-substrate interface significantly.
Specifically, the grant will be used to demonstrate whether the addition of the
carbon nanotubes will result in improved fracture toughness of the
coating.&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a major impact on ceramic
nanocomposite coating through advancing manufacturing science of ceramic
nanocomposite coating and better understanding its structure-property
relationship. The project will have broad potential impacts on aerospace,
automotive, biomedical, and many other areas, where ceramic coatings play a key
role. Some examples include the thermal barrier coatings in gas turbine engines,
and the wear or corrosion resistance coatings needed in numerous medical
implants and mechanical components.