* 1144017
* The Interaction Among Mesoscale Dynamics, Microphysical Properties and Radiative Effects of Mid-latitude Cirrus Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Andreas Muehlbauer, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 546,061.00

Cirrus clouds form under a variety of dynamical and thermodynamical conditions,
and have a profound impact on the radiative energy balance of the Earth. The
radiative properties and the radiative impact of cirrus clouds are inherently
controlled by their microphysical and macrophysical properties. However, the
physical and dynamical mechanisms that govern the formation, microphysical
evolution, and the life cycle of cirrus clouds and influence their mesoscale
variability are not very well understood, which in turn hinders confident
quantification of the radiative impact of cirrus under various conditions. The
primary goal of this research is to significantly improve our understanding of
the linkages between the microphysical and macrophysical properties of mid-
latitude cirrus clouds and the dynamical and thermodynamical properties of the
air masses in which they form. We seek to provide a detailed and process-based
understanding of the links between the large scale and mesoscale dynamical
forcing, the microphysical and macrophysical properties of cirrus clouds and
their radiative properties. The methodology used in this study combines (1)
numerical simulations with a cloud-resolving regional model; with (2) a novel
dynamical state classification technique to cluster cirrus cloud events
according to large scale and mesoscale dynamical forcing; and (3) comparison of
simulated cirrus cloud properties with observations from aircraft and remote
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cloud-resolving regional model simulations
allow for a detailed and process-based investigation of the microphysical and
macrophysical properties of cirrus clouds, as well as provide deeper insight
into the physical and dynamical mechanisms that affect the evolution and life
cycle of cirrus and the mesoscale dynamical feedbacks that are caused by the
presence of cirrus. The atmospheric state classification technique enables us to
statistically link atmospheric dynamical states with the microphysical and
macrophysical characteristics of cirrus clouds, allowing us to draw physically
and statistically based conclusions regarding how cirrus cloud properties are
affected by different large scale and mesoscale dynamical forcings. The results
of the classification are crucial for evaluating and improving cirrus
microphysical parameterizations in a regime dependent approach. Comparison of
model simulations with observations makes use of an unprecedented data set of
new microphysical observations in mid-latitude cirrus
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;Substantially
improved understanding of the microphysical and dynamical controls of cirrus
clouds and a better understanding of how these controls affect the macrophysical
and radiative properties of mid-latitude cirrus will be obtained. This knowledge
will be invaluable for improving microphysical parameterizations and lead to a
more physically based representation of cirrus microphysical, macrophysical, and
radiative properties in numerical models on various scales. The improved
representation of cirrus cloud properties will then help to better quantify the
radiative impact of mid-latitude cirrus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
&lt;br/&gt;Graduate education and training, collaboration with other scientists,
improvement of microphysical parameterization and representation of cirrus
clouds in cloud-resolving regional models, and participation in international
model inter-comparisons are all planned in this work. Newly acquired data sets
and results will be archived and shared with the broader research community. Our
research results will be documented in peer-reviewed publications and
disseminated through our participation in and presentations at national and
international workshops and conferences. In addition we will engage
underrepresented minority students in our research and use elements of the data
analysis in curriculum development for undergraduate and high school students.