* 1144316
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: From Data to Knowledge: The Quake-Catcher Network
* GEO,EAR
* 03/10/2011,09/30/2013
* Monica Kohler, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2013
* USD 88,327.00

The Quake-Catcher Network (QCN) is a transformative approach to earthquake
detection, science, and outreach. The QCN is a distributed computing project
that links internal (no cost, built-in) or external (low cost, USB-based)
accelerometers connected to any participating computer for earthquake
research.&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging an innovative set of cyber-enabled seismic
observations, this approach will enable the creation of a very dense, low-cost
seismic network that can explore earthquake fault rupture in real-time,
establish ground response to seismic wave passage, and quantify the shaking
effects on critical structures. Results from a one-year exploratory grant from
the NSF Cyber-Infrastructure Teaching, Education, Advancement and Mentoring
program indicate QCN has the ability to be a new and transformative type of
network, which is scalable and easy to deploy world-wide. Increasing the number
of QCN sensors from 1,000 to more than 30,000 worldwide and developing efficient
schemes to ingest, process, and distribute Terabytes of data will allow us to
(1) explore fault mechanics (including directionality, slip distribution, and
rupture velocity) at unprecedented resolutions, (2) study ground motions to
assess seismic hazard and building response and (3) analyze data in real time
for earthquake early warning and rapid response. This proposal will result in
network with 6,000 new USB sensors and tens of thousands of no-cost
sensors&lt;br/&gt;commonly built internal to laptops and other devices.
Additionally, QCN will provide the cyberinfrastructure to process and analyze
the large new seismic data sets in near-real time and to foster collaboration
between 1000?s of researchers and interested participants around the world. The
framework&lt;br/&gt;laid by this project will enable rapid expansion of the
network internationally and will allow us to grow the network at a fraction of
the cost of traditional seismic instrumentation and infrastructure, providing
valuable data to augment the existing seismic networks.The success of the Quake-
Catcher Network is intrinsically linked to the broader participation of the
general public; members of the public, schools (K-12, undergraduate and
graduate), and community organizations host QCN sensors. These ?citizen-
scientists? will receive real-time earthquake information, seismic data and
results, and interactive educational materials.