* 1144055
* Collaborative Research:   Forecasting and forestalling tipping points in an aquatic ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Nicholas Gotelli, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 306,482.00

Identifying, forecasting, and managing state changes (also known as thresholds,
tipping points, or regime shifts) are central challenges in many fields.
Preventing stressed ecosystems from collapsing into altered states that do not
provide useful ecosystem services is a major environmental challenge. This
project will identify markers for, and potential means to manage, tipping points
in aquatic ecosystems such as lakes, rivers, and streams. Nutrients will be
added to aquatic microecosystems that form within water-filled leaves of
northern pitcher plants in a series of experiments mimicking nutrient pollution
and resultant ecosystem collapse seen in larger lakes. Critical thresholds,
beyond which intervention cannot stop the breakdown of the system, will be
identified. Quantitative methods will be used to identify protein biomarkers
that can serve as early warning indicators of ecosystem collapse. Protein
biomarkers are hypothesized to be better indicators than traditional ones such
as oxygen levels or algal blooms, which reflect impending state changes too late
to reverse them or after they have already
occurred.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documenting, understanding, forecasting, and
averting state changes is of widespread and immediate importance not only to
ecologists and environmental scientists, but also to economists, social
scientists, policy makers, and environmental managers. Nutrient enrichment from
fertilizers, runoff, and atmospheric deposition can cause lakes, rivers, and
streams to switch to dramatically different, low oxygen states characterized by
algal blooms and fish die-offs. The most significant broader impact of the
proposed research will be to provide empirical tests of regime shifts that will
help to convince the broader public that scientists can detect and manage state
changes. Future applications of this work could lead to the development of
simple water-quality test kits that can forecast ecosystem tipping points early
enough to prevent them. Resources will be devoted to educating K-12 teachers,
undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers through their continuous
involvement in basic ecological research.