* 1144695
* GEOPRISMS Posdoctoral Fellowship: Systematic search and characterization of very low frequency earthquakes and offshore tremor in Cascadia using the Amphibious Array
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Emily Brodsky, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 02/28/2014
* USD 217,916.00

The study will undertake a systematic search for very low frequency earthquakes
(VLFE), along the entire margin of Cascadia subduction zone, from the trench to
the down-dip edge of the transition zone. The sources of VLFEs will be located
and characterized to better understand the physics of fault slip, particularly
at the edges of the locked zone. The study will better characterize the nature
of seismic radiation and their spatiotemporal variability along the fault zone
in the crust. It is also holed that it will improve our understanding of the
full spectrum of the seismic radiation during slow slip episodes, physical
mechanism governing slow earthquakes, and their relationship with regular
seismicity. It may also shed light on the implications of the slow seismic
activities on the nucleation of large damaging earthquakes. The study will form
an early career research project for a new postdoc under the mentorsuip of the
PI.

Broader impacts include support of career development of a new young
investigator. The study will examine the seismicity of a subduction zone that
can potentially produce great damaging earthquakes. It reflects some of the
major goals of the NSF-GeoPRISMS and the Cascadia Initiative, and makes good use
of the Amphibious Array. Results from this study may help in planning focused
interdisciplinary experiments, and guide the selection of target areas for
future research.