* 1144433
* Workshops on Basic Research Needs for Biofuel Production from Photosynthetic Microorganisms; Fall 2011, Washington D.C.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Kenneth Reardon, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 34,994.00

Proposal ID: 1144433 PI: Reardon

The production of biofuels from photosynthetic microorganisms has significant
potential, but also has considerable scientific and technological challenges for
scale up, including water and nutrient use, cost-efficient cultivation and
harvesting, and development of microorganisms that are robust and productive at
process scale. Due the recently revived interest in the potential of algae for
the production of renewable liquid transportation fuels, a variety of research,
development, and demonstration activities are now underway by the private
sector. Although these efforts provide an important stimulus toward the
development of an algal biofuels industry, they largely have short term
commercialization goals. Basic research at the level of the biochemistry,
biophysics, ecology, metabolic engineering, and synthetic biology of these
microorganisms, as well as complimentary bioprocess engineering research, has
the potential to resolve scientific and technological barriers to productivity
and scalability, and hence accelerate the drive to commercialization.
Furthermore, there are parallel research and development activities underway in
several countries around the world, and the facilitation of new collaborations
would enable synergism with respect to both basic and applied research in this
area.

This workshop will identify the current research gaps underlying the scalable
production of biofuels from photosynthetic microorganisms, primarily microalgae
and cyanobacteria, from the perspective of fundamental bioscience and bioprocess
engineering. The workshop will engage 12 scientific experts in topics
fundamental to the use of algae and cyanobacteria for biofuels production. The
complimentary follow-up workshop in Germany with 4 US participants will provide
an international perspective. These workshops will also suggest research
priorities that have the potential to make the greatest impact for advancing the
fundamental science and engineering needed to facilitate the nascent algal
biofuels industry, and nurture the development of future photosynthetic
biorefineries.

Broader Impacts

A report will be submitted to NSF summarizing the conclusions and high priority
research needs for algal and cyanobacterial biofuels. In addition, a manuscript
on these workshop outcomes will be submitted for publication in a research
journal. It is anticipated that new networks and partnerships will arise from
the activities associated with both workshops, many of them multidisciplinary
and some involving teams of German and US researchers. Travel support will be
offered to four junior researchers to benefit their professional development.
Efforts will be made to attract applications for these travel grants from
members of underrepresented groups.