* 1144947
* High aspect ratio, densely populated, pillar arrays for separations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Michael Sepaniak, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Michael Sepaniak at University of Tennessee, Knoxville
and his group will tackle the challenges of creating pillar arrays for chemical
separations (PACS) that function as miniaturized liquid phase separation
systems. An original processing sequence for the fabrication of high aspect
ratio pillars yields mechanically robust systems. Importantly, the
characteristic morphologies in the implemented highly ordered pillar arrays are
scalable to nanometer dimensions. Thus the fluidic structures, operated in
enclosed pressure-driven or open capillary action-driven modes, offer the
potential for substantial improvements in separation efficiency and permeability
over traditional packed and monolithic columns, as well as traditional thin
layer chromatography plates. Porosity and nanoscale morphology in conventional
separation systems is generally random and, therefore, morphological
heterogeneity and related mass transfer issues play a significant role in band
broadening. Conversely, PACS provides an alternative approach to separation
media with precisely controlled nano- and micro-scale architectures. New
insights into the retention mechanisms in nanoscale fluidic systems are
expected. Moreover, advanced lithographic techniques will be used to create for
the first time uniform pillar structures suitable for high performance open
format, 2-D spatial separations.

In addition to the scientific objectives of this proposal, an underpinning goal
is to introduce young researchers to cross-disciplinary science and technology
ranging from microfabrication and nanotechnology, studies of surface properties,
and the development of new instrumental approaches to separations, fluidics, and
ultra low volume detection/imaging. Efforts to recruit minorities and
disseminate research results will be leveraged by prior experience with programs
such as our prior NSF programs and Sepaniak's collaboration with the University
of Puerto Rico. Finally, an outreach educational component is included that
involves summer research experiences for visitors which emphasizes bringing area
high school teacher-student combinations to the UT campus.