* 1144404
* III: EAGER: Aspect-Oriented Data Weaving
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Curtis Dyreson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this research program is to develop a new paradigm for databases,
called aspect-oriented data (AOD). AOD enables cross-cutting data concerns to be
added to a database using aspect-oriented programming. A cross-cutting data
concern is a data need that is universal (potentially applicable to the entire
database) and widespread (can be used to enhance many, different databases).
Data has a wide variety of cross-cutting data concerns, including provenance,
time, lineage, and security. So this research has the potential to impact every
database. The project achieves its goal by conducting the following tasks: 1)
Develop a model for aspect-oriented data in which advice (metadata) can "tag" or
annotate data, 2) Build a data aspect weaver to weave the advice into queries,
constraints, and data modification, 3) Develop advice-specific modules for
common cross-cutting concerns that plug into the data aspect weaver and add
advice-specific behaviors, 4) Demonstrate that aspects themselves can be
aspected to model meta-metadata, and 5) Develop test cases for AOD. The data
aspect weaver is being developed for Pig Latin, which is a cloud-computing
platform for data analysis. The research impacts database management systems,
scientific databases, and digital government. The project supports a Ph.D.
student to pursue research in databases. Publications, technical reports, and
software from this research are disseminated on the project's web site
(http://www.cs.usu.edu/~cdyreson/aspectOrientedData).