* 1144676
* IGERT:  REN@WVU - Research and Education in Nanotoxicology at West Virginia University
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Peter Gannett, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,996,937.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports the interdisciplinary training of Ph.D. students to pursue research and
innovation in the growing and critical field of nanotoxicity. The program, which
is individualized for each student?s personal and career goals, ensures that
scientific understanding of the interaction of nanomaterials with people and the
environment keeps pace with the development of new nanomaterials and their
applications in consumer products.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The promise of
nanomaterials to revolutionize everything from energy efficiency to health
cannot be realized without detailed understanding of the interactions between
these innovative materials, the people who use them, and the environments in
which they are used. This IGERT project, in collaboration with researchers from
the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, facilitates an
interdisciplinary perspective via collaborative research projects that link
physical scientists and engineers with biological/biomedical scientists and
engineers. Research will address nanomaterials already used in consumer
products, those in development for future applications, and developing new
methods for rapid nanotoxicity evaluation. Trainees will acquire entrepreneurial
skills through workshops, internships, and a multidisciplinary team business
plan competition.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Students acquire a broad-based
understanding of the field of nanotoxicity from multiple perspectives: varied
scientific and engineering disciplines; industrial, academic and national
laboratory contexts; and from an international perspective. Participants learn
to work effectively with their counterparts in other scientific and engineering
fields, as well as develop the skills to communicate the nuances of this
important and potentially controversial field to the public and to policy
makers. Special focus is placed on digital communications tools that allow
scientists and engineers to interact directly with the public. &lt;br/&gt;IGERT
is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
establish new models for graduate education and training in a fertile
environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries, and to engage students in understanding the processes by which
research is translated to innovations for societal benefit&lt;br/&gt;