* 1144883
* EAR-PF: Characterizing small changes in the Earth from time-reversed multiply-scattered Rayleigh waves
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Thomas Mikesell, Mikesell                Thomas         D
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Dylan Mikesell has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to develop an integrated research and education plan at the Earth,
Atmospheric and Planetary Science Department at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT). Current passive seismic methods rely heavily on a priori
velocity models to accurately quantify and locate small velocity changes. This
project aims to theoretically extend a 1D acoustic wave method to 2D elastic
waves. We borrow from recent multiple scattering studies, which use incoherent
reflections to locate isolated changes in a 1D medium. These waves are called
incoherent reflections because there is no acoustic impedance contrast between
the isolated change and the background medium. With this approach we eliminate
the need for a priori velocity information. Furthermore, the input data for this
new method borrow from recent seismic noise studies. We will use Green's
functions derived from multi-component seismic noise crosscorrelations. This
approach ensures that we use surface waves, which dominate the seismic noise
field and propagate in 2D rather than 3D.We will test the new method with
laboratory experiments and then monitor a recent eruption at Pavlof Volcano,
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In all fields of Earth science we seek methods to
characterize potential hazards. Detecting geologic changes using seismic waves
is a useful tool for understanding a range of phenomena in the Earth's
subsurface, which in turn help us to better understand hazards themselves.
Seismic waves are sensitive to changes in Earth properties, in particular
seismic wave speed, which is related to more fundamental properties such as
density and stiffness. Over the past decade, methods using multiply scattered
seismic waves (i.e., waves that reflect more than once from subsurface
heterogeneities) have been developed and applied to detect small subsurface
velocity changes. These methods have shown promise for detecting real-time
changes; however, obstacles remain and there is room for improvement. This
project expands upon recent developments that link these multiple-scattering
techniques to time-reversal techniques in order to exploit the ability of the
Earth to re-focus waves, allowing us to locate small subsurface velocity changes
with less reliance on our a priori knowledge of subsurface parameters. This
project has potential applications in monitoring changes in volcanoes over time
(as well as monitoring other heterogeneous materials) and pre- and post-
earthquake changes along active seismic faults. More generally, it has the
potential to impact the fields of nondestructive material testing and medical
imaging. Over the course of the project, Dr. Mikesell will work with MIT's K12
outreach center to develop STEM content focused on seismic hazards. Using local
classrooms and informal learning centers, undergraduate and graduate students
will have the opportunity to deliver this content, thus developing their
communication skills with non-technical audiences.