* 1144866
* CAREER: Computational Analyses of the Interactions between DNA and Chromatin Structure
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Jun Song, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 707,936.00

The University of California - San Francisco is awarded a grant to develop
rigorous mathematical methods for analyzing the recent high-throughput
nucleosome mapping data in yeasts and provide novel computational tools for
studying the relations among DNA sequence, nucleosome stability, and nucleosome
positioning. Eukaryotic DNA has a complicated three-dimensional structure called
chromatin consisting of millions of nucleosomes, the protein-DNA complexes that
contain 146 base pairs of DNA wrapping around eight histones. Nucleosomes play a
critical role in regulating gene expression by controlling the accessibility of
DNA and modulating transcription factor binding activities. Nucleosomes are thus
of paramount importance, but there currently do not exist rigorous computational
tools for studying the biological signals that regulate their positioning and
stability. This research will devlop spectral decomposition methods for
analyzing nucleosomal and linker DNA, including their physical properties
derived from the molecular measurements of DNA flexibility. Dr. Song will apply
a statistical theory for analyzing the maximal frequency spectrum of categorical
time series in order to answer a long-standing question of whether certain
periodic DNA properties preferentially exist in individual nucleosomes.
Furthermore, wrapping DNA around histones introduces superhelical stress, which
we show to be often countered by increased sequence-dependent stabilization of
DNA. The developed computational tools will help unravel new connections between
DNA bendability and stabilization energy and, thus, facilitate the discovery of
novel nucleosome positioning signals at important regulatory sites. We currently
do not understand how chromatin structure is faithfully inherited upon cell
division, and it is likely that the genetic information contained in DNA
sequences may significantly influence the process of epigenetic inheritance.
Better understanding the mathematical and physical properties of DNA will
enhance our understanding of chromatin structure.

This project is uniquely positioned to integrate Dr Song's research in
computational epigenomics with innovative educational programs that will
significantly advance the training of biology students in mathematics and
statistics at UCSF. The project will help improve the infrastructure for
education and research at UCSF by synergizing different graduate groups at UCSF.
The project will support vertical integration of research and education, whereby
the proposed research will constitute an important theme for teaching
epigenetics to quantitative scientists and for teaching mathematics to students
at UCSF. The applicant will continue to teach a new statistics course that he
has recently designed in the Biological and Medical Informatics graduate
program, drawing examples from genomics. Topical mini-courses on high-throughput
sequencing technology and systems biology will be also taught in order to
disseminate the applicant's current research activities and to help prepare
students and postdocs conduct their own research in genomics. Undergraduate
students from other institutions will also have opportunities to participate in
our research through the UC Berkeley Summer Internship Program. Dr Song will
involved local high school students through the Science and Health Education
Partnership (SEP) at UCSF. SEP invites promising seniors from San Francisco's
public high schools and places them under the guidance of UCSF investigators for
8-week-long summer research projects. The project will exemplify the rich
possibility of applying mathematics and statistics to solving biologically
important questions. Computational tools will be implemented into open source
software that will be accessible to other researchers studying chromatin
structure. Further information about the project may be obtained from the PI's
lab website at http://songlab.ucsf.edu/Welcome.html.