* 1144773
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Parallel and non-parallel evolution at multiple levels: environment, selection,  phenotype, and genotype
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Daniel Bolnick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2016
* USD 482,524.00

A fundamental puzzle in evolutionary biology is whether evolution is repeatable:
if many identical starting populations were exposed to the same type of novel
environment, would they all evolve the same adaptations? Would the adaptations
result from changes in the same underlying genes? This research project aims to
answer both questions using a small fish, the threespine stickleback, as a study
subject. The same ocean-dwelling form of stickleback colonized many separate
river basins when the glaciers melted ~12,000 years ago, providing a naturally
occurring experiment to test the repeatability of evolution. The researchers
will measure environmental, morphological, and genetic divergence between
adjacent lake and stream populations of stickleback, from each of 16 watersheds
that represent separate instances of evolved lake-stream differences. They will
then apply state-of-the-art statistical analyses to measure the extent to which
differences between lake and stream types have evolved repeatedly or are unique
to each watershed. Genetic analysis will reveal the extent to which repeated
morphological differences result from evolutionary changes in the same genes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will reveal general principles of how
predictable evolutionary change is, and pioneer relevant statistical methods.
Such principles and methods are vital to anticipating how pests or diseases may
evolve in response to pesticides or drugs, or how species will adapt to climate
change. In addition, the project will pair up leading biological researchers
with high-school biology teachers and pre-service teachers-in-training, giving
K-12 science teachers practical research experience involving fundamental
principles of evolutionary biology.