* 1144763
* EAR-PF: Evaluating the relationship between physical heterogeneity and stable isotope fractionation factors during subsurface reactive transport
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jennifer Druhan, Druhan                  Jennifer       L
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Jennifer Druhan has been awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a combined experimental and modeling study of the
influences of physical heterogeneity on the measurement and analysis of stable
isotope fractionations associated with subsurface reactive transport. While
stable isotopes are commonly used to analyze a wide variety of complex
hydrogeochemical systems, models of fractionation routinely require simplifying
assumptions such as homogeneous, well-mixed reactivity, leading to
misrepresentation of system processes. The experimental aspect of this study
will involve a suite of meso-scale, flow-through column reactors packed with
homogeneous and heterogeneous permeability distributions. The columns will be
designed specifically to allow precise characterization of flow-path
heterogeneity using nuclear medial imaging techniques. The modeling aspect will
involve both inverse parameter estimation methods to obtain heterogeneous
permeability distributions from nuclear medical imaging data, and forward
geochemical reactive transport simulations of fractionation through these
permeability distributions to characterize the relationship between
heterogeneous solute transport and observed fractionation. The goal of the work
is to demonstrate the difference between effective fractionation factors
measured in homogeneous and heterogeneous systems, to show the effects of
hierarchical heterogeneity on these measurements, and to demonstrate the
temporal influence of evolving permeability fields on isotopic ratios. Results
of this work will have direct application to analysis of isotopic datasets in
near-surface environments in studies ranging from drinking water resources to
contaminant remediation to reclaimed water storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
supported research will be carried out at Stanford University in the Department
of Geological and Environmental Sciences. Through the Stanford SURGE program
aspects of the study will be leveraged to support mentorship of undergraduates
in the earth sciences. The study will further serve as a seminal example in the
development of a short course in reactive transport modeling of stable isotope
fractionation.