* 1144454
* Adirondack Thermal History
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* John Valley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2015
* USD 272,273.00

The Adirondack Mountains, New York are an outlier of the Grenville Province that
stretches from Texas to Labrador. This terrain represents the deeply eroded
roots of a vast mountain belt that existed 1200 to 1000 million years ago. Like
the Himalaya today, these mountains were subjected to intense heating and
pressure, followed by erosion, allowing rocks formed deep in the Earth?s crust
to cool and rise to the surface, accounting for the topography, ore deposits,
and recreational potential of the region. This study will apply newly developed
techniques of geochemistry to determine the thermal and fluid history that
formed these rocks.

This study will test the results of a pilot study in a range of rock types and
localities in the Adirondacks. That first study proposed that surprisingly rapid
cooling and uplift occurred in the NW Adirondacks along a major mylonite zone
that extends over 300 km (Carthage-Colton, Bonamici et al. 2011). The new
results will test this model, constrain the peak metamorphic temperatures, and
assess the significance of the concentric ?bulls-eye? pattern of isotherms that
has classically been interpreted to result from domical uplift. Cooling and
uplift rates will be combined with on-going studies of U-Pb geochronology to
test competing theories for uplift of the Adirondack Highlands at the end of the
Ottawan Orogeny (~1050 Ma). This project will develop and apply a new approach
to studies of oxygen isotope thermometry and speedometry in high-grade
metamorphic rocks. Novel capabilities for accurate and precise in situ analysis
of oxygen isotope ratios from small 1-10 &#956;m spots will be employed to
analyze mineral inclusions that are armored by refractory host minerals and to
quantify intracrystalline diffusion gradients that formed during cooling. These
profiles will be modeled with updated code for the Fast Grain Boundary diffusion
model. Samples will be selected primarily from granulite facies rocks. Garnet-
quartz thermometry will be tested in detail across the Adirondacks with a series
of outcrop tests for self-consistency, and other mineral systems will be tested
locally. Garnet + quartz are common in a range of orthogneisses and
metasediments, allowing the same pressure independent thermometer to be applied
across the terrane. Temperatures will be calculated for both quartz inclusions
in garnet, and in quartz surrounded by garnet coronas, and these T?s will be
compared to those from garnets in quartzite, and to other geothermometry. Oxygen
isotope profiles will be measured in single crystals of titanite as well as
garnet, and selected zircons and pyroxenes.