* 1144227
* EAGER: Automated High Speed Object Category Modeling and Model Based Recognition, Segmentation, Clustering, and Classification
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Narendra Ahuja, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 266,276.00

This project explores new directions to solving the following problem. Given an
image, determine whether and where specific objects, or objects from a specific
category, appear in the image. Visual category is defined as earlier, namely, as
a collection of objects which share characteristic features that are visually
similar, and occur in similar configurations. The visual nature of objects
sought is communicated through (training) data containing them, and estimated
using machine learning. The approach consists of two main parts. First, it
learns whether a given set of previously unseen images (including videos), say
supplied by a user, contains any dominant themes, namely, subimages, that occur
frequently and look similar. Second, given a set of categories automatically
inferred during training and a new test image, the approach recognizes all
occurrences in the image of the learned categories. It delineates each such
object in the image, and labels it with its category name. Both learning and
subsequent recognition do not require human supervision. The approach learns and
recognizes categories as image hierarchies. The impact of the project includes
accurate high-speed extraction of image regions, image representation by
connected segmentation tree, robust image matching, unsupervised extraction of
hierarchical category models, efficient recognition of a large number of
categories, unsupervised estimation of perceptually salient, relevance weights
of subcategory detections to category recognition, and generalization of the
proposed approach to extraction of texture elements. More broadly, the proposed
approach is useful for applications in search engines, surveillance, video
analytics, monitoring and data mining.