* 1144034
* EAGER: Learning to Efficiently Rank with Cascades
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jimmy Lin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Text search is undeniably vital to today's information-based societies, helping
users locate relevant information in web pages, journal articles, news stories,
blogs, emails, tweets, and a myriad of other sources. Naturally, users desire
results that are not only good but also fast. Learning to rank, the dominant
approach to information retrieval (IR) today, focuses almost exclusively on
effectiveness, often neglecting the runtime speed (i.e., efficiency) of the
ranking functions. This project contributes to the emerging research area of
learning to efficiently rank, which aims to let algorithm designers capture,
model, and reason about tradeoffs between effectiveness and efficiency in a
unified framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project explores a
novel cascade model for retrieval, where ranking is broken into a finite number
of distinct stages. Each stage considers successively richer and more complex
features, but over successively smaller candidate document sets. The intuition
is that although complex features are more time-consuming to compute, examining
fewer documents offsets the additional overhead. In other words, the cascade
model views retrieval as a multi-stage progressive refinement problem. Based on
the survey of the current state-of-the-art, knowledge, this is the first project
to explore this approach to the ranking problem, marking a substantial departure
from previous "monolithic" ranking functions. Although exploration in this
uncharted area carries some risk, this research promises to open up a new
frontier in IR research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to narrow the
chasm between academic and industrial IR research by bringing together
theoretical IR research and practical considerations in "real-world" search. It
is expected that the cascade model will be of interest to web search engine
companies, thus providing a path from the exploratory research results to
significant impact in production systems. Furthermore, this work dovetails with
the emerging area of green computing: more efficient algorithms use less energy,
hence help reduce the environmental footprint of web-scale services. The project
web site (http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/~jimmylin/projects/) includes more
information about this project and will be used for the release of a prototype
as part of the Ivory open-source retrieval toolkit.