* 1144807
* IGERT:  Interdisciplinary Quantitative Biology Program
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Meredith Betterton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2018
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award will
provide graduate students with the mathematical and computational training
necessary to excel in the collaborative world of quantitative bioscience and
make a positive impact on society through the application of their research.
Quantitative biology is a transformative approach to bioscience and
bioengineering research, which embraces a combination of quantitative skills and
biological insight applied to previously intractable research
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Led by the University of
Colorado Biofrontiers Institute, eight science, engineering and math departments
will collaborate to address the national need for both interdisciplinary and
quantitative training at the graduate level. IQ Biology will create new
infrastructure for interdisciplinary graduate programs by providing a mechanism
to bring trainees directly into interdisciplinary cohorts and remove hurdles for
trainees participating in courses and research that cross departmental and
college boundaries. Additionally, trainees will participate in innovation
training activities through industry internships, non-academic mentors,
symposia, and multidisciplinary team collaborations with faculty and business
school colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This IGERT project will
help define a new approach to graduate education, catalyze institutional change,
foster innovation, encourage global thinking and engage the public in scientific
discovery. IQ Biology will create cohorts of graduate students who have
disciplinary depth and are uniquely qualified to cross academic boundaries
throughout their careers. Building on the University?s commitment to increase
diversity in STEM disciplines, IQ Biology works with CU-Boulder?s successful
programs to recruit and retain students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.