* 1144520
* EAGER:  Programming the Crowd
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Emery Berger, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2015
* USD 180,000.00

People can perform with ease many tasks that remain difficult or impossible for
computers, including vision, motion planning, and natural language
understanding. New "crowdsourcing" platforms like Amazon's Mechanical Turk make
it easier than ever to harness human computational power by streamlining job
posting, tracking, and payment for workers. However, the lack of automation
means that crowdsourcing currently does not scale up. Low quality results must
be filtered out, but checking human computations can be difficult. Economic
incentives and anonymity expose crowdsourcing to fraud. Deciding how much to pay
workers for particular tasks and how many workers to hire remains an art.

This project introduces crowdprogramming, an approach that fully integrates
human and digital computation. In crowdprogramming, humans are modeled as
function calls in a standard programming language. This approach lets
programmers focus on programming logic, while the crowdprogramming runtime
system manages the critical tradeoffs between cost, time, and data quality.
Crowdprogramming will dramatically lower the barriers to harnessing human
computational power. It will enable a rich new class of applications that divide
labor between digital and human computations, where computers and humans do the
work each does best. It will enable complex orchestration of human computations,
automatically control quality to maintain high accuracy and avoid fraud, and
schedule tasks and adjust payments to maximize speed while staying within
budget. By streamlining the incorporation of human labor into computation,
crowdprogramming has the potential to add an entirely new job sector to the
economy.