* 1144511
* Mayapan LiDAR Mapping Project
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Timothy Hare, Morehead State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 179,018.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Timothy Hare, Brad Russell, and
Marilyn Masson, together with American and Mexican colleagues will use cutting-
edge remote sensing technology and archaeological survey in Mexico's northern
Yucatán Peninsula to map the regional context of the political and economic
prehistoric capital of Mayapán. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, along with
earlier studies, will definitively answer numerous important questions asked by
researchers when exploring complex questions about urban structure and regional
integration. Documenting Mayapán's multifaceted urban and regional context will
enable essential anthropological comparisons with contemporary and earlier
Mesoamerican regional capitals, and with ancient states elsewhere in world
history. This will enhance the comparative literature on the complex patterns of
urban and rural settlement structure and administrative organization around
ancient cities. Furthermore, these new data will make Mayapán one of the most
thoroughly investigated cities in Mesoamerica and an important case for the
comparative study of ancient urbanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
continues ongoing research at the last major city of the prehispanic Maya
(1100-1441 AD). Mayapán was ten times larger than any other Postclassic Maya
city and was unique in southeastern Mesoamerica with a highly dense settlement,
tremendously powerful military, and dominance in political, and economic ties.
Previous investigations have focused on the urban center, however, and little is
known about Mayapán's regional context. Previous research explored approximately
a kilometer outside the city's wall. More detailed mapping beyond the walls,
however, must overcome the obstacle of dense surface vegetation throughout the
region that inhibits traditional survey methods and remote sensing technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will reconstruct the city's regional context
by creating a map that reveals the extent and organization of archaeological
features across the region. Debra Rohrer (Geo-Rhea) will direct a drone-deployed
Flash LiDAR camera to map ancient remains through the forest canopy at a level
of precision never previously achieved. The NASA-developed 3D Flash LiDAR camera
allows a 1 cm resolution, which can reveal even subtle architectural features.
This technology will produce a detailed, 100% coverage LiDAR and aerial photo
survey of a 20 square mile area around the city. Field crews will ground-truth a
sample of mapped features to test the accuracy of this new technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues international collaborations with
researchers from the Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia's Merida,
Yucatán office under the direction of Carlos Peraza Lope, who have spent over a
decade excavating monumental structures in the city's center. This ongoing
collaboration provides numerous field and laboratory opportunities for students
and scholars from the United States and Mexico, and is dedicated to sharing its
findings with, and contribute to, local communities. The data generated with
this new technology will be shared with the Maya Area Cultural Heritage
Initiative (MACHI) and local authorities to facilitate long term conservation
and monitoring efforts at the site.