* 1144028
* EAGER -- Virtually Meaningful: The Power and Presence of Meaning in Virtual Worlds
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Robert Geraci, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2014
* USD 105,518.00

This project explores the ways in which massively-multiparticipant online
interactions provide experiences of meaningful accomplishment and how this
engagement may portend the social use of digital technology for mass persuasion
and motivation. Use of distributed network gaming technology has expanded
rapidly in all age and ethnic demographics over the past decade, and current
predictions conclude that growth will continue. As many of these online
engagements and computationally produced virtual worlds explore idealistic
themes or enable experiences of fulfillment, they could powerfully reshape the
mores of modern life , especially given that it is the experiences made possible
which account for much of their appeal. The principal investigator and four
undergraduate students will examine a variety of such virtual worlds for the
significant themes within them, such as the conflict between good and evil, a
system of principles and adherents, development of personal meaning or character
development, and individual identity expressed in heroic terms. All researchers
will conduct fieldwork, interviewing users within the virtual worlds, and
surveys will be conducted online for the residents of one or more virtual
worlds. While shedding light upon the appropriation and modification of such
experiences in virtual worlds, the project will also help clarify the ways in
which cultural beliefs interact with technological development and, more
importantly, the influence of technology on the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will be disseminated through
several publication efforts. The principal investigator will mentor the students
through the authorship of academic papers, which they will submit for
presentation or publication. The students will thereby learn to carry out long-
term research projects and develop their insights for an academic audience. An
additional paper co-authored with the students will assess all of the findings
and draw broad-based conclusions from the comparisons. The various publications
will help the project reshape public and academic understandings of how digital
technologies operate in public life, especially in their reconfiguration of
ideas and practices.