* 1144423
* IGERT: Adaptation to Abrupt Climate Change (A2C2)
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Paul Mayewski, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,929,087.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
facilitates the interdisciplinary training of Ph.D. natural and social
scientists in adaptation to abrupt climate change, one of the greatest
challenges to the sustainability of human society and ecosystem services in the
21st century.

Intellectual Merit: This program meets the challenge of abrupt climate change by
training students to conduct collaborative, interdisciplinary research across
the natural and social sciences, and to develop innovative policy and management
solutions from their research that fosters resilience and adaptation in response
to abrupt climate change. Research themes focus on three major challenges that
society faces with abrupt climate change: threats to global security, reductions
in ecosystem services, and adaptation in social systems. Novel training elements
of this program include a collaborative interdisciplinary research project, and
a policy and management internship with organizations that span international,
federal and state agencies, as well as the private sector.

Broader Impacts: The risks of abrupt climate change are globally pervasive and
include increased numbers of environmental refugees and political conflicts over
resources. Determining how to anticipate, avoid, and manage abrupt climate
change was recently identified as one of the five grand challenges to global
sustainability. This IGERT award trains the next generation of scientists to
meet these environmental and social challenges. To promote future recruitment of
a diverse science workforce, all IGERT trainees will conduct outreach activities
with K-12 students from underrepresented groups. The program also fosters a
strong international perspective through research collaborations as well as
internship experiences abroad.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
establish new models for graduate education and training in a fertile
environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries, and to engage students in understanding the processes by which
research is translated to innovations for societal benefit.

