* 1144162
* Collaborative research- Evolution of living and fossil green lacewings (Chrysopidae): phylogenetics, informatics and a universal ontology for Neuroptera
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Michael Engel, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* ashley dowling
* 12/31/2017
* USD 312,644.00

This project will investigate the phylogeny of green lacewings (Family
Chrysopidae) using DNA sequences combined with external characteristics for all
types of living and fossil species. Although there are a number of widespread,
common species, the family includes at least 1200 species, many of which are
poorly known and still undescribed and we lack a clear understanding of
evolutionary patterns and processes in the group. The phylogeny will be used to
explore how chrysopids evolved trash-carrying in larvae and how adults use
chemicals from flowers and insect prey to attract mates. A vocabulary of
descriptive morphological terms for lacewings will be defined, with terms
related to each other and to those used for other insects, so that they have
universal meaning when related back to gene expression. This effort will deliver
products such as web-based identification tools and a monograph on world
genera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Green lacewings are used widely throughout the
world in Integrative Pest Management in both field and horticultural cropping
systems as generalist predators. Thus, the phylogenetic results from this
project may lead to the discovery of new species that may also be of economic
importance in agriculture. The findings will also enable greater understanding
of lacewing evolution, including how and when certain behaviors and biology
appeared. The project will contribute to the broader goal of developing a Common
Arthropod Ontology, linking phenotype (i.e. appearance) to genotype (i.e.
genetics) in all insect-like organisms. This project will also provide training
for two community college interns, a PhD student, and a postdoctoral researcher.