* 1144611
* EAGER: Microfabricated non-linear fractal architectures for propagation and differentiation of human neural progenitors
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Raj Rao, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2015
* USD 110,558.00

1144611/ Yadavalli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award funded by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Division of NSF seeks to develop
novel bio-inspired microfabricated networks as platforms for stem cell growth
and differentiation. Challenges in the development of successful stem cell
therapies involve engineering and control of stem cell cues to regulate the
balance between differentiation and self-renewal. Equally critical is the void
that exists in the knowledge base on the cues that guide self-renewal and
differentiation during early human development. The study of neural network
formation involves the ability to control the spatial positioning and
connectivity of neuronal cells and progenitors. However, this has been
particularly challenging on account of complexity of architecture and function.
A first step in designing such networks is to provide topological and signaling
cues for the growing cells to form functional connections. In the context of
these engineering considerations, the researchers play to mimick early neuronal
development via the establishment of a biomimetic framework along which neural
progenitors can organize themselves into oriented constructs as nerves. They
hypothesize that microfabricated non-linear fractal architectures will promote a
relaxed self-supportive niche that will promote cellular fate related to
propagation of human neural progenitors (hNPs) and directed differentiation
towards neurons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal
comes from going beyond existing research paradigms that focus on simplistic
geometric designs for the spatial organization of cells on substrates. By
mimicking a biological network that allows for spreading of the cells instead of
confining them in a groove or a well, a nonlinear configuration can promote a
relaxed, self-supportive stem cell niche. By the tailoring of non-homogeneous
adhesion sites via the geometry and the compliance and roughness of the
substrate, the PIs believe they will enable a versatile microenvironment that
promotes neural progenitor propagation and neuronal differentiation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader research impact stems from the integration of
biomimetics, microfabrication and stem cell biology which will make key
transformative contributions in applied tissue engineering as well as
understanding fundamental neuronal development. The proposed research will lead
to synthesizing novel, biomimetic, cell culture platforms for the precise
control of cell growth and spacing and yield new insights into the mechanisms
determining the organizational features and signaling cues in neural
architectures and will contribute to tissue engineering for nerve repair.. The
broader educational impact is the enormous potential for communicating research
findings to a wider audience and for students and the general public to get
excited about the latest interdisciplinary approaches in nanotechnology and stem
cell research. This will be achieved via integration of research material into
course content taught by the PIs - ENGR 591-Concepts in Nanobiotechnology and
CLSE 561 Stem Cell Engineering. The PIs will also be engaged in summer courses
and other outreach programs at VCU and will develop presentation and laboratory
modules that will benefit high school students, undergraduate students and the
general public.