* 1144346
* EAR-PF: Seismological Investigations of Volcanic Eruptive Plumes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Ashley Shuler, Shuler                  Ashley         E
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2013
* USD 85,000.00

Dr. Ashley E. Shuler has been awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education program at the University of
California Santa Cruz. The project will explore the possibility of using
seismology as remote sensing tool to estimate height of volcanic ash columns, by
evaluating assumptions in the Prejean and Brodsky [2011] method, that relates
seismic waves to maximum heights of ash columns. Dr. Shuler will investigate the
source process(es) of co-eruptive seismic tremor and distinguish which eruptive
processes are well-coupled to the ground and measurable using seismic waves.
This study will determine whether 1 Hz seismic data can reliably be used to
estimate plume heights for a variety of different eruption types. Seismology
will also be used to calculate a previously unmeasurable quantity - the spectrum
of flow velocities inside large-scale eruptive plumes. These results will
constrain the turbulence structure of eruption columns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results from this investigation may have direct applicability to mitigating
hazards posed to the aviation industry by explosive volcanic eruptions. The use
of 1 Hz data has the potential to revolutionize the use of commonly deployed
seismic instruments and enable near real-time monitoring of remote volcanoes.
This study will provide a multidisciplinary, collaborative education for the
post-doctoral fellow and two undergraduate students linked to both the academic
and volcano monitoring communities. An integral component of the proposed work
is public education and outreach at Alaska Volcano Observatory, an institutional
partner for this project.