* 1144885
* IGERT:  Systems Approach to Green Energy (SAGE)
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* John Arnold, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,999,501.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award will
enable sustainable innovations in solar energy, biofuel, and energy storage
systems by incorporating green chemistry principles into the research and
development process. Sustainable solutions to our nation?s energy needs must
consider the environmental, health and social impacts of new energy generation
and storage. This award facilitates cross training of the next generation of
scientists and engineers in the diverse disciplines necessary for the design of
clean energy technologies.

Intellectual Merit: The development of energy technologies that simultaneously
minimize environmental and health impacts will draw on the combined expertise of
students and faculty in chemical sciences, engineering, environmental health,
public policy, and business. Researchers in these areas will interact closely to
reduce the use of toxic materials and maximize the environmental and social
benefits of new technologies throughout their lifecycle.

Broader Impacts: This program will inform the national and global priorities,
policies, and investments needed to develop a green energy future that maximizes
the net environmental benefits of new technologies. Its interdisciplinary
structure has the potential to create a wholly new intellectual space that is
shared by investigators from the physical, social, and life sciences. Broadening
participation activities include a suite of specific programs to increase the
recruitment of underrepresented students and create K-12 education
opportunities. This program aims to be a model for training the next generation
of scientists, engineers, toxicologists, policy-makers, and business leaders to
shape this country's clean energy economy.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
establish new models for graduate education and training in a fertile
environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries, and to engage students in understanding the processes by which
research is translated to innovations for societal benefit.