* 1144323
* Direct Numerical Simulation of Fully Resolved Vaporizing  Droplets in a Turbulent Flow
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Said Elghobashi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2016
* USD 8,500.00

This award facilitates scientific research using the large new computational
resource named Blue Waters scheduled to be deployed at the University of
Illinois in 2012. It provides travel funds to support technical coordination
between the principal investigators, the Blue Waters project team and vendor
technical team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed numerical
study is to enhance the understanding of liquid droplet vaporization and mixing
processes in a turbulent flow. The numerical study employs direct numerical
simulations (DNS) to examine the two-way interactions between freely-moving
vaporizing droplets and isotropic turbulence. The droplets will be fully
resolved in 3D space and time, i.e. not treated as point particles, and all the
scales of the turbulent motion are resolved down to the smallest relevant
length- and time-scales (the Kolmogorov scales). The emphasis will be on the
two-way exchange of mass, momentum and energy between the vaporizing droplets
and the surrounding turbulent gas. The turbulence will be assumed isotropic as a
first step before considering turbulent shear flows in future
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed study will potentially
impact efficient utilization of energy. This impact stems from the fact that the
vaporization rate is the main controlling mechanism of fuel droplet combustion
and that liquid fuels are the most important source of energy for all modes of
transportation and will remain as such for the foreseeable future. Understanding
the physical details of the vaporization and mixing processes in a turbulent
flow is an essential prerequisite to understanding the chemical reaction process
and the eventual control/optimization of the energy conversion process. The PI
has a record of accomplishment in the field of study and in combining research
and teaching, including outreach to undergraduate students and underrepresented
students in the sciences.