* 1144647
* Conference: "Thermophiles 2011"; to be held in Big Sky, Montana, September 11-16, 2011
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,500.00

The Thermal Biology Institute at Montana State University will host Thermophiles
2011 at the Huntley Lodge in Big Sky, Montana, September 11-16, 2011. The
objectives of the meeting are to: 1) bring together all active members of the
community of scientists, technologists and educators that study thermophiles to
share and review discoveries and progress in thermophilic research across
disciplines and applications; 2) provide a forum for young investigators to be
introduced to peers and senior scientists from academia, national labs and
private industry; 3) expedite opportunities for collaboration across disciplines
and applications; 4) host the conference in the United States for the first time
in fifteen years. This gathering of researchers who conduct basic and applied
research on thermophiles is needed to foster interactions that will be fruitful
in future scientific discoveries. Thermophiles 2011 will highlight recent
advances and new discoveries in thermopile metabolism which is greatly expanding
our knowledge of microbial activities and diversity on earth. The proposed
meeting topics include: Genomics and Metagenomics, Evolution and Origin of Life,
Applied Science of Thermophiles, Diversity and Ecology, Genetic Mechanisms and
Tools, Environmental Adaptations, Physiology and Metabolism, Mobile Genetic
Elements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The international and local
organizing committees have been deliberate in their efforts to broaden
participation in Thermophiles 2011. Attention has been given to inviting women,
underrepresented minorities, early career investigators and PhD students to
participate in the Conference.