* 1144843
* IGERT:  Global Traineeship in Sustainable Electronics
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Melissa Reeves, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 3,249,979.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
establishes a new integrative model for graduate research and education to
enable meaningful and measurable improvements in the global sustainability of
electronic products. Through a partnership between Purdue University and
Tuskegee University the Sustainable Electronics-IGERT will be carried out in
close collaboration with the global electronics industry and academic partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The IGERT will focus on establishing
the scientific foundation for a new model of consumption for electronics that
avoids the traditional design-manufacture-use-dispose approach: faculty and
student expertise from business, social sciences, and materials, product, and
process engineering will come together to re-envision the electronics
consumption paradigm, while maintaining a focus on simultaneously benefiting
people, planet, and profit. Research themes addressed by this IGERT are 1)
polymers from nature for fabricating electronics; 2) product design and
manufacturing approaches with a reduced environmental footprint; and 3) system,
supply chain, corporate and consumer behaviors, and the role of regulatory
frameworks. Trainees will develop depth in their disciplines as well as breadth
in the context of sustainable electronics, enabling them to become innovators
and change leaders in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This IGERT
project will develop new cross-disciplinary graduate courses to form a core
sustainable electronics curriculum, establish an interactive, international,
team-based community to break-down barriers to solving problems that limit
sustainability, and ensure that each trainee has an integrative international
experience with industry or academic partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an
NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
establish new models for graduate education and training in a fertile
environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries, and to engage students in understanding the processes by which
research is translated to innovations for societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;