* 1144860
* IGERT:  Big Data Social Science - An Integrative Education and Research Program in Social Data Analytics
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Melissa Hardy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,999,713.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award draws
together a diverse interdisciplinary team of researchers to create a new
training program in Social Data Analytics, aimed at producing a new type of
scientist capable of meeting emerging big data challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In response to massive new sources of
data, "data science" and "analytics" are emerging as new fields of inquiry,
merging statistics, computer science, and visualization. The greatest challenges
and opportunities arise from socially-generated big data, observed as a result
of human interactions that are increasingly recorded via web, mobile device, and
distributed sensors, or revealed through digitization of historical records.
Society faces a transformative data deluge, from which new scientific, economic,
and social value can be extracted. The BDSS-IGERT project includes a new
curriculum, training in advanced technologies of data science and analytics, a
series of research rotations ? in both academic and nonacademic settings ? and a
challenge mechanism, under which interdisciplinary teams compete to innovate
solutions to real social data analytics problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: A recent report estimated that big data contain unexploited economic
value over $1 trillion annually, but that 165,000 positions in "deep analytics"
will need to be filled. Government statistics agencies need to produce useful
statistical products, at lower cost, while protecting confidentiality. Big data
technologies like crisis mapping present opportunities to address grand social
challenges. Further, the BDSS-IGERT project expands the participation of
underrepresented groups in data science, by combining an exciting new field with
a focus on diversity as a research theme. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-
wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists
and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to establish new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage
students in understanding the processes by which research is translated to
innovations for societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;