* 1144534
* Collaborative Research:  Rifting, Magmatism, and Lithospheric Sutures;  Crustal Imaging of the South Georgia Basin and Suwanee Suture
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Donna Shillington, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2018
* USD 534,051.00

The rocks beneath the coastal plain of Georgia were at the center of the most
fundamental tectonic events to shape eastern North America: continental
collision around 290 million years ago to form the super continent of Pangea;
continental breakup leading to the formation of the Atlantic Ocean beginning
around 230 million years ago; and one of the biggest magmatic events in Earth's
history around 200 million years ago, the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province. A
record of these events and possible relationships between them is preserved by
structures in the crust of southern Georgia, including a suture between two
different types of continent, the largest failed rift basin along the east coast
of North America and igneous rocks from the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province.
These investigators and a large team of graduate and undergraduate students are
collecting seismic data that can be used to image structures in the crust to
understand these tectonic events. Hundreds of geophones are being deployed along
two ~300-km-long profiles across the suture and the basin, which record sound
waves generated by a series of explosive charges spaced ~20 km apart. Geophones
are also being deployed in a box focused on the basin to record explosive
charges arranged in a grid. The speed that sound waves travel through rocks
varies with composition, porosity, and other rock characteristics. The
investigators are using travel-time tomography to create velocity models that
reveal the distribution of igneous rocks, variations in the thickness of the
crust and variations in crustal composition. Besides a better understanding of
fundamental tectonic processes, other benefits of this program include training
and education of students, and characterization of basins and igneous rocks that
might be good targets for carbon sequestration.