* 1144399
* IGERT:  Language plasticity - Genes, Brain, Cognition and Computation
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Kenneth Pugh, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
establishes a unique interdisciplinary training program that prepares Ph.D.
scientists from cognitive (linguistics, psychology, communication disorders) and
biological fields (molecular genetics, behavior genetics, neuroscience) to
achieve a unified cognitive-biological understanding of human language
development. Innovations from this approach will address societal challenges in
education, technology, and health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A
full understanding of human language ? including genetic, neural, cognitive and
environmental influences that shape language development and recovery from brain
injury ? requires linking a vast array of biological and cognitive sciences.
Conventional approaches to graduate training produce cognitive and biological
language scientists with little technical overlap ? a barrier to communication.
Trainees will develop expertise in their home domains and rigorous
interdisciplinary training, providing broad and deep knowledge of theories and
methods of other domains to communicate, collaborate and innovate in
multidisciplinary teams. The training program uses a team-based model, in an
environment designed to foster creativity and innovation ? along with integrated
coursework and training in how to translate that research to educational,
technological, and health applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This IGERT award will prepare a new generation of leaders to conduct (and train
others to conduct) the team-based basic and applied research needed to achieve a
unified biological-cognitive science of language. Key components include:
training to communicate with educators, policy makers and the public in
innovative ways that address societal challenges in technology and education;
comprehensive efforts to increase participation among historically
underrepresented groups in science; and preparing trainees for the increasingly
international scientific community through on-site and internet-based
opportunities to connect with leading cognitive and biological centers of
language research around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to establish new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage
students in understanding the processes by which research is translated to
innovations for societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;