* 1144215
* RUI: Mechanisms of Emergent Swarm Behavior:  Simulation Models vs. Whirligig Experiments.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* William Romey, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 02/29/2016
* USD 290,000.00

Birds, fish, insects, and humans join groups to avoid predators, gather food,
and move long distances. The movement rules of these individuals are remarkably
similar between species, as are the emergent group patterns. Two principle
questions about emergent patterns will be addressed by this project: 1) how do
individual differences (size, gender, leadership) influence a group's speed and
turning?, and 2) how do groups interact with solid structures? Techniques to
answer these questions include: controlled behavioral studies of marked insect
groups; studies mixing real and robotic insects; and mathematical simulation
models. Projected results include understanding how: 1) panic responses can
spread through a crowd based on motions of only several individuals, and 2)
leadership, diversity, and the shape of an exit influences escape rates of
panicked groups. Other applied outcomes from the research may include the
modeling and control of: geese flocks near airports, humans leaving buildings,
military robots, and migrating groups of cancer cells. Tools developed during
the research, such as the group simulation model, robotic insects, and automatic
tracking system, will be detailed in primary literature articles and/or made
available on the internet. As well as the primary knowledge resulting from this
cutting-edge interdisciplinary work, the project will train and support nine
undergraduate students, preparing them to enter graduate school and become the
next generation of scientists ready to decipher the behaviors of animal groups
moving through our world.