* 1144752
* IGERT: Novel ecosystems, rapid change, and no-analog conditions: the future of biodiversity conservation in human-dominated landscapes
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Anthony Ives, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,999,589.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
trains the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists to design
biodiversity conservation strategies in the face of novel environments, and
develops an integrative program of experiential learning, engaged scholarship,
and problem-focused research on biodiversity
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Humans are now the
dominant biogeographic, evolutionary, and climatic force on Earth. As we change
the environment ever more rapidly, new climate conditions are emerging that have
no historical analogs, novel ecosystems are flourishing, and people are creating
new land use patterns and demographic, economic, and political realities. This
program will support a community of practice in which social scientists,
climatologists, ecologists, computer scientists, geneticists, economists,
statisticians, remote sensing specialists and others collaborate in
interdisciplinary teams to find solutions for future biodiversity conservation
in novel environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This IGERT award
advances discovery and understanding by integrating research and experiential
learning, and by establishing and strengthening collaborations among disciplines
within UW-Madison, and with partners in government, conservation organizations,
and abroad. A participatory research approach will ensure broad dissemination of
findings, thereby enhancing scientific understanding and social benefits. A
suite of new graduate seminars will train students in collaborating, and in
communicating with broader audiences, and in integrating research and education.
Continuing feedback from agencies and communities will ensure that results are
relevant for policy formulation at both state and national levels, and program
elements have been designed to engage students from underrepresented groups in
partnership with existing on- and off-campus
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;