* 1144884
* Solar Wind-Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling During Northward Interplanetary Magnetic Field: How do Transpolar Arcs Affect the Global Ionospheric Electrodynamics and vice versa?
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Judy Cumnock, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 05/31/2013
* USD 63,787.00

This project will study the influence of solar wind conditions on isolated high-
latitude transpolar arcs (also known as theta aurora) and determine the local
and global plasma flows in the ionosphere associated with the arcs. The project
will examine the electrodynamic characteristics of the transpolar arcs and
relate them to the corresponding A total of 87 events where Defense
Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F13 satellite has measured precipitating
charged particles associated with transpolar arcs. The satellite measurements
will be used to determine: (1) the spatial extent of the precipitating particle
regions, (2) the electrostatic potential distribution, (3) the cross-track
(sunward/antisunward) horizontal ionospheric plasma flow, (4) precipitating ion
and electron average energies and fluxes, and (5) field-aligned currents. In
addition to the satellite measurements, data from the Super dual Auroral Radar
Network (SuperDARN) will be used to determine the details of the ionospheric
convection pattern associated with the transpolar arcs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the energy coupling between the
solar wind, Earth's magnetosphere, and the ionosphere during periods when the
interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) is pointing northward. During northward IMF,
auroral arcs often form and divide the polar cap into two apparently separate
regions. The project seeks to understand the nature of the electromagnetic
coupling of the different regions and how they evolve.