* 1144500
* Geochronology using Nucleogenic Neon
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Kenneth Farley, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2015
* USD 302,657.00

This project will support the development of a new method for determining the
formation ages of minerals, especially those that cannot currently be dated with
existing techniques. The method is based on the ingrowth of a rare isotope of
neon - 21Ne - from the decay of uranium and thorium. This technique should be
especially useful for dating of iron oxide minerals such as hematite and
magnetite, and will likely be applicable to understanding the timing and origin
of economically significant ore deposits produced by both sedimentary and
hydrothermal processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several important aspects of this
dating system will be investigated. First, a set of experiments will be
performed to determine the nuclear cross sections for the reaction
18O(&amp;#945;, n) 21Ne, which produces the daughter isotope. These experiments
will involve implantation of a known dose of &amp;#945; particles of known
energies into various target materials, followed by direct measurement of the
21Ne produced by isotope dilution mass spectrometry. Additional experiments will
caharcterize the diffusivity of neon in likely minerals to be dated, which will
establish under what temperature conditions neon retention is to be expected.
Such data are necessary for accurate interpretation of the measured ages. A
final set of experiments will be designed to identify the typical levels of
uranium and thorium, as well as non-radiogenic neon, in minerals of interest for
dating. These data will provide insight to what types of minerals are promising
targets for the dating method.