* 1144771
* Developing a comprehensive model of subduction and continental accretion at Cascadia
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Yang Shen, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2015
* USD 206,576.00

Cascadia is a prime site to understand subduction dynamics and continental
accretion, because it has one of the youngest subducting slabs in the world and
a wide range of tectonic units. A variety of scientific questions can be
addressed at Cascadia: What controls the subduction zone segmentation? What is
the role of water transport in the subduction zone? Where does melting occur and
how does magma migrate in the mantle and crust? And how does oceanic lithosphere
accrete to the continent? Paleoseismic records show that Cascadia has a history
of generating ~M9 megathrust earthquakes, so research is needed to improve the
assessment of seismic and tsunami hazards from megathrust
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops and implements an
advanced seismological method to construct a comprehensive, high-resolution
velocity model of the crust and upper mantle for the entire Cascadia subduction
zone. The velocity model provides a detailed structural framework and new
understanding of the subduction processes. The structural correlations of a
well-resolved model help address whether serpentinization of the forearc mantle
varies substantially along strike and how it is related to the subduction of
sediments, pre-existing features on the slab, and melt production beneath the
volcanic arc. The project tests whether the recurrence of episodic tremor and
slow slip events is related to properties of the overriding plate or the
subducting oceanic plate. The new crustal model helps in understanding how
accretion of oceanic lithosphere contributes to continental growth and
subduction evolution. Accurate and high-resolution characterization of the crust
and upper mantle structure is also critical to refining seismic and tsunami
hazard assessment in Cascadia.