* 1144353
* MARGINS: Collaborative Research: Illuminating the Architecture of the Greater Mount St. Helens Magmatic System from Slab to Surface
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2019
* Paul Bedrosian, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2019
* USD 469,204.00

To better understand volcanic activity, it is fundamental to get an accurate
representation of magma generation zones and storage regions in the Earth?s
crust and upper mantle. Illuminating the architecture of the plumbing system
beneath volcanoes will allow scientists to determine (1) at which depths and
conditions magmas are generated, and (2) the shapes and sizes of pathways and
reservoirs along which magma travels towards the surface. Such knowledge will
allow scientists to make more informed predictions on the durations of volcanic
crises and on the total volume of erupted material during eruptive episodes.

This project focuses on the Mount St. Helens volcanic edifice, (WA, USA), whose
explosive eruption in 1980 attracted world?s attention, and was the first
volcano to be thoroughly monitored with modern instruments. Mount St. Helens
provides an ideal setting to apply state-of-the-art geophysical and geochemical
techniques to image its subterranean roots: It is active, easily accessible, and
has a well recorded past history. The project will use several different methods
(active and passive source seismic tomography and scattered wave imaging,
magnetotelluric imaging, petrology and geochemistry), involving a large
collaborative team, to image the volcano?s plumbing system with unprecedented
resolution from the subducting plate to the surface. The results will be
informative for many other volcanoes around the world, particularly those
located along the infamous Pacific Ring of Fire.