* 1144503
* EAR-PF: Earthquake triggering throughout the seismic cycle: a unified laboratory and seismological study
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Nicholas vanderElst, vanderElst              Nicholas
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Nicholas van der Elst has been awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral
Fellowship, to be carried out at Columbia University, to study the physics of
earthquake nucleation and triggering. This study will combine observational
seismology and laboratory experiments to link earthquake triggering
susceptibility to the stress state on the fault. Small earthquakes are commonly
initiated by the seismic waves from distant large earthquakes, in what is called
remote triggering. Susceptibility to remote triggering varies regionally, and
may increase as stresses build throughout the seismic cycle. The purpose of this
study is to identify the local conditions that make a fault susceptible to
triggering, and to determine whether triggering susceptibility can be used as an
indicator of a critical stress state on the fault. The observational component
of this study will use seismic waveforms to identify triggered earthquakes near
known active faults. This component will capitalize on the recent occurrence of
large earthquakes in well-instrumented regions (e.g. off Tohoku, Japan), where
we now know that faults were near the end of the seismic cycle. In the
laboratory component, simulated gouge-filled faults will be subjected to seismic
waves, and acoustic sensors will monitor for changes in triggering
susceptibility throughout the stick-slip cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
addresses a major current challenge in the field of earthquake forecasting: how
to take the elastic earthquake cycle into account in producing time-varying
rupture probabilities. The results will be of use to government agencies tasked
with identifying seismic hazard as well as to industries concerned with managing
seismic risk. This project will create opportunities to train undergraduate
students in digital seismogram processing and experimental rock mechanics.