* 1144646
* IGERT:  Bioinnovation through the development of novel biological delivery technologies
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,01/31/2021
* John Clements, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* John Weishampel
* 01/31/2021
* USD 2,999,154.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
creates an interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in bio-innovation that will cultivate
trainees? abilities to develop clinically relevant biomedical technologies and
devices leading to commercial products. This program couples research with
entrepreneurship to develop graduates who can lead the creation of innovative
and cost-effective solutions to complex biomedical
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Trainees will complete a bio-
innovation curriculum that includes courses in entrepreneurship, marketing and
intellectual property, and an FDA internship where they will learn device
regulation and establish non-academic research collaborations. Business plans
will be developed with colleagues in Tulane?s schools of Business, Law and
Medicine. Research projects will center on drug delivery with application in
regenerative medicine, biosensors or therapeutic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project will provide
exceptional opportunities to a wide variety of students. IGERT trainees will
learn first-hand about entrepreneurship, intellectual property and regulation.
Teamwork interactions will educate non-scientists about transformational
research approaches. Historically underrepresented groups will be recruited
through established relationships with diversity programs at Tulane University
and through direct ties to SACNAS and Xavier University. Finally, the
development of new technologies and devices will expand economic development and
reinforce the burgeoning biomedical industry of the New Orleans
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;