* 1144054
* EAGER: What is the Economic Impact of NSF-Funded Research?  Connecting the Dots Between Scientific Discovery and Entrepreneurship
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jonathon Cummings, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 284,402.00

Broadly defined, entrepreneurship is the discovery, evaluation, and exploitation
of profitable opportunities. In the context of NSF-funded science and
engineering research, entrepreneurship can range from a graduate student
starting a new company based on knowledge gained through an NSF-funded graduate
research fellowship program to researchers licensing a new technology developed
through an NSF-funded center. This project focuses on identifying examples of
entrepreneurship in NSF-funded science and engineering research, which will help
better document the economic impact of NSF-funded research (e.g., new companies
started, technology licensed) as well as better understand the conditions under
which scientific discovery results in entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;This project
will survey the landscape of entrepreneurial activities engaged in by NSF-funded
research projects (year 1) and conduct qualitative interviews with a
representative sample of these projects (year 2). The research aims to broaden,
beyond patents, the ways in which the economic impact of NSF-funded research is
measured. These measures include new companies that are started based on the
research, hardware and software developed during the research that are
incorporated into commercial products, and technology originating from the
research that is licensed to a company. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to furthering the
scientific understanding of entrepreneurship, a potentially transformative
outcome of this research is discovering ways that NSF could better support
entrepreneurship, thus increasing the potential for economic impact from science
and engineering research. Furthermore, identifying practices that successful
investigators use could boost entrepreneurship among researchers in an
increasingly knowledge-intensive economy, as the US looks for new ways to foster
start-up companies and create jobs.