* 1144910
* EAR-PF An Automated Search for Deep Tremor and its Relationship to the Seismic Cycle in Southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Justin Brown, Brown                   Justin         R
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Justin Brown has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral fellowship
to carry out a research and education plan at California Institute of
Technology. This project aims to improve our understanding of the earthquake
cycle by applying newly developed, high resolution methods. Recent analyses of
continuous seismic waveform data allowed seismologists to discover a new class
of seismic signals on faults that host large subduction earthquakes named non-
volcanic tremors. This newly identified signal has been shown to comprise
repeating low-frequency earthquakes that occur in both temporal and spatial
patterns throughout the seismic cycle. In addition, recent studies have shown
that non-volcanic tremor can be triggered by surface waves of large earthquakes
at remote distances. Previous investigations have identified tremor in limited
regions in southern California, but a comprehensive effort to detect and catalog
non-volcanic tremor in southern California has not yet been done. This project
will utilize waveform cross-correlation techniques to characterize non-volcanic
tremor in southern California in context of the seismic cycle. Dr. Brown will
search systematically for tremor and determine the recurrence intervals of low
frequency earthquakes. Investigations and central cataloging of tremor in
southern California will provide new insights into the nature of seismogenic
faults and earthquake source physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also
includes a middle school Earth sciences outreach program. The program has three
goals: 1) To introduce young students from underrepresented minorities to the
Earth sciences; 2) To help prepare young people for natural disasters in their
communities; and 3) To expose students to cutting-edge research regardless of
their background. This program will take place over the course of two years and
will include monthly field trips, outdoor activities and community-based service
projects led by students themselves.