* 1144888
* Is carbon biosequestration by plants feasible? Revealing the source of carbon embedded in phytoliths by using isotope analyses (Gamma-13C and 14C measurements) and nanoparticles
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Guaciara dos Santos, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2017
* USD 431,439.00

Plants absorb the chemical element silicon from soil through their roots and
transport it into their aboveground parts. The deposit of silicon results in
minute structures inside the plant known as phytoliths. During phytolith
formation, small amounts of carbon and other elements can also become trapped
and in the process become physically protected after the plant dies and
undergoes decomposition. Since photosynthesis is the main way that plants
acquire carbon to make their own food, it has been assumed that phytolith carbon
only comes from the air and that the properties of carbon trapped in phytoliths
should reflect those of the atmosphere at the time the plant was growing and
fixing carbon into its leaves. In fact, building up phytolith-protected carbon
in soils was recently considered as a possible way for removing some of the
excess carbon in the atmosphere. However, the assumption that phytolith carbon
only comes from the air has been recently challenged by the dating of carbon in
phytoliths extracted from live grasses that has been found to be several
thousands of years old. Because plants also take up small amounts of carbon from
soils during nutrient uptake, the unexpected old ages of some of the phytolith
carbon suggest that soil carbon could become trapped in phytoliths as well. If
this is the case, opportunities for sequestering carbon via phytoliths are
probably overestimated. To test these ideas, this project will analyze
phytoliths extracted from grasses exposed to distinctly labeled carbon isotopes
in two experiments. The results should reveal the origin - root uptake from soil
or leaf uptake from the atmosphere - of the carbon in phytoliths. Additionally,
an independent verification method using nanoparticles will be developed and
applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations have
increased dramatically since the Industrial Revolution. The recent interest in
sequestering atmospheric carbon by promoting plants capable of producing large
amounts of phytoliths makes it essential to evaluate the origin of phytolith
carbon. If phytoliths are merely recycling carbon from soil, then their
potential for additional sequestration is minimal. To test this, a new phytolith
extraction method for reliably obtaining isotope results will need to be
developed. Since many fields of science rely on isotope measurements of carbon
inside plants, they will be informed by these findings. In addition, doctoral
students in the United States and France will work in tandem to evaluate the new
procedures. A postdoctoral fellow will work on the nanotechnology part of the
project. Results will be used in annual short courses open to all undergraduate
students at the University of California in Irvine, and also available to both
national and international established researchers. Finally, the methods and
results will be presented at meetings, incorporated into a text book, and
publically released on a project web page.