* 1144397
* History of Counterbioterrorism Policy under the Federal Government Administration 2001-2008
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Susan Wright, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 208,405.00

Introduction This project investigates the history of the counterbioterrorism
policies pursued by the Federal Government Administration 2001-2008. The study
will address several major dimensions of this history. It will address how
counterbioterrorism policies were crafted and by whom through an examination of
the roles played by government departments and agencies, national security
advisers, science advisers, members of Congress, and leaders of biotechnology,
pharmaceutical, science, and policy organizations, and the media. It will also
address the assumptions and values that influenced the substantial rise in the
support for counterbioterrorism activities, including research and development.
In addition, it will address governmental responses to criticism of specific
policies from scientists, public health specialists, and arms control advocates.
Finally, it will address the relation of counterbioterrorism goals to more
general geopolitical and military policies of the administration.

Intellectual Merit The methods of the study are historical. The project draws on
a wide variety of sources, including government documents, Congressional
hearings, policy papers, memoirs, conference records, and media materials. The
project also uses detailed interviews with those who played primary roles in
policy developments, including members of the Bush administration; senior staff
members of relevant Congressional committees; and members of scientific,
industry, and security policy organizations engaged in this area.

Potential Broader Impacts The study is important for the understanding it will
generate of a major U.S. defense policy, the issues that arose as it evolved,
and how these issues were addressed inside and outside the government. The
issues addressed in the study are of special relevance for the future
development of biomedical research and biotechnology. They relate to questions
of scientific freedom and responsibility, secrecy in research, ethical treatment
of human subjects, and the constraints of international arms control agreements.
Additional broader significance of the study will result from the increased
understanding it will bring to an important security policy and the conditions
under which scientific knowledge is enlisted for pursuing policy goals.