* 1144337
* Characterization of the Timing and Nature of Metasomatism in the Siberian Lithospheric Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Yang Liu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2016
* USD 380,000.00

This project addresses one of the fundamental issues about the evolution of the
Earth ? how continental form and grow through time. Cratons are the oldest and
most stable parts of our continents and act as the nuclei for the formation and
growth of our continents. Stable and old cratons are believed to be formed early
in the history of our planet through a process that involves the extraction of
magma that eventually yields a compositionally buoyant crust and underlying
lithospheric mantle. Old cratons such as the Kaapval Craton in South Africa,
Slave Craton in Canada, and the Siberian Craton in Russia are well-known for
their occurrences of diamond-bearing kimberlites as well as the sites for
finding other valuable mineral resources. Because these cratons are deep and we
cannot sample them adequately through drilling, their study require access to
samples of the deep Earth (xenoliths, diamonds, diamond inclusions) that are
carried to the surface in explosive volcanic eruptions (kimberlites,
lamproites). The Siberian Craton contains &gt;1000 kimberlites that are
distributed across the craton and contain evidence that will be used to
reconstruct the formation, development, and evolution of this core of the upper
Asian continent. The proposed research will be conducted as a consortium effort,
built on a formal scientific treaty between the University of Tennessee (UT) and
the V.S. Sobolev Institute of Geology and Mineralogy in the Siberian Branch of
the Russian Academy of Sciences (IGM) in Novosibirsk, under the direction of
Akad. Nickolai P. Pokhilenko.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan includes
the investigation of geochemical and mineralogical variations of peridotite
xenoliths from kimberlite pipes of different age groups across the Siberian
Craton in order to address the following questions: a) What were the composition
and thermal structure of its sub-continental mantle over time; b) What were the
styles, processes, and sources of metasomatism that occurred in the mantle and
their timing; and c) What were the conditions and time scales of the metasomatic
events that led to the formation of zoned garnets (sub-calcic to eclogitic) in
peridotite xenoliths? It is expected that these various data sets will be
integrated to provide a more comprehensive view of the Siberian craton.