* 1144804
* IGERT: Training Innovative Leaders in Biofabrication
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2020
* Terri Camesano, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* John Weishampel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 3,033,953.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
establishes a unique training program at WPI for Ph.D. students in the field of
bioengineering, and specifically biofabrication. The program will train students
in the entrepreneurial mindset, providing graduates with skills necessary to
contribute to the innovation economy while also addressing important medical
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of this training
program is to produce engineers who will be future innovators in academia and
industry, leading to the translation and commercialization of bioengineering and
biofabrication technologies. Today?s medical devices suffer from the drawback
that their materials are foreign to the human body and prone to rejection. The
growing field of biofabrication uses biological matter as the basic building
blocks to assemble advanced biological tissues for treatments and screenings.
Trainees will participate in mentored lab research, formal coursework in their
discipline, and international research collaborations. In addition, trainees
will develop an entrepreneurial mindset through integrated entrepreneurship
training modules, and an immersive innovation culture at WPI?s Life Science and
Bioengineering Center, a mixed-use research/industrial facility. Finally, hands-
on industry training will expose the IGERT trainees to the needs and use of
consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This program will help sustain
America?s innovation economy by training Ph.D. students to be future leaders in
biofabrication. True to WPI?s educational and training philosophy, ?Lehr und
Kunst? (Theory and Practice), the proposed research aims are focused on
practical approaches to developing commercially viable enabling technologies to
fulfill critical unmet needs in biofabrication. International research
experiences will be provided in collaboration with Politecnico di Milano in
Italy and Tsinghua University in China. Outcomes of the IGERT experience are
also anticipated to extend beyond the program and may be measured as new
companies launched, jobs created, patents filed, and products reaching clinical
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;