* 1144374
* SAVI: A Max-Planck/Princeton Research Center for Plasma Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Stewart Prager, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 03/31/2016
* USD 950,002.00

This project will establish a joint research center in fusion and astro-plasma
physics involving two units within Princeton University (the Princeton Plasma
Physics Laboratory, PPPL, and the Department of Astrophysical Sciences) and
three institutes within the Max Planck Society (MPS) (the Institute of Plasma
Physics at Garching and Greifswald, the Institute for Astrophysics at Garching,
and the Institute for Solar System Research at Lindau).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major research goal of the center is to harness the expertise and resources of
both the fusion and astrophysical plasma communities to tackle fundamental
problems that impede progress in both communities. Such problems include
understanding the process of magnetic reconnection, the generation and transport
of energetic (superthermal) particles in collisionless shocks, and the
generation and dissipation of turbulence in magnetized plasmas. Research
conducted at the center will advance our understanding in many areas of
theoretical plasma astrophysics, fusion physics, basic plasma experiments, and
tokamaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the joint center will foster
interdisciplinary collaboration between the plasma and astrophysics communities,
both nationally and internationally. It will forge new collaborations between
Universities, the national fusion labs, and international partners. It will
leverage the tools and expertise developed independently in both communities
(for example, laboratory experiments and sophisticated computer codes) in order
to address fundamental research questions. It will provide international
research collaboration opportunities for postdocs, graduate, and undergraduate
students, and provide opportunities for students and teachers at high-schools,
local, and regional institutions to engage in scientific inquiry in ways that
enhance their understanding of science concepts and scientific ways of thinking
through a well established outreach program at PPPL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award has been designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award
and is being co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering.