* 1144965
* RUI:   Investigating Hox gene regulation of paired appendage patterning in the basal actinopterygian, Polyodon
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Marcus Davis, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2017
* USD 399,957.00

Terrestrial (land living) vertebrates possess a specialized region of their
appendages called the autopod (hands &amp; feet; fingers &amp; toes) which are
not present in their aquatic fish ancestors. Variation in key genes that form
the autopod generate the diversity of crawling, flying, and swimming adaptations
we see in nature, but also explain common forms of congenital birth defects seen
in human hands and feet. Previously, this laboratory discovered that genes
involved in autopod formation, called Hox genes, are active in the fins of a
primitive living fish, the North American paddlefish Polyodon spathula. This
fish does not have an autopod region, nor did it evolve from an ancestor that
had an autopod. Why then, do paddlefish have these genes and what is their
function? To address these questions, these investigators are using modified
versions of these genes designed to either shut down gene function or amplify it
above normal levels within the developing fins of embryonic paddlefish. These
results should reveal the normal function of these genes, and interpret the
results of abnormal gene expression in comparison to data from human and mouse
birth defects. Initial results demonstrate a pattern of loss of skeletal
structures that links specific Hox genes to the formation of specific portions
of the fin, in a manner similar to humans and mice. These results will provide
significant insights into autopod formation that will answer both evolutionary
questions and contribute to clinical approaches for addressing congenital
autopod birth defects in humans. In addition, undergraduates at Kennesaw State
will comprise the core of this research, providing numerous students with
research experience to prepare them for careers in medicine and the biological
sciences.