* 1144041
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: CIF: Exploring the Fundamentals of Multihop Multiflow Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Ashutosh Sabharwal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 23,998.00

While current cellular networks are based essentially on one-to-many and many-
to-one single-hop subnets and cope with inter-cell interference by careful
centralized resource planning, future wireless networks must consider
heterogeneous environments characterized by user-deployed and user-operated
infrastructure in which multiple flows and multiple hops will play an
increasingly relevant role. Indeed, such networks are expected to open doors to
trillions of dollars of e-commerce, while also providing vast amounts of easily
accessible knowledge to the public. Developing a fundamental understanding of
multihop multiflow wireless networks is therefore critically important at this
time.

This exploratory project will seek to discover the fundamentals of such networks
by obtaining their information theoretic capacity in an approximated sense. It
is expected that scalable and extensible solutions are possible for such
networks ranging from the seemingly simple ones involving two hops and two flows
to apparently more complex ones involving multiple hops and more than two flows
with arbitrary connectivity. In so demonstrating, multiple metrics will be
employed. These metrics in the increasing order of accuracy in the high signal-
to-noise ratio regime are (a) the fundamental limit on the available signaling
(temporal/spectral/spatial) dimensions of the network, (b) the fundamental limit
on the available signaling and signal-level dimensions, and (c) the capacity to
within a (universal) constant number of bits independently of channel
parameters.