* 1144726
* IGERT:  Systems Biology of Cells in Engineered Environments (SBE2)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Cathy Wu, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
facilitates the unique interdisciplinary training of Ph.D. scientists and
engineers in the field of biotechnology by elucidating how cells interact with
specifically designed environments based on a broad understanding of changes in
the molecules within cells. Trained students will be ready to address a wide
range of problems facing society, from agriculture and energy to human health
and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This program addresses
this challenge by focusing on two areas of importance in biotechnology: cells'
behaviors based on growth in a variety of environments; and "systems biology" -
the integrated analysis of numerous molecular changes, particularly those
related to gene expression, that occur within cells when exposed to different
environments. A key feature of this work is that the environments will be
specifically engineered. For example, different materials will be used to
support the growth of a particular type of cell. By studying the impact of these
controlled environments on the expression of the cell?s genes, one can begin to
design strategies to target specific environments for specific applications:
growth of cells as tissue replacement for healing, and design of better ways to
deliver medicines, among others. The cross-training effort synergizes diverse
areas of expertise available at the University of Delaware.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This program addresses a critical
question related to biotechnology research: how do molecular changes within a
cell relate to the environment in which the cell is exposed? There are many
important application areas and our program will provide students with an
opportunity to learn critical experimental and computational techniques to best
prepare them for careers in the life sciences industry. An emphasis on
innovation will provide students with an opportunity to engage in industry
internships and public policy, intellectual property workshops, as well as
research experiences at institutions around the world. We will work to develop
programs that broaden minority participation at multiple
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;