* 1144165
* A Model Study of the Chemistry of Biomass Burning Smoke Plumes Constrained by Aircraft Data
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Matthew Alvarado, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2016
* USD 303,969.00

Biomass burning is a major source of trace gases and particles to the
atmosphere, but current models have not yet captured the processes that lead to
the significant formation of ozone and secondary organic aerosol (SOA) that is
often observed in the first few hours after emission. This project will develop
a new state-of-the-art modeling framework that incorporates recent advances in
modeling gas- and aerosol-phase photochemistry into a high resolution Lagrangian
dispersion model. The new modeling framework will be evaluated against detailed
measurements of the chemical evolution of two North American smoke plumes. This
will allow the following science questions to be addressed:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* What causes the high ozone and hydroxyl radical (OH)
concentrations observed in fresh biomass smoke plumes? &lt;br/&gt;* What are the
sources of SOA within the smoke plumes? &lt;br/&gt;* What is the impact of smoke
aerosols on photolysis rates, and hence photochemistry, within the smoke
plumes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aircraft measurements of young biomass burning
smoke plumes from the 2006 MILAGRO (Megacity Initiative Local and Global
Research Observations) campaign in Mexico and the 2009 San Luis Obispo Biomass
Burning (SLOBB) experiment in California provide comprehensive trace gas and
aerosol evolution data, including the first in situ observations of OH in
biomass burning plumes, and are thus ideal to evaluate the model development.
The chemical evolution of these plumes will be modeled using a new version of
the Aerosol Simulation Program (ASP) that will incorporate the semi-empirical
two-dimensional Volatility Basis Set (2D-VBS) scheme that has been used
successfully to model SOA formation in Mexico City. This updated version of ASP
will be incorporated into an enhanced version of the Hybrid Single Particle
Lagrangian Integrated Trajectory (HYSPLIT) dispersion model driven by high-
resolution output from the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model. The
combined models, constrained by aircraft and GOES satellite observations, will
then be used to study the formation of O3 and SOA within the smoke
plumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to a better fundamental
understanding of the climate, air quality, and human health impacts of biomass
burning. Use of the WRF-HYSPLIT framework for modeling atmospheric dispersion in
this work will facilitate the future inclusion of the model into the existing
forecasting system models. This project will establish collaboration between an
academic scientist specializing in the measurement of trace gases in biomass
burning smoke plumes and two private sector scientists, one specializing in the
modeling of atmospheric chemistry within smoke plumes and one specializing in
modeling the dispersion of atmospheric plumes. The work will also stimulate and
support the continued development of the WRF and ASP models, which were
developed with previous NSF support. Two graduate students will be trained to
use the developed models, which will give them the opportunity to work with
scientists in a non-academic environment.