* 1144494
* MARGINS: Collaborative Research: A 21st Century Reconnaissance of Aleutian Arc Inception
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Bradley Singer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2015
* USD 197,814.00

The Alaska/Aleutian Arc is the most geologically active region in North America
with abundant large earthquakes and eruptions from more than 50 active
volcanoes. Determining precisely how and when the Aleutian Arc began to form is
one of the key elements for understanding the origin of the Bering Sea-Alaska-
North Pacific region as well as how several circum-Pacific volcanic zones are
related to one another. Our understanding of how volcanism initiated in the
Aleutian Arc is clouded due in large part to the scarcity of data that bear on
the ages of the earliest volcanic rocks in the Aleutian Islands. The proposed
reconnaissance investigation of Aleutian Arc inception involves sampling and
determining the ages of the oldest records of volcanism. The aim is to define
when Aleutian arc volcanism started and highlight potential linkages with the
initiation of volcanism elsewhere in the Pacific and the rapid change in the
relative motions of oceanic plates that occurred 52 million years ago. In
addition, the proposed research will generate basic information regarding how
and why the Aleutian arc poses significant volcanic and earthquake hazards to
the population in Alaska and around the Pacific Rim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will employ state-of-the-art 40Ar/39Ar and U-Pb geochronology,
along with geochemical, and isotopic analysis of the dated rocks. The focus is
on subaerial outcrops on Amatignak, Ulak, and Kiska islands, which hold the
greatest potential for exploration into the early history of the Aleutians. New
geochronologic and geochemical data will precisely constrain when the Aleutian
arc inception began, what the compositions of the eruptive products were, and
how they evolved through the earliest history of the arc. This information will
also be used to evaluate the existing tectonic models of Aleutian arc inception
and Pacific Plate motion during the middle Eocene. This project will forge a new
collaboration between scientists at UW-Madison, Cornell University, and the
University of Alaska-Fairbanks/USGS that may benefit the GeoPRISMS program for
its duration. Our findings will be used immediately to determine where future
efforts to examine the Aleutian Arc and its fore-arc structures via submersible
ROVs, dredging, and geophysical imaging should concentrate to best address
questions of subduction zone initiation.