* 1144635
* IGERT: Water SENSE - Water Social, Engineering, and Natural Sciences Engagement
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Anil Deolalikar, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,999,984.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports inter-disciplinary graduate training in research that can improve water
quantity and quality, thereby reducing exposure to waterborne diseases,
increasing potable water supplies, and improving hu-man well-being. Water is an
increasingly important factor in determining human well-being in the future, as
the world?s population increases from 6.5 billion to 9 billion by 2050. As the
de-veloping world?s population urbanizes, the demand for water worldwide will
increase signifi-cantly. Since water scarcity has a direct link to water
contamination, the future outlook for water-related morbidity and mortality is
bleak, especially in the absence of major public interventions. Water scarcity
also portends worldwide political instability as more people and nations compete
for this vital resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Multidisciplinary teams will integrate their disciplinary knowledge towards
solution of the complex and severe water problems in the California-Mexico
border region. Five major research themes have been identified: public
education, water policy/management, water-borne contaminant detection/effects,
vector/disease control, and water treatment and remediation. Through coursework
and collaborative team projects with government agencies, trainees will
experience the translation of research outcomes to implemented public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Water SENSE IGERT will produce
scholars who can work in leadership positions in government, private, and
nonprofit organizations interested in improving community health and child
development outcomes via improved water supply, utilization, and management.
Students will be trained in all aspects of water and waterborne disease
management, including designing, executing and evaluating water-based
interventions in close consultation with ? and the active participation of ? the
intended beneficiaries. Other goals are to increase recruitment and retention,
and to increase the ethnic diversity, of students in NSF-supported
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scien-tists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;