* 1144692
* RUI: ARTS. Revision of the poorly known frog genus Chiasmocleis (Anura, Microhylidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Rafael de SÃ¡, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 314,165.00

The study proposes a revision of a poorly known group of semifossorial frogs
that occurs throughout the Neotropical lowlands east of the Andes from Panama to
southern Brazil. This group has never been thoroughly studied to determine its
species composition, species boundaries, and cryptic speciation in the group.
The revision will be an important addition to understanding diversity and
speciation of the Neotropical biota. Currently, most of the Neotropical biota is
poorly understood with regard to species diversity and individual species
distributions. Preliminary data suggest that morphological variation is a poor
estimate of genetic diversity among Amazonian frogs. The researchers intend to
study the composition of this group of frogs using a combined approach of
molecular and morphological characters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will
result in publications in scientific journals and a monographic revision of the
group. The project involved collaborations with scientists throughout Latin
America. It will also directly support the training of two undergraduates per
year at the University of Richmond. Furthermore, the project will strengthen
international scientific collaboration by training of two Brazilian researchers.
A specific aim of the project is to train research collaborators and interested
undergraduates on synthetic and revisionary monographic work