* 1144111
* EAGER: Exploring Multimedia Information Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Thomas Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2013
* USD 199,360.00

This project is built on the interdisciplinary collaboration between multimedia
and natural language processing (NLP) researchers. The goal of this exploratory
research is to provide effective methods for organizing, searching, mining and
reasoning with web-scale multimedia. The approach is based on formulation of a
structured multimedia database, called Multimedia Information Networks (MINets)
which enables new searching and mining paradigms such as keyword query of
unlabeled image/video databases, query expansion in content-based image
retrieval (CBIR), and measuring similarity between different modalities such as
an image and a piece of text). In addition, MINets framework is expected to
provide the ability to perform robust inference (e.g., recognizing objects and
activities in images or videos) in the presence of noise and uncertainty. In its
simplest form, a MINet is a graph where nodes are either concepts (text) or data
(such as images), and links are ontological/semantic relationships between
concepts, attachment of images to concepts, and visual similarity measures
between images. Construction of an experimental MINets framework involves
crawling the Web for a particular domain, gathering images with associated text
and exploiting natural language processing, computer vision and mining
techniques in establishing the concepts, associated images, interconnecting
links and an ontology that supports inference. Validation against current web
search engines and CBIR techniques is expected to provide a proof-of-concept for
the novel MINets framework.

This interdisciplinary exploratory project is expected to yield general
theoretical and algorithmic MINets framework that will provide new searching,
mining and reasoning capabilities for multimedia data. It will help to define
new research areas in effective utilization of multimedia information sources
for cross-media and cross-conceptual knowledge discovery and analysis, large-
scale annotation, information fusion and inference. Project results, including
open source software, annotated corpora, scoring metrics will be disseminated
via project Website (https://netfiles.uiuc.edu/qi4/www/MINets.htm). This project
will provide research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.