* 1144852
* Building Partnerships and Pathways to Address the Foundational Grand Challenge for Engineering Education - Concrete Steps towards Broadening Participation
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/15/2011,09/30/2013
* Masoud Milani, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 09/30/2013
* USD 75,000.00

Proposal # 1144852 Title: Building Partnerships and Pathways to Address the
Foundational Grand Challenge for Engineering Education - Concrete Steps towards
Broadening Participation. P.I. Amir Mirmiran Florida International University

The College of Engineering and Computing at Florida International University
(FIU) proposes to host a national workshop on Building Partnerships and Pathways
to Address the Foundational Grand Challenge for Engineering Education Concrete
Steps Towards Broadening Participation in February 2012 in Miami, Florida. The
workshop will focus on identifying partnerships and pathways that will help
increase the stagnant supply of the next generation of engineering workforce in
the U.S. who can address the NAE engineering grand challenges. The specific
objectives of the workshop are the following: 1. To identify actions needed to
create a culture of collaboration on the educational needs of the next
generation of engineers, including a plan of action for revitalizing the current
engineering education practices, in particular at universities with an urban
mission; 2. To identify best opportunities for synergistic partnerships among
MSIs, HSIs, HBCUs, school districts, community colleges, research extensive
universities, government, the industry, and the urban communities to address the
barriers hindering the expansion of the future engineering talent pool; and 3.
To identify the existing Best Practices shown to be effective in (a) attracting
minority K-12 students to engineering and increasing their graduation rates with
engineering degrees; and (b) strengthening the pipeline of minority students to
graduate-level engineering education and faculty positions, as well as
successful engineering careers.

The workshop will result in action plans and white papers a road map for funding
agencies and a clear pathway for all stakeholders. The results will be
circulated widely to raise awareness of the fundamental contributions that a
diversified engineering workforce must make to address the Grand Challenges for
Engineering as well as the kinds of active partnerships that can realistically
address the foundational grand challenge for engineering education. The proposed
road map will help guide the stakeholders in engineering education, including
the funding agencies, to align their resources and increase the stagnant supply
of the next generation of engineering workforce, particularly within
underrepresented minorities in urban settings. Such activities will also help
increase the number of faculty from HIS/HBCU/MSI?s including severely
underrepresented and minority faculty who will serve as role models for the next
generation of engineering students in the U.S.

Omnia El-Hakim Director for Diversity and Outreach