* 1144918
* The Basketmaker Communities Project: Early Pueblo Society in the Mesa Verde Region
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Scott Ortman, Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2015
* USD 245,720.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Scott Ortman and colleagues will
conduct two seasons of archaeological research in southwest Colorado, USA. The
Basketmaker Communities Project (BCP) is a collaborative, public-private
partnership between Crow Canyon Archaeological Center (CCAC), the University of
Colorado-Boulder, and landowners in Indian Camp Ranch, a private residential
community. The research will examine the demographic, social and environmental
impacts of the adoption of domesticated food production in a well-preserved
early agricultural settlement dating from the 7th century
A.D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adoption of domesticated food production is widely
acknowledged as a pivotal moment in human evolution that set in motion a number
of transformations in human demography, social organization, and environmental
relationships. The results of this process are apparent in the archaeological
record of Neolithic societies worldwide, but in many regions the archaeological
record is either too spotty or too imprecisely-dated to observe these
transformations in progress. However, the archaeological record of the northern
U.S. Southwest is amenable to such study, and the BCP will take advantage of
this opportunity through survey, excavation, and collections research on the
Basketmaker III (A.D. 500-750) period in the Mesa Verde region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific project goals are: to determine the relative
contribution of migration and intrinsic growth to the formation of Mesa Verde
Pueblo society; to place the organization of BMIII communities within the
continuum bracketed by Late Archaic foragers and Early Pueblo villages; and to
evaluate the anthropogenic legacy of the first farmers to colonize the region.
This will be accomplished through re-analysis of well-dated collections, surface
survey of a well-preserved BMIII settlement cluster, and excavations at BMIII
habitations and public architecture within this cluster.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BCP will develop a case study of the demographic,
social and environmental impacts of the adoption of a Neolithic economy using
one of the best-preserved archaeological records available. It will develop
refined methods for dating BMIII habitations and will apply these methods to
gauge the relative roles of migration and intrinsic population growth to the
formation of Mesa Verde Pueblo society. It will also examine the socionatural
transformations initiated by the adoption of a Neolithic economy by focusing on
the period when they were actually underway. This will extend knowledge of how
village communities emerged from the blending of indigenous foragers and
immigrant farmers in the U.S. Southwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BCP will also
support training and experience in excavation, laboratory and survey methods for
18 student interns and two graduate assistants over the next two years. Several
thousand learners aged 12 and up will also participate directly in the research
through informal science education programs at CCAC that emphasize the STEM
concepts inherent in archaeology, the importance of historic preservation, and
the extent of cultural diversity in the United States. American Indians will
contribute to the research through service on CCAC's Native American Advisory
Group. Finally, project results will be disseminated to researchers and the
public through publication on CCAC's web site, and all project collections will
be curated at Crow Canyon or another appropriate facility.