* 1144739
* EAR-PF: An Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Pressure, Mineralogy and Water on the Rheological Properties of the Upper Mantle: Implications for Mantle Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Janelle Homburg, Homburg                 Janelle        M
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2014
* USD 100,196.00

Dr. Janelle Homburg has been awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
Minnesota. This work will investigate the effects of mineralogical composition
(olivine/pyroxene modal abundance), water content and pressure on the strength
of Earth's upper mantle in order to better understand large-scale dynamic mantle
processes. To this end, an important goal of this study is to utilize
experimental work to develop flow laws (relationships between stress and strain
rate) that incorporate the effects of composition, water and pressure.

Experiments will be preformed on olivine/pyroxene aggregates ("harzburgite"
rocks) utilizing the D-DIA, a high-pressure deformation apparatus. The recent
development of the D-DIA will allow this study to investigate high-pressure
conditions (3-12 GPa) that have previously been unobtainable in the lab and are
more representative of deformation conditions throughout the upper mantle. In
addition to analyzing the mechanical data from each experiment, the run products
will be analyzed by a number of different techniques (infrared spectroscopy,
electron backscatter diffraction, and transmission electron microscopy) in order
to develop a deeper understanding of the microphysical processes involved in
deformation.

While the mechanical behavior of the shallow Earth is thought to be relatively
well understood, great uncertainty still remains in the deformation behavior of
the deeper portion of the upper mantle (depths greater then ~100 km). This
situation is due in large part to the fact that prior to the advent of the
D-DIA, the range of pressures accessible in the lab was fairly limited. The
series of experiments planned in this research will allow for better
understanding of the deformation behavior of earth materials throughout the
entire upper mantle and, by extension, better understanding of a wide variety of
key geodynamic processes, such as subduction.

In addition to developing J. Homburg's skills as a researcher, this fellowship
will allow her to develop as an educator both in classroom and outreach
settings. She will assist in teaching geology courses and in mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Minnesota. She will
also be involved in the development of science education programs at the Science
Museum of Minnesota.