* 1144388
* IGERT:  Smart Grids - Technology, Human Behavior and Policy
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Marshall, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 3,027,802.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports the interdisciplinary training of Ph.D. scientists and engineers
working in the development of modern, smart-grid power systems that operate with
extensive interaction and data exchange between the utility company and the
consumer. The educational program integrates technology, human behavior and
policy within a complex systems framework in order to understand the coupled
dynamics of the integrated power system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This training program integrates education and research in complex
systems modeling, human behavior, engineering, and policy at the University of
Vermont (UVM) with expertise in modern electric power systems, renewable energy
and high-performance computing at Sandia National Laboratories to train students
to effectively deal with integrated technological-human-policy systems typical
of the smart grid. Trainees will complete a summer internship at Sandia National
Laboratories, engage in outreach activities with public museums and energy
festivals in Vermont, work collaboratively with undergraduate students in game
design at Champlain College, and visit the consortium of Vermont utility
companies involved in developing the first state-wide smart grid in the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Development of the smart grid entails a
transformation from the current centralized control structure for power delivery
to a decentralized structure in which the consumer plays an integral role.
Design, control and optimization of smart grids to provide reliable, inexpensive
power will require utility companies to understand, model and shape human
behavioral responses and governments to design policies to enhance energy
efficiency and smart grid adoption. This training program lays the educational
foundations for a workforce trained in an integrated approach to complex human-
technical-policy systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to establish new models for
graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage
students in understanding the processes by which research is translated to
innovations for societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;