* 1144335
* Collaborative Research: Conference for Undergraduate Women in Physics, January 2012 at Case Westernn Reserve University
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Kathleen Kash, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

This award provides funding for the Seventh Annual Conferences for Undergraduate
Women in Physics and the collection and analysis of data on the impact of these
meetings on undergraduate women in physics. Six regional conferences will take
place January 13-15, 2012, simultaneously at Stanford University, the University
of Washington, Texas A&M University, Yale University, the University of
Tennessee, and Case Western Reserve University. Data analysis will be centered
at Indiana University.

The conferences have two overarching goals: 1) To give undergraduate women the
resources, motivation, and confidence to apply to graduate school and to
successfully complete a Ph.D. in physics or a related discipline; and 2) To
increase awareness by undergraduate women in physics of the wide range of career
opportunities available to them. Regional conferences are held simultaneously to
maximize student attendance by minimizing travel, to increase the excitement of
the participants in a joint national venture, and to allow the interactive
simulcast of a keynote address. The conference goals are achieved by providing a
series of inspiring talks by female physicists, panel discussions on graduate
school and physics careers, student presentation sessions, and ample opportunity
for networking and informal mentoring. The success of these goals will be
measured by surveys given to students before and after the conferences, as well
as by longitudinal studies following the student's post-graduation paths and
comparing them with female student cohorts who did not attend the conferences.