* 1144905
* EAR-PF:Constraining the burial and unroofing history of the Rae craton, Baffin Island, from multiple low temperature thermochronometers and secondary Fe-oxide (U-Th)/He dating
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Alexis Ault, Ault                    Alexis         K
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Alexis K. Ault has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out research and an education plan at the University of
Arizona. This research investigates the surface response of cratons to near-
field plate boundary activity including deformation, sedimentation from regions
of high topography, foreland basin development, flexural uplift, and exhumation-
related fluid-circulation. The proposed research focuses on the Rae craton,
exposed on Baffin Island, Canada, a unique cratonic locality given its proximity
to plate boundaries throughout the Phanerozoic, and aims to constrain the
magnitudes and patterns of cratonic burial and unroofing with a suite of
thermochronometers including apatite (U-Th)/He, apatite fission-track, and
zircon (U-Th)/He dating. Fluid flow and secondary mineralization associated with
rock exhumation, will be dated via hematite (U-Th)/He dating. An innovative
aspect of this proposal is the coupling of paleomagnetic data with the hematite
dating to provide a backdrop to evaluate Fe-oxide data and potentially "double-
date" fluid flow events in two Western U.S. pilot studies. Accurate
interpretation and understanding of the significance of hematite (U-Th)/He dates
is necessary before application of the technique to other settings like Baffin
Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How and why cratonic regions, or the cores of
continents long considered to be immune to tectonism, are reactivated and the
signatures of such processes on the surface evolution of cratons remain
outstanding questions in continental dynamics. The results of this research will
be of interest to the geochronology and tectonics communities. Reconstruction of
the past extent and thickness of sedimentary rocks deposited across the Rae
craton and quantification of burial temperatures will aid glaciologists and
geomorphologists exploring the impact of Laurentide ice sheet dynamics on the
Baffin Island landscape, but will also provide critical information for
understanding regional hydrocarbon reservoir potential in the Canadian Arctic.
The development and successful application of the hematite (U-Th)/He dating
technique to constrain near-surface fluid flow will benefit those in the active
tectonics and economic geology communities. Education activities associated with
this research include mentoring University of Arizona undergraduate and graduate
students and co-teaching an intensive summer student workshop on the method and
application of the new hematite (U-Th)/He dating technique.