* 1144176
* Collaborative Research: MIDGE: Minimally Invasive Direct Glacial Exploration of Biogeochemistry, Hydrology and Glaciology of Blood Falls, McMurdo Dry Valleys
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* W. Berry Lyons, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 239,617.00

Recent discoveries of widespread liquid water and microbial ecosystems below the
Antarctic ice sheets have generated considerable interest in studying Antarctic
subglacial environments. Understanding subglacial hydrology, the persistence of
life in extended isolation and the evolution and stability of subglacial
habitats requires an integrated, interdisciplinary approach. The collaborative
project, Minimally Invasive Direct Glacial Exploration (MIDGE) of the
Biogeochemistry, Hydrology and Glaciology of Blood Falls, McMurdo Dry Valleys
will integrate geophysical measurements, molecular microbial ecology and
geochemical analyses to explore a unique Antarctic subglacial system known as
Blood Falls. Blood Falls is a hypersaline, subglacial brine that supports an
active microbial community. The subglacial brine is released from a crevasse at
the surface of the Taylor Glacier providing an accessible portal into an
Antarctic subglacial ecosystem. Recent geochemical and molecular analyses
support a marine source for the salts and microorganisms in Blood Falls. The
last time marine waters inundated this part of the McMurdo Dry Valleys was
during the Late Tertiary, which suggests the brine is ancient. Still, no direct
samples have been collected from the subglacial source to Blood Falls and little
is known about the origin of this brine or the amount of time it has been sealed
below Taylor Glacier. Radar profiles collected near Blood Falls delineate a
possible fault in the subglacial substrate that may help explain the localized
and episodic nature of brine release. However it remains unclear what triggers
the episodic release of brine exclusively at the Blood Falls crevasse or the
extent to which the brine is altered as it makes its way to the surface.

The MIDGE project aims to determine the mechanism of brine release at Blood
Falls, evaluate changes in the geochemistry and the microbial community within
the englacial conduit and assess if Blood Falls waters have a distinct impact on
the thermal and stress state of Taylor Glacier, one of the most studied polar
glaciers in Antarctica. The geophysical study of the glaciological structure and
mechanism of brine release will use GPR, GPS, and a small passive seismic
network. Together with international collaborators, the 'Ice Mole' team from FH
Aachen University of Applied Sciences, Germany (funded by the German Aerospace
Center, DLR), MIDGE will develop and deploy innovative, minimally invasive
technologies for clean access and brine sample retrieval from deep within the
Blood Falls drainage system. These technologies will allow for the collection of
samples of the brine away from the surface (up to tens of meters) for
geochemical analyses and microbial structure-function experiments. There is
concern over the contamination of pristine subglacial environments from chemical
and biological materials inherent in the drilling process; and MIDGE will
provide data on the efficacy of thermoelectric probes for clean access and
retrieval of representative subglacial samples. Antarctic subglacial
environments provide an excellent opportunity for researching survivability and
adaptability of microbial life and are potential terrestrial analogues for life
habitats on icy planetary bodies. The MIDGE project offers a portable,
versatile, clean alternative to hot water and mechanical drilling and will
enable the exploration of subglacial hydrology and ecosystem function while
making significant progress towards developing technologies for minimally
invasive and clean sampling of icy systems.