* 1144340
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Developing a Culturally Compelling Social Network Approach to HIV/AIDS Prevention for African American College Students
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Lynette Yarger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 42,552.00

The proposed research will advance scientific knowledge about health information
dissemination and the design of appropriate social media tools for the African
American female college student community. The goal of this project is to
broaden access to and utilization of HIV prevention information, thereby
strengthening African American organization and individual capacity to address
the HIV/AIDS epidemic in these communities. The project will achieve this goal
the following aims: 1) Describe the ways in which African American female
college students construct their cultural/racial identities; 2) Identify the
relationship between these identities and the use of smart health information
technology and social networking systems by the target user group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will provide empirical evidence on
the design and implementation of HIV/AIDS preventive education, as well as the
culturally-specific challenges related to the use of Information Computer
Technology (ICT) for HIV/AIDS preventive education. It will contribute to
understanding how social networks targeting African American female college
students for HIV/AIDS prevention are received by the target community and how to
improve the design of such tools for optimal effectiveness. This research will
have very far-reaching implications for science and health education within and
beyond the target research study community. These intellectual contributions
will be of interest to scholars in communication and information studies,
software engineering, pervasive mobile devices, and smart health information
systems and trustworthy computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage
college students in the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority as both users and
participatory designers of social media tools intended to disseminate HIV
information. The National Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, an organization with
national and international programs for outreach and networking African American
women in institutes of higher education, will offer a mechanism to reach
additional college students beyond the physical locale of North Carolina State
University - thereby providing a network penetration to other North Carolina
chapters and beyond for future direction and interdisciplinary, inter-
institutional collaborations. More specifically, this research is to broaden
access to and utilization of HIV prevention information, thereby strengthening
African American organization and individual capacity to address the epidemic in
these communities using innovative smart health information technologies.