* 1144271
* Studies of Coastal Orographic Precipitation Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* David Kingsmill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 02/28/2017
* USD 454,889.00

Orography has a profound influence on the intensity and spatial distribution of
precipitation. Broadly speaking, there are two key factors in the development of
orographic precipitation: the weather regime or season, which can determine the
relative importance of stable versus convective precipitation and the width of
the barrier, which can determine whether orographic precipitation falls on the
barrier crest or its windward or lee slopes. Of course, these relatively simple
concepts do not articulate many of the complexities implicit in orographic
precipitation processes, such as airflow blocking and cloud microphysics. This
research effort addresses some of these complexities by focusing on coastal
orographic precipitation processes. Specific objectives of this research are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Examine how the coastal terrain deflects impinging low-level
airflow upward to force the development of orographic
precipitation;&lt;br/&gt;2. Investigate the structure of coastal orographic
feeder clouds and how it varies as a function of upslope wind
speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives will be pursued by testing specific
hypotheses using airborne Doppler radar and in-situ microphysics, ground-based
polarimetric Doppler radar, profiling radar, balloon sounding and surface
meteorology and precipitation data from the California Land-falling Jets
(CALJET) and Pacific Landfalling Jets (PACJET) experiments operated along the
northern California coast during the late 1990's and early
2000's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Several observational
field experiments have been conducted over the last forty years to help clarify
unresolved details about orographic precipitation processes. Most of these
efforts have been focused on relatively large barriers, with half-widths
exceeding 50 km and heights more than 2 km above upstream flat terrain. Smaller
barriers, with half-widths and heights less than 50 km and 2 km, respectively,
can also significantly influence the development of precipitation, particularly
those on or near a coastline where sources of maritime moisture are unimpeded by
upstream topography. In fact, precipitation in these orographic locales can lead
to severe flooding that incurs hundreds of millions of dollars in property
damage. Analysis of the datasets from CALJET and PACJET provides an opportunity
to advance fundamental understanding of coastal orographic precipitation
processes. More specifically, this research is important because it will better
clarify the forcing factors that influence the distribution and intensity of
precipitation along and offshore of coastal orography and it will provide
constraints on the range of microphysical processes active in coastal orographic
feeder clouds and how they are influenced by forcing
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research project
has a variety of broader impacts. More generally, the results will have societal
benefit owing to the increased knowledge of coastal orographic precipitation
processes. A better understanding of the processes that lead to extreme rainfall
in coastal orography could help improve hydrologic forecasts of such events.
Advancements in this area also have economic and environmental relevance as
water quantity has a large impact on water management, agriculture, water-based
recreation, water quality and protection of endangered species habitats such as
salmon fisheries. More specific broader impacts associated with this project
will be student participation in the research and application of the results to
classroom instruction and development of exhibits for informal science
education.