* 1144521
* Collaborative Research: Resolving the Nature and Extent Archean Crustal Components in Southwestern Laurentia Using Hf and U-Pb Analysis of Zircon and Baddeleyite
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2015
* USD 101,365.00

This project aims to resolve a long-standing controversy regarding the earliest
evolution and deep structure of the Precambrian lithosphere of southwestern
North America. This area is a globally important field laboratory for studies of
the processes that form continents. Current debate has focused on the need to
resolve the relative importance of accretion of juvenile arcs versus recycling
of older crustal materials, and/or rift-related addition of mafic crust. The
objectives of this project are to: 1) resolve the nature of the cryptic Archean
and other pre-1.8 Ga lithospheric components in the Mojave Province and
elucidate the timing and processes of their incorporation into an assembling
1.8-1.6 Ga orogenic system; 2) discover more definitive piercing points
(relative to Australia, Antarctica, etc.) that can be used for supercontinent
reconstructions of Nuna (1.8 Ga) and Rodina (1.0 Ga); and 3) provide a
comprehensive basement provenance age template in support of the wide array of
detrital zircon studies of sedimentary basins of all ages in the Southwest. The
approach is to use U/Pb radiometric dating and Hf isotopic characterization of
zircons from the oldest rocks in the Southwest. Pilot studies show that these
rocks contain still older grains, whose history will be decipherable using these
approaches. The research team will analyze inherited zircons from the oldest
plutons, which act as probes what was being melted in the lower crust, and
detrital zircons from the oldest metasedimentary rocks, which are an indication
of eroding source regions and resulting sedimentary basin and depositional
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves collaboration between PIs in
U.S. academia, the USGS, and Australian collaborators from academia and the
mineral industry. The combined datasets will be integrated with several decades
of previous work by the PIs and with emerging new geophysical images from the
NSF EarthScope experiment. The importance of the work will be a new integrated
synthesis of the structure and evolution of the basement architecture of this
part of the North American continent that will be useful for many subfields in
the geosciences, including tectonics, deep time geologic history of our
continent, ground-truth of geophysical interpretations of the subsurface, and
applications for minerals exploration. The project also has a strong outreach
component that integrates research and education via training of student
geoscientists, including minority students, and working with the Parks for
informal geoscience education of the public.