* 1144957
* Collaborative Research: The Provenance of the Excess Sulfur Released in Arc Volcanoes During Plinian Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Christian Huber, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2015
* USD 168,247.00

Collaborative Research: The provenance of the excess sulfur released in arc
volcanoes during Plinian eruptions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit.
Although it is commonly accepted that the behavior of volatile elements in
magmas controls eruption dynamics, the depth and amount of vapor exsolved, as
well as the distribution and transport of vapor bubbles in shallow magmatic
systems remain poorly constrained. This project aims to develop a novel
multidisciplinary methodology to quantify where and how much vapor degassing
occurs, how fast vapor bubbles are transported in different magmatic
environments, if they are expected to accumulate in the shallower portion of the
system and how much effect this accumulation will have on eruption dynamics. A
fundamental observation to be explained is the discrepancy between emitted
volatiles released during explosive eruptions and the amount of volatiles that
can be dissolved in the melt prior to eruption (excess degassing). The clearest
example of excess degassing is associated with S mass balance, because S release
during and after eruptions can be measured accurately by spectroscopic methods.
Several open questions will be addressed: (1) How much vapor can be present in a
magma prior to an eruption and what fraction was exsolved in-situ versus
transported from deeper unerupted magma (ex-situ)? (2) If ex-situ degassing is
important, what controls the accumulation of bubbles in the shallowest part of
the magma body and how does it affect the eruptive behavior of the magma? The
proposed work is transformative in that it will explore the poorly understood
transport and storage of exsolved volatiles in magmatic systems with new
numerical models developed by the PIs, and it will integrate geochemical data
(trace elements in apatites and pyrrhotite) with thermodynamic modeling
(expected vapor content as function of crystallinity) and fluid dynamics
modeling into a novel approach to quantify the volatile budget in magmas.
Existing thermodynamic models will be used that include H2O (e.g., MELTS) and
H2O-CO2 (e.g., VolatileCalc) solubilities to determine, for a range of
reasonable initial conditions, the percentage of exsolved vapor in given
examples of Plinian eruptions with documented S excess (Mount St. Helens 1980,
El Chichon 1982, Pinatubo 1991, Krakatau 1883, Katmai 1912, Taupo 181 AD) as
well as for larger, older S-rich units (Kos Plateau Tuff 160 ky, and Fish Canyon
Tuff 28 Ma) for which the S atmospheric load is poorly-constrained. In the same
units, published data and/or analyses of apatites and pyrrhotites by electron
microprobe will be used to determine (a) whether the magmas were vapor-saturated
in their shallow reservoirs prior to eruption (using a geochemical test we have
developed) and (b) using zoning profiles in apatites, how volatile element
contents vary prior to eruption. Finally, multi-phase flow models will be
developed using different numerical techniques to estimate how mobile vapor
bubbles are across the magmatic system and how quickly they accumulate in
reservoirs before an eruption. Such models will provide invaluable new insights
in the dynamics of volcanic eruptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
This project will support a graduate student, and will train her/him in a highly
multi- disciplinary and inherently quantitative environment, enabling him/her
with those fundamental skills of modern science. It will provide a new
investigator (Huber, no prior funding) funds to develop an active group in
physical volcanology and will also allow two young faculty members to continue
an active multi-disciplinary collaboration that has been successful over the
last few years. Finally, the PIs propose to develop a short course for advanced
undergraduate and graduate students on merging modeling techniques and
geochemical analyses applied to magmatic processes. PI Huber has been teaching a
version on this course, over the last two years, as a week-long series of
lectures and practical exercises at the University of California, Berkeley, the
University of Geneva (Switzerland), and at Rice University. On the basis of the
enthusiastic response of the students to this class, we expect that organizing
such a course at Georgia Tech and University of Washington is likely to attract
many local students, and would strongly help our community to become more aware
and proficient in quantitative methods in Earth Sciences.