* 1144318
* Experimental and Descriptive Investigation of Gaidhlig Consonant Mutations
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Natasha Warner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,170.00

As many as 20 million Americans identify themselves as Scottish or Scots/Irish
in descent. One of the primary heritage languages of this community, Scottish
Gaelic is the medium for a rich culture of literature, song, poetry, history and
indigenous knowledge-systems. It also provides an important window into the
world-view and culture of the ancestors of the Scottish-American community. The
loss of native speaker knowledge about this endangered language is imminent. The
Scottish Gaelic language is of particular interest to scientific linguists.
Gaelic is very different from English in the ways it signals grammatical
relationships between words. In particular it has a mechanism for indicating
grammatical notions such as tense, gender, aspect, and possession by changing
the first consonant of one of the words in the relationship. For example, the
initial consonant in the word cù 'dog' (a k sound) is pronounced with a hard ch
sound like German Bach when it is appears after possessive words like mo 'my'
(written as mo chù). These changes, called "initial consonant mutations," are a
productive and critical part of the grammatical system of the language. This
mechanism for indicating grammatical inflection is extremely rare in the world's
languages and is very poorly understood. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order for
linguists to properly understand the sound system of a language, they have to
use instrumental measures of how speakers articulate sounds and use
psycholinguistic experiments to measure how speakers understand and use the
patterns of sounds. Using modern linguistic instrumental and psycholinguistic
techniques. Professors Andrew Carnie, Diana Archangeli, Michael Hammond, Natasha
Warner and Adam Ussishkin, along with Scottish Gaelic native speaker Muriel
Fisher will investigate the articulation, patterning, and perception of initial
consonant mutations. For example, this study will determine whether speakers
store both the mutated and non-mutated words in their minds by asking them to
identify the word while they listen to obscured (or "masked") speech sounds. A
related experiment, where the sounds people hear are subtly artificially
modified (or "gated"), will be used to study that the exact point in the sound
stream at which listeners can identify whether the word is mutated or non-
mutated. A study of the relative statistical frequency of sounds in mutated and
non-mutated in a collection of language (or corpus) will show how productive the
process is and how it corresponds to statistics on the frequency of sounds in
the larger grammatical system of the language. Psycholinguistic techniques,
including judgments and nonsense word tasks will be used to investigate the
mental procedures speakers use to produce these mutations. Finally the actual
articulation of these mutations will be investigated using modern phonetic
instrumental measures such as ultrasound and airflow volume. The output of this
research project will be a description of the Gaelic consonant mutation that
will help complete an on-going description of the language. In addition, in
doing this research graduate students will be trained in the techniques of sound
analysis of an endangered language. This training will allow the students to
conduct similar experimental studies on other endangered languages. This work
has significant implications for documenting and preserving the linguistic
traditions of the Scottish and Scottish-American communities.