* 1144559
* A PETROLOGICAL AND NITROGEN ISOTOPE STUDY OF CRUSTAL RECYCLING THROUGH TIME
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Peter Barry, Barry                   Peter
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Peter Barry has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a research and education plan at the University of Tennessee. His
study will focus on petrology and volatile (He-N-Ne) isotope characteristics of
mafic xenoliths from cratonic and ocean island settings. Subduction of oceanic
crust has occurred continuously since the Archean, effectively recycling
materials into the convecting mantle and enabling mass transfer between the
surface, mantle, and continents. Stable (e.g., nitrogen) and noble gas (e.g.,
helium and neon) isotopes are powerful tracers of mantle processes, and
sensitive indicators of recycling and crustal inputs. Selected xenolith samples
from the Cook Islands and the Siberian Craton display strong ancillary evidence
(e.g., oxygen isotope anomalies) suggesting they are derived from a recycled
crustal protolith. We will target xenolith samples for He-N-Ne isotopes, which
have previously been age dated using Re-Os and Pb-Pb methods and span a large
(~3 billion years) age-range, to assess time-integrated mantle variations that
are potentially attributed to recycling. In addition, microprobe (major
elements) and LA-ICP-MS (minor and trace elements) analyses will be conducted on
the sample suite. We use a combined geochemical and petrological approach, as
isotopic interpretations are most meaningful when bracketed by strong
petrological constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has broad impacts for
the overall understanding of mantle evolution and crustal recycling throughout
Earth history. A central focus will be on nitrogen and how it has been
transported between Earth's reservoirs throughout geological time. Nitrogen is
important because it is the principle gas (~78%) in Earth's modern-day
atmosphere. However, surprisingly little is known about nitrogen characteristics
of the Earth's mantle - particularly ancient recycled reservoirs. We aim to
determine the nitrogen isotope characteristics of rare xenolith samples that
show evidence of crustal recycling and span a large age-range. This feat will be
accomplished by utilizing a newly developed nitrogen isotope extraction and
purification system, recently constructed at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography. Furthermore, this study will provide an excellent opportunity to
engage both students and science educators, through outreach programs that
introduce them to laboratory procedures and updating them on the progress of
current projects and bringing cutting edge geoscience research into the
classroom. Furthermore, undergraduate and graduate students at the University of
Tennessee - Planetary Geosciences Institute, will be mentored and involved in
this study. Findings will be presented at international science conferences as
well as in seminars at the University of Tennessee.