* 1144600
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Archaeological Investigations at Genta Mariam
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Brian Clark, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 19,995.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Brian Clark will conduct
dissertation research including surveys and excavations around the historically
significant 13th-century church of Geneta Mariam in north-central Ethiopia. As
in many present day nations, especially in the developing world, religion plays
an important role related to governance and centers of power and influence may
shift over time. This project is significant because it examines in detail one
such system which served to preserve social stability within a traditional
society for an extended period.

As a pivotal part of historic imperial governance, the royal church of Geneta
Mariam is a prime location to investigate the political structure and economy of
the early Solomonic Dynasty as it reconstituted the empire following the decline
of the former capital, Aksum. Three archaeological sites have been identified in
the vicinity of the church; these include an extensive iron working area likely
associated with the church's construction and the remains of a large community,
possibly a royal camp, a mobile settlement type that replaced the use of fixed
capitals.

As a means to support the emperors' consolidation of control over the empire,
Solomonic emperors patronized clerical communities, granting them rights similar
to the feudal nobility. Such royal churches then became the political and
economic centers of territories under their control and were essential nodes in
the support network that permitted Ethiopian emperors to migrate perpetually
around the empire, consolidating their hegemony. The mobile royal court traveled
in large camps, which were in effect urban capitals by most definitions save
their mobility. The proposed archaeological research project will investigate
the political and economic conditions of the Empire as it emerged around such
royally-sponsored churches in part by examining archaeological remains relevant
to the organization of labor and industry at the iron working sites associated
with the church. In addition, extensive surface and subsurface surveying and
targeted excavations of the probable royal campsite will shed light on the
structure of social organization and of mobile political capitals in Ethiopia
and their direct associations with prominent royal churches.

Aside from its significance as one of the few archaeological investigations of
post-Aksumite archaeological sites in Ethiopia, this project will contribute to
a number of major contemporary theoretical issues. The collection of economic,
political and social data comparable to that from the Aksumite Period, for
example, will contribute to archaeological understandings of how and why complex
societies collapse and regenerate. The study of a mobile capital with an
analytical emphasis on cross-cultural comparison to similar political systems
will also contribute greatly to the understudied fields of mobile political
capitals and mobile cities. This study will also contribute to our understanding
of the variability of governance in complex societies and provide a further
example of indigenous African urbanism that challenges normative notions of
urbanism more generally.

This project will permit the completion of Mr. Clark's PhD research and further
train two Ethiopian archaeology graduate students from Addis Ababa University.
The students already hold government positions in Ethiopia's heritage management
infrastructure and further training and experience will ultimately benefit their
country. Local residents also hope that greater scientific attention toward the
church and its surroundings will emphasize its historical significance on par
with better-known sites such as the neighboring UNESCO World Heritage Site of
Lalibela. In turn, greater recognition is expected to have important impacts on
local tourism and development.