* 1144429
* Redox and Structural Controls on Iron Isotopic Variations in Igneous Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Nicolas Dauphas, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2014
* USD 249,664.00

The elevated degree of oxidation present in the Earth is a major condition of
its habitability, allowing the existence of free oxygen and other oxidized
species used during respiration to sustain activity in human beings and simpler
life forms. Earth is more oxidized than other planetary bodies such as Mars and
the reason for this is not well understood. For example, Titan's atmosphere
(Titan is the largest moon of Saturn) is composed primarily of nitrogen, methane
and ethane. In addition, Titan's surface is covered with lakes of hydrocarbons.
It is not known whether Earth was born like it is today or whether it started
with a Titan-like atmosphere and the oxidized conditions were established during
Earth's history through geological processes. In this study, a new tool will be
developed to measure the oxidation conditions of Earth through time. The
measurements will use and develop cutting edge analytical methods at a national
facility; the intense X-ray source located at the Advanced Photon Source
(Argonne National Laboratory). This study will provide critical constraints on
why our planet is unique and it will help us understand the nature of volcanic
emissions in the distant past. On long timescales, the nature of volcanic
emissions has played a key role in climate regulation and prevented the Earth
from going into a permanent snowball state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iron
oxidation state of magmas (i.e., Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio) is a key parameter to trace
the redox evolution of the Earth. Unfortunately, geological processes such as
assimilation, degassing, crystallization, and alteration can blur this record.
Iron isotopes provide insight into the conditions of mantle melting that are
less susceptible to these secondary processes. A team of investigators with
expertise in experimental petrology, iron isotope geochemistry, and nuclear
resonance vibrational spectroscopy will calibrate the effects of redox and
structural conditions on equilibrium isotopic fractionation between ferrous
(Fe2+) and ferric (Fe3+) iron in magmas and minerals. This will provide a solid
framework for interpreting iron isotopic variations and redox conditions in
igneous rocks of all ages. Silicate glass, olivine, and spinel will be studied
by the Nuclear Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (NRIXS) technique to get a
holistic view of iron isotopic fractionation during mantle and crustal melting,
as well as mafic and felsic magma differentiation. Measurements of basalts
through rhyolites produced under a range of oxygen fugacities, will allow the
parameterization of iron equilibrium fractionation factors of magmas taking into
account parameters such as Fe3+/Fetot ratio and NBO/T (nonbridging oxygen per
tetrahedrally coordinated cation, a measure of polymerization of a silicate
melt) to predict equilibrium Fe isotopic fractionation between minerals and
melts.