* 1144538
* WORKSHOP: New Perspectives on Intractable Problems: Informal Institutions as Policy Responses to Global Grand Challenges -Spring
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Daniel Kelly, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2013
* USD 37,450.00

This workshop at Purdue University draws together a global group of
interdisciplinary scholars who, together with Purdue faculty, offer analyses of
a series of pressing global challenges. The workshop focuses on finding new
perspectives on seemingly "intractable" global policy problems by examining a
cutting edge area of research in the social sciences: the role of social norms,
considered as a kind of informal institution, in shaping policy design,
adoption, and implementation. The workshop aims to apply these theoretical
insights on multipe difficult problems that have faced policy makers
internationally. The workshop involves a series of substantive issue panels
focusing on the actual and/or potential role of informal institutions in
offering solutions. It also includes an intergrative, cross-issue panel drawing
out broader lessons about informal institutions as they relate to multiple
diverse issues. The presentations and broader conclusions of this work will be
disseminated in both scholarly and non-scholarly
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regards to intellectual merit, informal
institutions (or norms) are increasingly recognized as vital determinants of
human behavior in multiple contexts and disciplines. Where simpler models of
rationality once dominated our understanding of human behavior, more complicated
models emphasizing the influence of norms are now recognized as playing a
critical, but poorly understood role. While much progress has been made in the
past decade in studying these informal institutions in multiple disciplines and
as they operate in many different contexts, the intellectual challenges of
understanding the impact of these norms remain daunting and the integration of
this work remains limited. By convening this interdisciplinary, cross-national
group of scholars, the organizers aim to contribute to the understanding of
solutions to policy challenges as well as to advance theoretical understanding
of the ways that informal institutions and social norms affect global
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regards to broader impacts, the workshop
will offer new solutions to serious problems, promote the professional and
intellectual development of graduate students working on vital scientific
questions that affect serious policy problems, and build international,
interdisciplinary networks and partnerships that include scholars and students
from underrepresented gender, racial, and geographic groups.