* 1144854
* IGERT: From Data to Solutions:  A New PhD Program in Transformational Data &amp; Information Sciences Research and Innovation
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Julia Hirschberg, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2018
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) provides
Ph.D. students with the unique interdisciplinary training necessary to extract
useful information from vast amounts of collected data. Consumer opinions,
information on disease and its symptoms, and breaking information on social
websites allow us to gather information on a scale previously unknown. However,
such big data is useful only if we can extract information from it. Columbia and
CUNY, in collaboration with international partners in Argentina and Brazil,
propose the interdisciplinary training of students in making sense of big data.
Researchers from Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Psychology, and
Statistics will partner with Biomedical Informatics, Business and Journalism, to
educate the next generation of information scientists in solving real world
problems. We will train students to extract information from multiple data types
? text, video, audio ? and familiarize them with a wide range of techniques for
making sense of information from a world in which Youtube, Wikipedia, Facebook,
and Twitter are supplanting newspapers, encyclopedias, television, and consumer
surveys as everyday sources of information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: A curriculum based upon the concept of studio learning will integrate
techniques from Business, Journalism, and Biomedical Informatics. Aided by
advisors from large corporations, major research labs, and small start-up
companies, the program will encourage IGERT trainees to pursue patents, and to
apply their research in society. A second goal will be attracting more diverse
students to information sciences by emphasizing real world applications, a
supportive environment, and diverse faculty role models. The mentoring and
career development activities proposed will help to retain this diverse
population and prepare them for their future careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;