* 1144681
* RAPID collaborative research: Historic freshwater input and hypoxia effects on zooplankton populations of the northern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* David Kimmel, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2013
* USD 85,191.00

Since 2003 the PIs have conducted 5 summer cruises in the northern Gulf of
Mexico using high-resolution sampling to define the spatially-explicit
relationships between physical structure, hypoxia and pelagic zooplankton
distributions. After the Deepwater Horizon spill, the PIs received a NSF Rapid
Response grant to measure zooplankton community composition and abundance in the
same spatial domain as the previous 5 cruises. They now have one of the most
comprehensive, synoptic data sets on temperature, salinity, oxygen,
phytoplankton, zooplankton and fish in the northern Gulf of Mexico. Synthetic
products from these efforts include biomass size spectrum models which have been
used to assess anthropogenic effects on planktonic and fish food-webs; the
species composition of phytoplankton, microzooplankton, mesozooplankton, and
fish; fish diet data; and fish growth potential models to quantitatively assess
fish habitat requirements based on food availability and physical conditions.
For the past several months and continuing into summer 2011, the amount of
freshwater delivery to the Gulf has been of historic proportions, creating the
largest stratified and hypoxic water column seen in a century
(http://www.cop.noaa.gov/gulf_hypoxia_forecast/). Earlier studies by the PIs in
Chesapeake Bay suggest that vertical extent of hypoxia (% water column) may be
the main factor causing shifts in both location and size distribution of
zooplankton. Change in the vertical structure of zooplankton populations
directly impacts trophic transfer to fish, since they are more tolerant of low
oxygen than their zooplanktivorous predators. The PIs propose to take advantage
of a planned survey cruise to collect and analyze zooplankton in the study area
(LA-TX shelf) from 25 July to 2 August.

Intellectual Merit: The impact of hypoxia on benthic organisms has been well-
studied and the impacts are largely understood. Pelagic organisms, such as
zooplankton, present a more difficult problem as they are able to use behavior
to avoid hypoxic waters and this behavior is tightly related to the hypoxia
tolerance of individual species. Hypoxia results in water columns that are
biologically stratified, causing as yet unquantified impacts on trophic
transfer. The PIs' prior work provides a high-resolution, spatially explicit
database to compare with the anticipated hypoxia of 2011 and address specific
hypotheses about these effects.

Broader Impacts : Given the economic importance of the Gulf of Mexico commercial
fisheries (about 20% of the U.S. total landings representing about $991 million)
and recreational fishing (generating ~30% of the nation's saltwater fishing
expenditures and supporting nearly 25% of the nation's recreational saltwater
jobs). The Horn Point Laboratory is part of the National Science Foundation's
Center for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence (NSF-COSEE) and Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) programs. Where possible in this NSF RAPID response grant,
the PIs will involve REU undergraduate students and teachers in their research.

All data will be submitted to the BCO-DMO database in a timely manner so they
will be available to the larger scientific community.