* 1144223
* Subject preference and ergativity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,11/30/2016
* Kevin Ryan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2016
* USD 133,845.00

Linguists know that the word order in our sentences does not necessarily match
the order in our brains. For example, in the sentence "What do you see?" the
question word "what" parallels the object in the answer: we say "I see a car",
so "what" corresponds to the thing that we see. The word "what" appears to start
after the verb, but moves to the front of the sentence. This study will examine
grammatical constraints on this displacement in languages where the grammatical
subject can appear in two different forms depending on whether the verb is
intransitive (e.g., "run") or transitive (e.g., "eat"): ergative languages. In
most ergative languages, the subject of a transitive cannot displace at all.
Linguists do not know why; perhaps it has to do with the difficulty in
processing such displacement. To test this, the researchers will use eye-
tracking to investigate whether this displacement is particularly difficult in
the few ergative languages that can move both kinds of subjects (such languages
are about 10% of all ergative languages). Avar, a minority language of the
Caucasus, has already been investigated. In this project, they propose to study
Niuean, an endangered Polynesian language spoken mainly in New Zealand. The
choice of Niuean is critical because its structure is the mirror image of Avar
structure and will allow researchers to fill in an important gap in the
understanding of ergativity. That in turn will lead to novel ways of modeling
the structure of complex sentences and long-distance relations in natural
language. If these studies of ergative languages show that speakers pay
attention to the notion of grammatical subject, regardless of its form, this
would constitute novel confirmation that the abstract notion ?subject? is
psychologically real. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few minority languages have been
studied using experimental methods, so this study will set an important
precedent for combining experimental methods with field linguistics. The
research team will be working with the National Maori Language Institute, with
the Faculty of Maori Development (Te Ara Poutama) at Auckland University of
Technology, and with colleagues at the University of Auckland. Graduate and
undergraduate assistants will be given the opportunity to work on the project
and interact with the Niuean community in Auckland and will therefore be exposed
to the linguistic and cultural diversity of the Polynesian world.