* 1144417
* Collaborative Research:   ARTS:  Taxonomy and systematics of selected  Neotropical clades of arachnids
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Gonzalo Giribet, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 12/31/2014
* USD 387,860.00

Arachnids comprise one of the most diverse groups of animals, with numerous
representatives in all terrestrial ecosystems. Aside from Acari (mites and
ticks), whose total estimated diversity might reach up to one million species,
the orders Araneae (spiders) and Opiliones (harvestmen or daddy longlegs) are
the most diverse arachnid lineages. The main goal of this project is to carry
out taxonomic revisions (monographs) of several lineages across selected
Neotropical groups in two arachnid orders (Araneae [spiders] and Opiliones
[daddy long legs]). The groups that we have targeted in this proposal are mainly
leaf litter inhabitants (except for mimetids), grossly undersampled and
understudied, that lack modern revisionary work and include many undescribed
taxa at the species level and above, and thus provide excellent research and
training opportunities in modern monography and systematics. The largely
overlapping Neotropical distribution of our study groups allows us to
effectively collect these arachnids in joint field expeditions. Some of these
study taxa also pose similar biogeographic and evolutionary questions that can
be addressed with common methodology and expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To
carry out our research and training goals we have assembled a team of scientists
with diverse backgrounds in systematics and arachnology and a demonstrated
history of successful collaborative research efforts. Combining research efforts
to tackle these taxonomic problems provides the empirical basis for our multi-
ordinal and multidisciplinary approach for training doctoral students in the
broadest possible way. Lab rotations and collaboration among the multiple
investigators participating in the projects, in addition to the joint field
expeditions, also contribute to this synergism. Research results will be
disseminated in high impact portals such as Encyclopedia of Life and Tree of
Life. Online interactive identification tools will also be produced.