* 1144377
* OP-TEC:  The National Center for Optics and Photonics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Marion Soileau, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,728,289.00

The OP-TEC Center, established in 2006 as an NSF-ATE National Center of
Excellence, is a consortium of eight community and technical colleges in NJ, PA,
CA, FL, NC, TX, IA, and SC led by OP-TEC staff at the Center for Occupational
Research and Development (CORD). OP-TEC's mission is to build the capacity of
U.S. two-year colleges to provide the quality and quantity of technicians needed
in this critical and emerging field. OP-TEC projects the job market, maintains
skill standards, designs curricula, tests recruiting and teaching strategies,
and supports AAS programs and retraining efforts at community and technical
colleges by providing studies, technical assistance, and faculty development.
OP-TEC continually examines the field of optics and photonics to identify and
support new education and training for emerging and changing technologies
related to photonics. Photonics, the technology that incorporates optics and
electronics (lasers, fiber-optics, electro-optics, etc.) is a rapidly expanding
field that provides rewarding jobs for technicians and excellent opportunities
for economic growth. Photonics is also an enabling technology with applications
in defense/homeland security, renewable energy, telecommunications,
manufacturing and materials processing, diagnostic and therapeutic medical
equipment, environmental monitoring, nanotechnology, and solid state lighting.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A 2009 survey of U. S. employers estimated that nearly
2200 new photonics technicians are needed this year. The need is also great for
education and training of employed technicians in this field. In its first three
years, OP-TEC has created and tested its infrastructure (skill standards,
curricula, teaching materials, databases, clearinghouse, website, exhibits,
outreach strategies to colleges, high school recruitment strategies, faculty
training, dual-credit courses, and retraining courses). It has helped eight
Partner Colleges to increase enrollment and improve their curricula and
teaching. These colleges have documented their "best practices" and are
providing models and technical assistance for colleges that are interested in
initiating or improving photonics education. OP-TEC has identified related
fields (precision optics, solar electric energy) that require technicians with
similar knowledge and skills. OP-TEC is communicating and/or working with over
240 colleges that have expressed interest in offering new programs in photonics
or require assistance in rebuilding struggling programs. As a result of OP-TEC's
efforts, three colleges have initiated programs, seven colleges have
strengthened their offerings, two colleges are restoring phased-out programs,
over 40 colleges are in the process of planning and initiating new offerings,
and one college is retraining incumbent workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
renewal, OP-TEC has shifted its emphasis from building infrastructure to
building capacity (greatly expanding the number of photonics student completers
who enter the U.S. workforce annually). It will take an additional 6 to 8 years
to reach the targeted capacity to meet employer needs for photonics technicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal resides in its
focus on photonics, photonics-enabled technologies, and the emerging
applications that impact U.S. security and economic development. Success in
building U.S. capacity for producing photonics technicians also provides
rewarding jobs for newly-educated students and ensures that employed technicians
receive additional education and training as job requirements change. OP-TEC is
uniquely positioned to expand this capacity because of (1) the infrastructure
already developed, (2) the 240+ colleges that have asked OP-TEC for assistance,
and (3) the excellent Partner Colleges that can serve as models and provide
technical assistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed
Center continuation lie in (1) the potential for student/completer growth due to
OP-TEC's effective strategies for assisting colleges in initiating new
educational offerings, (2) the expansion of photonics applications into areas
such as solar energy and solid state lighting, as well as efforts to support
education/training in photonics-related fields such as precision optics, and (3)
OP-TEC's aggressive efforts to open doors to underrepresented populations by
educating faculty and administrators in diversity awareness, recruitment, and
retention. Many colleges are also adopting OP-TEC - developed strategies for
building the high school pipeline. As a result, 3-4 high schools near each
college are introducing optics and photonics in their science and technology
courses.