* 1144727
* Ca Isotope Variations in Oceanic Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Stein Jacobsen, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2016
* USD 352,078.00

Ca Isotope Variations in Oceanic Basalts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. Preliminary work demonstrates that measurable mass dependent 44Ca/40Ca
isotopic variations Hawaiian basaltic lavas can be attributed to the presence of
recycled ancient carbonates in the underlying mantle. It is proposed to extend
this work to other oceanic islands and other tectonic settings to determine if
Hawaii is a unique case or if recycling of ancient carbonates is a more general
process in generating mantle heterogeneity? It is predicted that such a process
would significantly affect the Ca and Sr, as well as C, budgets of the Earth?s
mantle. Radiogenic isotope geochemistry (Rb­Sr, Sm-Nd, U-Th­Pb, Lu­Hf, and noble
gas systems) provides compelling evidence that widespread mantle heterogeneity
exists, and can be described in terms of apparent isotopic end­member
compositions (e.g., EM1, EM2, HIMU and DMM). It is proposed to determine Ca
isotope compositions of representative oceanic basalts to see how this parameter
varies with the other isotopically determined end­member variants, and to
further constrain the importance of carbonate recycling. Specifically, the new
measurements will be used to [1] test current hypothesis that mass dependent
44Ca/40Ca variations are due to carbonate recycling, [2] investigate if non-mass
dependent 44Ca/40Ca variations, due to 40K decay, are present in samples with
very high 87Sr/86Sr ratios and [3] quantify fluxes of recycled materials that
may have caused the variations. Processes that could account for mass dependent
44Ca/40Ca variations incluse: [1] carbonate recycling, [2] altered oceanic crust
subduction, [3] recycling of plagioclase­rich gabbroic crust, and [4] igneous
fractionation (diffusion, partial meting and fractional crystallization). A
research plan is designed to help resolve the following questions: [1] Is
carbonate recycling a common feature in oceanic basalts with high 87Sr/86Sr or
is it limited to rare and unique sites like Hawaii? [2] Are Ca isotope data
consistent with upper crustal recycling proposed to explain very high 87Sr/86Sr
ratios in Samoan lavas? This research aims to establish a Ca isotope constraint
on the magnitude of upper crustal recycling in mantle sources of basalts and
also to test the influence of garnet and plagioclase fractionation on isotopic
variations in oceanic basalts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. T the
proposed research facilitates for the first time extensive application of Ca
isotopes to the field of mantle geochemistry. This proposal involves an early
career research scientist (Huang) at Harvard University, and will educate and
train graduate and undergraduate students in application of state­of­the-art
analytical techniques to geosciences. Part of the proposed study will evolve
into the senior thesis of an undergraduate student. The proposed research will
leverage previous NSF investments by using samples recovered from previous NSF
funded programs, such as ODP. The scientific results from this research will be
presented in an educational website, which will be used in undergraduate and
graduate education. As part of the proposed study, a new silicate standard will
be prepared for intercalibration of future Ca isotopic work. Finally, results of
the proposed study will be made available for outreach education via a project
web page and an exhibition setup.