* 1144998
* 2011 Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting, Hartford, Connecticut, October 12-15, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Donald Peterson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 08/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

1144998&lt;br/&gt;Peterson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BMES Annual Fall Meeting is
a high quality, multidisciplinary scientific event conducted by the Biomedical
Engineering Society (BMES). This year?s Meeting is co-hosted by the University
of Connecticut and Brown University and will be held in Hartford, Connecticut,
from October 12-15, 2011, and will feature a one-day workshop, at least four
plenary lectures, numerous research presentations, a variety of special
sessions, and several valuable networking opportunities for members of the BME
community. There will be a total of 14 parallel technical program sessions
providing over 800 oral presentations and an additional 1,600+ in poster
presentations. Special sessions will include several distinguished BME lecturers
and a ?Meet the Candidates? poster session that will promote BME employment
opportunities. The pre-conference workshop, ?BME-IDEA? will deal with important
contemporary issues in Biomedical Engineering on technology transfer and
commercialization. Other special sessions, including ?Career Alumni Panel?,
Resume Review/Writing Workshop?, and ?BMES Town Hall Meeting?, will give
participants an opportunity to understand the career of a biomedical engineer,
how to apply for job opportunities, and learn about the current state of the
society and discipline. A record 3,500+ attendees are anticipated for the 2011
meeting. The potential record attendance is based upon the very high number of
abstracts received for the 2010 meeting (i.e., 2,182, which is a 23% increase
over the number of submissions in 2009) coupled with the fact that conference-
friendly Hartford is very conveniently-located in the Northeast between New York
City and Boston. A booklet will provide program details to the participants of
the conference. All technical presentations will come from one-page, peer-
reviewed abstracts, which will be compiled in CD format and distributed to all
registrants. Copies of the CD will also be provided to all co-sponsoring
societies. Currently, the CD is envisioned to serve as the only technical
proceedings of the meeting due to the large number of high-quality abstracts
accepted. At this conference, at least four extremely high-quality plenary
speakers are scheduled during a time with no other activities so that all
conference participants may attend these talks as well as the workshops. The
2011 meeting currently has sponsorship commitments from six major sponsors,
including the University of Connecticut, Brown University, Covidien, and
Medtronic.