* 1144581
* Community-level effects of defensive endosymbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* John Jaenike, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2016
* USD 477,498.00

Most insect species on earth carry specific bacteria that are passed from
infected females to their offspring. Many of these bacteria are beneficial to
their hosts in such ways as conferring resistance to pathogens. Because insects
are important members of larger ecological communities, the bacteria they carry
may affect the structure and dynamics of these communities. The proposed
research will examine several community-level effects of specific bacteria that
infect specific mushroom-feeding flies. The bacteria living inside flies confer
resistance to the sterilizing effects of a parasitic nematode worm and thus
increase the fitness of parasitized flies. In addition, the bacteria
dramatically affect the population dynamics of these parasitic nematodes:
nematode parasitism increases rapidly in fly populations that lack bacteria, but
the nematodes quickly go extinct in bacteria-infected populations. This project
will investigate three questions: 1) How do bacteria affect the relative
abundance of various species of competing flies, both in the presence and
absence of nematode parasitism? 2) How does the presence of bacteria in one fly
species affect the rate of nematode parasitism in other fly species? 3) Under
what conditions can bacteria spread to new fly
species?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has potential broader impacts in the
areas of public health and agriculture. Filarial nematodes cause onchocerciasis
(River Blindness) and lymphatic filariasis in humans, with about 160 million
people currently infected worldwide. These nematodes are carried from one person
to another by insect vectors. If specific bacteria adversely affect nematodes
within insect vectors, it might be possible to introduce the bacteria into
populations of these insects and thus reduce the transmission, prevalence, and
severity of certain diseases. As a potential agricultural application, bacteria
or genes derived from them could be introduced to crop plants to provide
resistance to root-knot nematodes, which annually cause over $120 billion in
agricultural damage around the world. The proposed work includes several
projects suited to undergraduate research. The PI will work with the Kearns
Center at the University of Rochester to recruit low-income, first-generation,
and underrepresented minority students.