* 1144945
* Insights into the Development of Silicic Magma Reservoirs over Space and Time from Crystal-scale Trace-element and Isotopic Data and U-Th Datin
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Kari Cooper, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2016
* USD 374,297.00

Insights into the development of silicic magma reservoirs over space and time
from crystal- scale trace-element and isotopic data and U-Th
dating&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Caldera-forming eruptions are
among the most dramatic and hazardous geologic events to occur on Earth. In
addition, melting and assimilation at large silicic caldera systems represent
over geologic time important mechanisms that influence chemical characteristics
of the continental crust. Important outstanding questions about how silicic
reservoir systems operate include how large bodies of silicic magmas are
generated (i.e., the balance between re-melting of existing crustal material and
differentiation of mantle-derived material), how silicic magma systems are
organized in terms of their subsurface geometry and the distribution of distinct
magma bodies within the reservoir, how and when large volumes of eruptible melt
are accumulated prior to eruptions, and whether the processes of rhyolitic melt
generation and storage differ with tectonic setting. Results of this project
will contribute to the debate by providing insights into the heterogeneity or
homogeneity of melt compositions in silicic reservoirs over space and time.
Specific goals of this proposal are: 1) to determine the degree to which large
silicic magma bodies are chemically heterogeneous in composition over space and
time, which has implications for how silicic magmas are generated and
amalgamated/stored prior to eruptions, and 2) to compare this information about
subsurface geometry and heterogeneity between two large caldera systems in
different tectonic settings. It is proposed to address these questions by
analyzing samples from Yellowstone Caldera, Western US, and Okataina Caldera
Complex, New Zealand. The project will utilize a novel combination of analytical
techniques, including trace-element analyses and dating of zircon and major
phases along with Hf isotopic compositions of zircon. A longer-term temporal
record of chemical changes in magmatic systems will be obtained through two
approaches: 1) analysis of surfaces on unpolished grains mounted with the
crystal face parallel to the mounting medium, which will be combined with
interior analyses of conventional polished mounts and with multiple interior
regions of selected grains in a serial-sectioning approach, and 2) combining
zircon analyses with U-Th dating and analyses of trace elements in mineral
separates of major phases. The analysis of surfaces of grains will provide a the
record of the most recent growth of zircon, which is difficult to obtain from
spot analyses of polished interiors because thin zircon rims are smaller than
the spot dimensions, leading to mixing of ages. Zircon grains in silicic magmas
often record conditions in the subsurface tens to hundreds of thousands of years
prior to the eruptions that brought them to the surface, whereas major phases
are more likely to record information about the accumulation and storage of
magma bodies within a few thousands of years prior to their eruption, thus the
combined approach provides unique insights into the long-term subsurface history
as well as the accumulation of silicic magmas in the lead-up to eruptions.
Furthermore, the addition of in-situ Hf isotopic analyses of zircon that can be
directly related to age and trace-element data is new and will provide an
excellent method of fingerprinting different magma compositions/bodies and
tracking their evolution and mixing history over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this study include a better
understanding of the growth of silicic systems, which has implications for
volcanic hazards and for understanding the growth of the continental crust. This
project will also support a female PI and possibly a female graduate student (MS
student to be recruited). Two graduate students will gain valuable experience
and training in a wide variety of cutting-edge analytical techniques. At least
one undergraduate thesis will be supported by this work, and if possible we will
recruit an additional undergraduate student each year to participate in this
project. The PI has a track record of mentoring women and other underrepresented
groups, and will continue to recruit underrepresented students for the graduate
and undergraduate work in this proposal. This proposal will also support
international collaborations and collaborations between the university and USGS.