* 1144480
* Workshop on Sociolinguistic Archive Preparation
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2013
* Malcah Yaeger-Dror, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 10/31/2013
* USD 24,534.00

For nearly five decades sociolinguists and dialectologists have studied the
differences in pronunciation, word choice and grammar as correlated with the
demographics and attitudes of the speakers and the situations in which they find
themselves. This work has important implications for society, education,
politics, technology development and forensics. Sociolinguists routinely produce
recordings of natural speech, variously transcribed and quantitatively analyzed
for dialect features plus careful descriptions of the speakers' characteristics
and the interview situation. These data have important potential for linguists,
scholars in language related fields and computer scientists developing human
language technologies. Although many sociolinguists are eager to share their
work, there have been impediments to such sharing. The proposed workshop will
address two of the most important. First, within the United States, an
Institutional Review Board (IRB) must approve any research involving human
subjects. The vast majority of sociolinguistic research involves extremely low
risk, and potentially high social benefit particularly for minority communities,
but no common body of practice exists for permitting data to be shared. Nor is
there a common body of practice with respect to the demographic, attitudinal and
situational information collected, complicating sharing and comparison across
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will gather leading sociolinguists
and dialectologists, and other field researchers with extensive experience, to
develop common practice in preparing for institutional review and sharing of
data. Expected outcomes are a sketch of an IRB protocol and demographic,
attitudinal and situational questionnaires, each containing a core set that
scholars should collect for every subject as well as a larger set whose
relevance will depend upon the interview itself. The Linguistic Society of
America and the Linguistic Data Consortium will publish the protocol and modules
on their web sites and announce them via their newsletters and mailing lists,
which reach more than 8000 scholars worldwide.