* 1145588
* Ecological dynamics of vertically transmitted symbionts in hosts with complex life histories
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Jennifer Rudgers, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2017
* USD 587,100.00

Many plants and animals harbor microbial symbionts, i.e., microbes that live on
or in individuals of a host species, which are transmitted from host parent to
offspring. However, there is striking variation in the frequency of microbial
symbiosis across host species and even among populations of the same species. In
some cases, a microbial symbiont species is present in all individuals of a host
species, leading to tight integration of the ecology and evolution of host and
symbiont. In other cases, such as fungal symbionts living within plants, the
symbiont occurs at intermediate frequencies, with symbiotic and symbiont-free
individuals co-occurring within host populations. This project will address the
question of why there is wide variation in the frequency of host-symbiont
associations. Given the strong evolutionary and ecological impacts of microbial
symbionts, answering this question is a major challenge in biology. This project
will test the hypothesis that the life history traits of the host species can
explain much of the observed variation in symbiosis. Theory suggests that the
population dynamics of symbionts are determined by how they affect the fitness
of their host and the efficiency of their transmission among individual hosts.
Host species with more complex life histories (longer lifespan, repeated
reproduction, different stages of development) have more opportunities to be
affected by symbionts and to lose them. This project will develop new
mathematical models to examine the influence of host life history traits on
symbiont population dynamics, and use field experiments to test model
predictions. Experimental work will focus on the well-studied model system of
grasses and their fungal symbionts. Symbiont dynamics in annual host grasses
will be compared to dynamics in perennial host grasses that have more complex
life histories. The integration of theoretical and field-based research is
expected to provide a transformative approach to understanding and predicting
the dynamics of symbionts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theoretical understanding of
the dynamics of symbionts that are passed from parents to their offspring has
broad application in conservation biology, ecosystem management and
epidemiology. For example, global climate change has disrupted key symbioses,
with warmer waters causing coral bleaching and drier climates altering the
frequency and outcomes of animal and plant symbioses. This research will
generate a framework for evaluating the responses of host-symbiont interactions
to ongoing global change. In addition, this project will train students in using
mathematical approaches to addressing fundamental questions in microbial ecology
and evolution. Finally, the research team will develop hands-on projects for
high school classrooms to illustrate concepts in the ecology and evolution of
symbiosis.