* 1145202
* Isotopic Diversity in Mangaia Melt Inclusions: Mantle Source or Crustal Assimilation?
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Matthew Jackson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2014
* USD 199,703.00

Isotopic diversity in Mangaia melt inclusions: Mantle source or crustal
assimilation?

Intellectual Merit: Olivine-hosted melt inclusions (MIs) are trapped by growing
phenocrysts in magma conduits at depth and provide ?snapshots? of diverse melt
compositions before complete melt aggregation. MIs reveal major and trace
element diversity that is not clear from analyses of whole rock lavas alone and
the origin of this diversity is a source of vigorous debate. One end member
hypothesis is that the MI diversity reflects heterogeneity in mantle source
compositions. Alternatively, MI diversity may result from magmatic processes,
including crustal assimilation. In one case, olivine-hosted MIs from a single
lava from the island of Mangaia (Cook-Austral Islands) exhibit extreme Pb-
isotopic variability spanning half the range observed in all ocean island and
MORB lavas. Surprisingly, some of these MIs contain Pb that is significantly
less radiogenic than observed in any Mangaian lavas. These data give rise to
many fundamental questions. Why is it that the inclusions are not isotopically
representative of the bulk magma? Is this because MIs from a single lava sample
an array of melts derived from isotopically-diverse mantle sources? Or, does the
isotopic diversity reflect assimilation of the lithosphere during magma ascent?
It is proposed to measure trace element and isotopic compositions of MIs in a
new set of samples from Mangaia so that these comprehensive data can be used to
evaluate crustal assimilation and other processes responsible for the Pb
isotopic diversity. Preliminary study of 14 MIs from Mangaia hint at a possible
influence of crustal assimilation, but the data are limited additional data are
required to conclusively describe and assess the competing hypotheses. In
particular, if the Pb isotopic diversity in Mangaia MIs is caused by crustal
assimilation processes, it is expected that Pb-isotopic compositions will
correlate with tracers of assimilation (e.g., high Cl and B, Sr isotopes),
whereas this is unlikely to be the case if the isotopic diversity reflects
diverse mantle sources beneath Mangaia. To enable comprehensive evaluation of
these alternatives, funds are requested to collect new high-precision Pb- and
Sr-isotopic data as well as trace element and volatile data for an expanded
collection of MIs from primitive Mangaia lavas. The proposed research aims to
constrain the relative roles of magmatic processes and mantle sources in
generating heterogeneous inclusions, and will provide insights into magma
transport and emplacement processes in the lithosphere.

Broader Impacts: The proposed study will support an early-career non-tenured
faculty and one PhD student. The project will also involve several undergraduate
advisees. While carrying out fieldwork in the Cook Islands in 2010, the PI
taught students about local volcanism at the Mangaia high school and interviewed
with the local newspaper on Rarotonga, resulting in an article that describes
his research there. The PI also met with the Prime Minister of the Cook Islands
to discuss the relevance of the proposed work.