* 1145734
* Microevolution and population dynamics of Prochlorococcus cells in the ocean:  Insights through single-cell genomics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Sallie Chisholm, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Prochlorococcus is a bacterium that is widespread and abundant in the world
oceans. As a photosynthetic cell, it uses sunlight to fix carbon dioxide into
organic carbon, similar to plants on land. The global Prochlorococcus population
in the oceans is made up of a diversity of "ecotypes," each of which has
slightly different conditions for optimal growth. It is hypothesized that the
diversity of this group of microbes allows it to thrive over broadly varying
ocean habitats, but the genetic underpinnings of this diversity is very poorly
understood. This research aims at advancing our understanding of the ecology and
evolution of Prochlorococcus, by studying the genetic composition of single wild
Prochlorococcus cells isolated from the Atlantic and Pacific oceans at different
times of year. The study is motivated by two fundamental questions: (i) what is
the relationship between the genetic composition of the cells and their
ecological dynamics? (ii) how do populations adapt to their environment over
ecological and evolutionary time scales?

The broader significance of this work lies in the central role that
Prochlorococcus plays in ocean ecology and the global carbon cycle. As the most
abundant photosynthetic group in the oceans, Prochlorococcus is a critical
component of the base of the food web. Because it conducts a sizable fraction of
ocean photosynthesis, it plays an important role in the global carbon cycle and
global climate processes. Understanding what regulates Prochlorococcus'
diversity and dynamics is critical for developing predictive models of these
important Earth system features.