* 1145640
* CGV: EAGER: Simulation-Based Manipulation Capture for Dexterous Character Animation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Nancy Pollard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/2013
* USD 81,000.00

Through our hands, we communicate, care for ourselves and others, and use tools
to affect our world. However, our understanding of how we control our hands to
accomplish such feats is still in its infancy. Dexterous manipulation is
especially challenging to study, as even "simple" manipulation tasks are complex
in their details. The task of lifting a wrench into the hand, for example, can
be decomposed into five separate actions, each of which may require a
specialized control strategy. It is important to study human examples of such
activities; through understanding human expertise we can reach practical
outcomes such as physically intelligent animated characters for training and
remote communication, robots capable of unprecedented dexterity, and prosthetic
designs that far exceed the current state of the art in their elegance and
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key hurdle in making a significant
advance in these areas is the difficulty of capturing human manipulation in a
form that facilitates analysis and study. The rapid sequence of contact events,
the hand's large number of degrees of freedom, and close contact between the
hand and object all contribute to creating an impossible capture task using
traditional methods. The investigators are developing an alternative: simulation
motion capture, where a user interacts with and guides a running simulation.
Through this innovative approach, details such as contact timing, contact area,
and contact forces are made available for the first time for general
manipulation tasks. Key innovations include a fast simulation system for a
deformable human hand (or full body) and novel techniques to control such a high
degree of freedom simulation with intent and precision. In parallel, the
investigators create a database of manipulation tasks, study new languages for
action segmentation and control law development, develop robust autonomous
controllers for grasping and manipulation, and study novel classifiers for
recognition of affordances.