* 1145947
* Collaborative Research: The structure, function, and evolution of a regulatory network controlling sexually dimorphic fruit fly development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Mark Rebeiz, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 12/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Gene networks are fundamental to animal development, and though the complexity
of these networks has been mapped in model organisms, the critical connection
between network evolution and organismal diversity remains unclear. This project
provides a unique perspective to these complex biological networks by
investigating how new fruit fly pigmentation patterns were achieved through the
modification of connections between pivotal members of a pigmentation gene
network. Using candidate gene and genome-scale approaches it will be determined
how a key regulatory protein is connected to and thereby controls the
utilization of a battery of target genes necessary to make a pigmentation
pattern. Furthermore, comparing network connections within and between related
species that exhibit different pigmentation patterns will reveal how these
connections evolved and how network interactions affect natural variation in the
production of this key regulatory protein. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An enhanced
understanding of this model gene network will aid both the evolutionary and
developmental biology communities in the construction and testing of hypotheses
as to how other gene networks operate and have changed to control diverse traits
in diverse lineages. Moreover, these outcomes bear upon the human condition as
genetic differences in the DNA sequences connecting regulatory proteins to their
target genes is a major yet poorly understood cause of variation between
individuals. This project will achieve numerous broader impacts, including:
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, the development
of both lab exercises for high school biology curricula and research experiences
for high school students, and interactions at University symposia and on
visitations to area High Schools with non-scientific students and teachers to
communicate the contributions of evolutionary developmental biology to modern
scientific thought and the value of scientific research to society.