* 1145994
* Collaborative Research:   Frugivory networks and the assembly rules during early plant community assembly
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Tomas Carlo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 10/31/2015
* USD 156,100.00

Understanding how tropical forests regenerate after clearing is crucial to the
conservation of natural resources and biodiversity. In the tropics, seed
dispersal by birds helps certain trees to spread back into deforested areas and
regenerate forests. The unique feature of this study will be to ask what role
fruit-eating birds can play overall in tropical forest regeneration. The
research will go beyond separate studies of individual plants and birds to study
the combined role of birds as dispersers in a whole forest community. Working in
deforested pastures in Puerto Rico, researchers will follow the behavior of
birds and the seasonality of fruit production by trees, measure the abundance of
incoming seeds of different tree species, and add seeds to test whether
dispersal is limiting regeneration. The project will also use an innovative
method involving the labeling of seeds with stable isotopes to follow the actual
movement of seeds by birds. Results will contribute new knowledge about the
dynamics of tropical forests, including the interactions between plants and
animals and how species assemble into forests on open land.&lt;br/&gt;Most
tropical forests worldwide are secondary forests that have regenerated following
the abandonment of agriculture and grazing. Understanding what drives
regeneration will help land managers accelerate the recovery of forests and
counteract continuing forest loss. The project will also incorporate students
and citizens into the data collection activities and serve as an education and
information dissemination tool. Research activities will train a Ph.D. student
and provide hands-on experiences for other students and the general public
through a partnership with local educational organizations.