* 1145847
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding diversity in camas and rush lilies: can a unified approach resolve species boundaries in difficult groups?
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Jenny Archibald, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 427,266.00

Characterizing life's astounding diversity is fundamental to creating the
stable, predictive classifications applied daily in agriculture, conservation,
and medicine. Despite new genomic tools, however, species boundaries remain
contentious since both the processes and traits that define species are
spatially and temporally dynamic. This project uses multiple evidentiary
approaches and novel protocols to test discovery-driven hypotheses of species
delimitation in closely related Camassia and Hastingsia (rush lilies). Their
morphological complexity, hybrids, and variable populations pose difficult
classification challenges, making them ideal exemplars for defining the "best
practices" of integrative taxonomy. Analysis of ecological and genetic
differences, reproductive barriers, and the response of "generalist pollinators"
to floral traits will add further insights into how diversity arises in a family
where highly specialized pollination also occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ecological and cultural value of camas to indigenous peoples enhances the
project's broad focus, which engages K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students
in investigations encompassing the full scope of systematics. Volunteer
partnerships will foster diverse, structured experiences in threatened habitats.
Access to internet keys will further improve rare and common plant
identification. Finally, ecological niche modeling and records of insect visits
and flowering times may facilitate tracking the effects of climate change on
plant-pollinator interactions.