* 1145981
* Paying the piper:   how two fish species adjust calcium cycling for different mating calls
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Lawrence Rome, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 659,343.00

In some species of fish, males contract and relax muscles which surround the
gas-filled swimbladder at 100 Hz and up to 250 Hz to produce a mating call.
Calcium (Ca2+), the switch for muscle contraction, is released from and pumped
back into the sarcoplasmic reticuluum on each stimulus. The rapid contractions
would seem to require a prodigious Ca2+ pumping rate. However the Ca2+ pumps are
not very fast. Toadfish solve the Ca2+ problem in two ways: (1) Toadfish reduce
the amount of Ca2+ released per stimulus and thus require less pumping. (2)
Toadfish do not call continuously, they make 400 ms calls followed by a long
5-15 second intercall interval (i.e., 3-8% duty cycle calls). Toadfish possess a
protein, parvalbumin (Parv), in very high concentrations which binds 70-80% of
the Ca2+ released during a call. Parv then releases the Ca2+ slowly during the
long intercall interval and it is pumped back at a modest rate. Another fish
species, the midshipman, make a 100% duty cycle call and a single call can last
1 hour. Without the intercall interval to unload Ca2+, Parv cannot be useful.
Accordingly, midshipman have only 1/7 of the Parv as toadfish. This leaves the
problem: how can midshipman call? This research project will examine how much
Ca2+ is released per stimulus, how the Ca2+ level changes during calling, and
whether midshipman possess a means of performing mechanical work with little
release and reuptake of Ca2+-utilizing a mechanism (asynchronous contraction)
observed in insects, but never before seen in vertebrate muscle. The work will
utilize innovative energetic analyses, high speed intracellular Ca2+ and high
speed mechanics/video techniques (20,000 frames/s) developed by the
collaborators. Toadfish and midshipman share neural mechanisms with birds and
mammals and thus this work will improve our understanding of how vocal
communication evolved. Also, extreme function usually involves extreme
modifications, and thus studies of these extreme muscles will reveal new
mechanisms that are not visible in normal muscle. This project will include
mentoring underrepresented minority undergraduates through a REU program at the
MBL in Woods Hole. In addition 1 or 2 undergraduate students from the PI's
physiology and advanced muscle/biomechanics class will be given the opportunity
to work on the project in Philadelphia and Woods Hole.