* 1145999
* Model inference, comparison, and averaging for genetically structured populations
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Peter Beerli, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2015
* USD 327,000.00

Researchers collect genetic data to assess variability of animal and plant
populations and their ancestral relationships. For such datasets, thousands of
different relationships can be specified. For example, are polar bear
populations isolated from each other and if not what is the pattern of
relationships of polar bears from different populations? This research will
develop new methods to calculate the likelihood of different patterns of
relationships using Bayesian inference. These methods will be coded into freely
available software that will be able to evaluate large data sets. This will
achieve accurate ranking of alternative hypotheses using genomic data sets
considering complexities such as recombination and data collection
artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide freely available software along
with a user manual for the research community. The new methods will facilitate
many types of studies, including disease epidemics, and the studies of the
effect of changes in climate onto the distribution and maintenance of genetic
variability in crop-related and other species. The software will be disseminated
through online tutorials and workshops aimed at senior researchers. There will
also be two workshops on computer literacy for individuals ranging from high-
school science teachers, to undergraduates, and graduate students.