* 1145989
* Evolving hyperdiversity in phenotypic, ecological, and geographic networks: testing the taxon cycle and alternatives in Indo-Pacific Pheidole
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Evan Economo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 385,619.00

There are 429 ant genera known to science, but over 10% of ant species belong to
the single 'hyperdiverse' genus Pheidole. Likewise, certain geographic areas
(e.g. New Guinea) are diverse in species, phenotypes, and ecological strategies
while others (e.g. Samoa) are depauperate. These patterns represent a puzzle for
biologists. This project investigates the macroevolutionary dynamics of Pheidole
lineages in the island systems of the Indo-Pacific. The approach uses DNA to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of Pheidole, establishing when and where
different species, phenotypes, and ecological strategies evolved. Using
statistical and theoretical methods, this information will be used to test
hypotheses for the forces shaping biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses a fundamental question of biology; whether the course of evolution and
the biodiversity patterns we observe are inevitable or the outcomes of random
chance. Addressing this question is a necessary step toward predicting the
future dynamics of ecosystems in this time of unprecedented change. This is
especially true for ants, one of the most ubiquitous and ecologically dominant
animal groups on the planet. In the modern era, 'invasive' ants are now being
transferred around the globe by humans and are causing damage to both economic
interests and natural ecosystems. Understanding the historical dynamics of ant
evolution will allow us to better predict the future evolutionary consequences
of these modern colonizations.