* 1145118
* Expanding Frontiers of Detrital Shocked Mineral Research
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Aaron Cavosie, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2016
* USD 232,505.00

Meteorite impacts on Earth have caused rapid and dramatic changes in surface
conditions, including rapid climate change and biological extinctions.
Understanding the terrestrial impact history is thus crucial for a variety of
scientific and social reasons that affect modern society, including informing
policy decisions to study the hazard potential of future impacts. However, the
geologic record of past impact events is fragmentary, as many craters have been
removed by erosion over time. The true number of impact events Earth has
experienced is underestimated based on the number of preserved craters, which
makes predicting impacts in the future a challenging science. This project is
focused on identifying evidence of eroded impact craters in the form of uniquely
impact-deformed sand grains that collect in sedimentary environments.
Sedimentary rocks throughout the geologic time scale may preserve the record of
Earth's missing impacts, and thus allow a more accurate determination of the
history of terrestrial impacts. Learning where to look for and how to identify
this 'sedimentary record of impact' is the focus of this proposal.

Detrital shocked minerals, including quartz (SiO2), monazite (CePO4), and zircon
(ZrSiO4), have recently been documented in fluvial sediments eroding from the
two largest impact basins on Earth, the 2.0 Gyr Vredefort Dome in South Africa
and the 1.85 Gyr Sudbury impact in Canada. Shocked sand has been found in rivers
>750 km downstream from the impact site. Shocked minerals have also been found
in distal (>750 km) fluvial deposits in Miocene age sediments in South Africa.
The shocked sand grains can be used to determine the age of the source terrane,
in the age of impact, and set constraints on crater size. These findings imply
that shocked minerals survive the erosion and transport process, and record
structural and isotopic information about the impact event as they are dispersed
to continental scales over long geologic time periods. This project will test
the limit for the detection of detrital shocked minerals in diverse sedimentary
environments in the geologic record in both time and space. We will search for
shocked minerals eroded from Vredefort Dome impact in the Orange River basin, at
distances up to ~2000 km from the crater. We will also search for shocked
minerals in sediments transported during Paleozoic glaciations in southern
Africa, 300 Myr ago. Other projects will further test the applicability of this
approach to younger and small impact structures in North America. The results of
this project will also provide insight during analysis of materials from future
sample return missions to both the Moon and Mars, where heavily impacted early
planetary crusts are preserved and targeted for future sampling campaigns.