* 1145294
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Neighborhood Dynamics at Calixtlhuaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2013
* Juliana Novic, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2013
* USD 14,709.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Michael E. Smith, Juliana Novic will examine the
social composition of the neighborhoods of the ancient city of Calixtlahuaca.
Social clustering is evident today in U.S. cities with phenomenon such as white
flight, ethnic neighborhoods, and urban ghettos. Are these phenomena unique to
modern society or do they have a deep historical trajectory? Did social
clustering occur in ancient cities? Ms. Novic seeks to address these questions
by looking at social clustering in the Aztec-period city of Calixtlahuaca,
Mexico (AD 1100-1520). She will investigate the ways in which class, ritual,
consumer culture, and resource procurement influenced the social fabric of
Calixtlahuaca's neighborhoods. Very few archaeological case studies exist where
the researcher is able to examine more than one facet of social clustering.
Physical, chemical and mineralogical studies of artifacts from a NSF funded 2006
surface survey are used to provide data for statistically assessing social
clustering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Novic uses physical and mineralogical
characteristics of the pottery to identify producers and styles. She then
examines what people were purchasing in this early market economy, determine
what that indicates about the consumer socially, and the relationship to
neighborhood organization. The chemical analysis allows a precise reconstruction
of the places from which people obtained their imported goods. Ms. Novic can
look at the interrelationships among class, ritual, consumer preference, and
resource procurement in neighborhood life. Similar questions about the
relationship among class, religion, and economics are asked about modern cities,
and this project is unique in asking these questions about past cities. The
historical path that cities take is influenced by previous urban forms.
Understanding neighborhood composition in Precolumbian cities can help one to
understand the processes that lead to similar forms in modern cities. This can
inform planners and developmental organizations seeking to improve the urban
environment. This project is highly transdisciplinary, combining insights from
Urban Studies, Sociology, Economics, Geography, and Archaeology. The new ideas
produced will in turn influence the above mentioned fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The urban core of Calixtlahuaca is unique, with many
different temples spread out and no paramount temple. This is different from
most Mesoamerican cities and suggests that ritual life was highly varied at this
site. Historical records state that many languages were spoken in the city. If
social clustering occurred in Mesoamerican cities, Calixtlahuaca would be an
ideal place to find it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will seek to have
broader impacts beyond the research topics presented. The project involves women
from the local community in the analysis, thus providing them with an
opportunity to learn a skill and learn about their history. The field laboratory
is located at the Colegio Mexiquense. This provides an opportunity for
intellectual exchange between scholars at the Colegio and US researchers on
Precolumbian Mexico. The project is the final step in Ms. Novic's doctoral
degree. Ms. Novic is Puerto Rican, a group that is underrepresented in the
archaeological profession and in academia as a whole.