* 1145875
* Collaborative Research:  Controls over C sequestration: physiology vs. physics
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Joshua Schimel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 607,635.00

Understanding the global carbon cycle is a central issue facing ecosystem
science because of carbon dioxide's (CO2) role in the greenhouse effect and
climate change. One of the main stores of organic carbon on Earth is in soil,
which contains more organic carbon than all the plants growing upon it. This
project aims to better understand C-sequestration by evaluating the physical
processes (diffusion &amp; desorption) that regulate microorganisms' access to
C, and how they use that C to make enzymes to acquire additional resources, and
modify their immediate environment. A major focus of the work will be to explore
how these processes are influenced by soil moisture and drought. The research
will be done at the Sedgwick Reserve in California, and will use a combination
of field experiments to manipulate plant inputs of fresh carbon and water
inputs, laboratory studies to evaluate specific mechanisms involved in
controlling the processes, and mathematical modeling to relate these fine-scale
mechanisms to larger-scale dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help
train interdisciplinary graduate student researchers, and will involve
undergraduate students, bringing them into the research environment. For public
outreach, the project will rely on Sedgwick Reserve?s center for public
education. The investigators have developed presentations about soils, soil
research, and their importance to society. They will update these with
information from this project, and work with the docents to use in their
educational programs. Members of the research team will continue their
activities mentoring K-12 students with programs such as their "Soil's Alive!"
demonstration of soil ecology for 10th graders from the local Santa Ynez Valley
Union High School District, &lt;br/&gt;