* 1145887
* Functional characterization of a multi-enzyme complex involved in xylan synthesis in wheat
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Ahmed Faik, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2016
* USD 411,999.00

Plant cells produce a complex structure called cell wall, composed mainly of
polysaccharides (cellulose, hemicelluloses, and pectins). Xylan is a major
hemicellulose constituent in cell walls from grasses and trees. Although xylan
is the third most abundant polymer on earth, its biosynthesis has proven to be
more challenging to elucidate than expected. This project seeks to overcome this
lack of understanding and is built upon our recent discovery that xylan
synthesis in wheat involves a multi-enzyme complex (called xylan synthase
complex, XSC). The objective of this project is to use a multi-faceted approach
that combines proteomics, cell biology, biochemistry, bioinformatics, and
reverse genetics to (i) identify and determine the function of the proteins that
are part of this XSC, and (ii) elucidate the mechanism of assembly of these
proteins into a functional complex. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes from this
work will lead to a basic understanding of hemicellulose biosynthesis in wheat
as it relates to plant growth and seed development, and may also provide ways
for engineering plants with improved cell wall properties to meet the needs of
the food, wood, and biofuel industries. Finally, this project will provide
valuable research and training opportunities for students and a postdoctoral
fellow. There are several stand-alone components of the project that are likely
to yield results in the time frame of an undergraduate project, and would
include routine analyses used in a research laboratory. All students will be
trained in cell, developmental, molecular, and computational biology. Ohio
University is located in southeast Ohio, a predominantly rural area with the
highest poverty rate in the state of Ohio. Its undergraduate population comes
from the surrounding Appalachian region of Ohio and West Virginia. The PI
believes strongly in the mission of research in science education and makes
every effort to incorporate research activities and current literature into his
teaching mission at the university.