* 1145968
* CAREER: Improving Hydrogen Storage with van der Waals Density Functional Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Timo Thonhauser, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 426,572.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports an integrated research and education plan related to
hydrogen storage and alternative energy. The research plan addresses the
hydrogen-storage problem, a critical barrier to a hydrogen economy and an
urgently needed alternative fuel. Magnesium borohydride Mg(BH4)2, ammonia borane
NH3BH3, and methane-based material (H2)4CH4 show great potential, but they
release or store hydrogen only at impractical high or low temperatures. To
resolve this problem, the research plan includes the following objectives: (i)
lowering the hydrogen desorption temperature in Mg(BH4)2 by destabilization
through doping; (ii) lowering the desorption temperature in NH3BH3 by
substitutions in the hydridic group to lower the activation barrier; and (iii)
determining whether alkanes longer than the methane in (H2)4CH4 can be stable at
higher temperatures. While these materials are different in nature, reaching
from chemisorption to physisorption of hydrogen, they are all influenced by van
der Waals interactions.

A novel density functional theory approach that includes van der Waals
interactions fully self-consistently will be used to calculate temperature-
dependent reaction enthalpies for the hydrogen release and barriers to hydrogen
desorption using nudged elastic band calculations. Throughout the project,
computational and theoretical efforts will be coordinated with experiments to
determine materials' properties and significantly advance research on hydrogen
as an alternative fuel. Computational tools will also be greatly improved during
the project, since a key methodological goal is to combine van der Waals density
functional theory with Car-Parrinello molecular dynamics to evaluate
thermodynamic stabilities. This will result in a new tool for modeling a wide
range of materials from water to DNA and be made available to the larger
scientific community through a general public license.

This CAREER award also supports the PI's educational and outreach plans of
addressing the lack of scientific literacy in a highly diverse region facing
economic and educational challenges, and inadequate mentoring in academic
science. The objectives are (i) to work with the local science museum and
schools to create an "Energy Zone" that will include a display, demonstration,
teaching module, and informal talks at the Science Café for the general public
about alternative energy and hydrogen as fuel; and (ii) to develop an
interdepartmental mentoring program for graduate students and postdocs in the
sciences to improve their research skills and transition to independent careers.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports an integrated research and education plan related to
hydrogen storage and alternative energy. As a tasteless, colorless, odorless,
and nontoxic molecule, hydrogen has been identified as an ideal fuel that can be
produced renewably from a variety of sources. It is the most abundant element on
Earth, and all nations have access to it. Its combustion reaction with pure
oxygen is perfectly clean, creating neither air pollutants nor greenhouse gases.
In practical terms, the energy content of 1 kg of hydrogen corresponds to 3 kg
of gasoline, whereas 3 kg of gasoline also produce 9 kg of undesirable
greenhouse gas. Although hydrogen is the ideal fuel, the reason why it is not
widely used is that there are problems related to hydrogen production, storage,
and use. This research program will address the hydrogen-storage problem. The
primary goal of the project is to investigate and manipulate properties of
several materials, such as magnesium borohydride, ammonia borane, and methane-
based materials known as H4-alkanes which show great potential for hydrogen
storage.

The focus of the project will be to stabilize such materials at ambient
pressures and temperatures by utilizing novel theoretical and computational
methods. These computational efforts will be coordinated with experimental
studies to determine the materials' properties and significantly advance
research on hydrogen as an alternative fuel. The project will also result in a
new computational tool for modeling a wide range of materials which display a
particular kind of bonding that makes straightforward applications of state-of-
the-art computational techniques challenging. The resulting computational tool
will be made available to the larger scientific community through a general
public license.

This CAREER award also supports the PI's educational and outreach plans of
addressing the lack of scientific literacy in a highly diverse region facing
economic and educational challenges, and inadequate mentoring in academic
science. The objectives are (i) to work with the local science museum and
schools to create an "Energy Zone" that will include a display, demonstration,
teaching module, and informal talks at the Science Café for the general public
about alternative energy and hydrogen as fuel; and (ii) to develop an
interdepartmental mentoring program for graduate students and postdocs in the
sciences to improve their research skills and transition to independent careers.