* 1145605
* Classical vs. Operant Conditioning: Differences in Circadian Regulation and in Mechanism
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Terry Page, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/29/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Recent studies suggest that an internal biological clock (circadian clock)
modulates several aspects of learning and memory including acquisition,
retention, and recall such that the ability to form and/or recall new memories
may be quite different at one time of day than another. Neither the mechanisms
by which the circadian system regulates these processes nor the extent and
functional importance of their circadian regulation are well understood. The
goal of this project is to evaluate the role of the circadian clock in
regulating the formation and recall of associative memories, comparing memories
formed by classical (Pavlovian) conditioning with those formed by operant
(instrumental) conditioning. Preliminary studies indicate there are major
differences in the role of the clock in regulating memory formation and recall
for the two types of conditioning, and the project will address both functional
significance and mechanism underlying these differences. The results of the
experiments will provide new insight into our understanding of how animals learn
and of processes that regulate the ability to learn. The project will also
provide exceptional opportunities for research training of graduate and
undergraduate students, and for engaging high school students and the general
public in the research enterprise though several outreach programs.