* 1145749
* Risk effects in large carnivore-ungulate interactions: relationships between direct predation rates, antipredator responses and the costs of response.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Scott Creel, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,015,000.00

Predation is one of the most important factors affecting the size of wildlife
populations. To manage and conserve wildlife populations, we must understand how
predation limits prey numbers For many decades, research on predation has
focused solely on the effect of direct killing, but recent studies show that the
costs of avoiding predation (or 'risk effects') can also have strong effects. In
particular, antipredator behavior can lead to changes in nutrition that reduce
reproduction, and it is easy to mistakenly attribute such responses to factors
other than predation (for example, limitation by the availability of food). This
study will (1) measure a broad set of antipredator responses to variation in the
risk of predation for a broad set of species, (2) measure the nutritional costs
of these responses, and (3) test for effects on reproduction. By examining the
responses of several prey species under varying environmental conditions, the
study will identify factors that control the magnitude of predation risk
effects. Overall, this study will advance our understanding of the ways that
large carnivores affect populations of ungulates. Because large-carnivore
ungulate systems are in decline worldwide, the results will be of immediate
value for conservation and management. This project will also train
undergraduate and graduate students in animal behavior and conservation research
and provide international experience for those students who will be working at
the research area in Zambia. Due to the international component the project is
jointly supported by the Behavioral Systems Cluster and the Office for
International Science and Engineering Global Venture Fund.