* 1145525
* CAREER: The Fundamental Physics of The Invisible and The Very Early Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Justin Khoury, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER grant supports the research of Professor Justin Khoury at the
University of Pennsylvania.

As is now increasingly well understood, the energy density of the universe is
dominated by contributions from a so-called "dark sector". As part of his
research, Professor Khoury will explore the tantalizing prospect that the dark
sector includes new light degrees of freedom that mediate long-range forces on
cosmological scales, affecting both dark and baryonic matter. To ensure
consistency with laboratory and solar system tests of gravity, some screening
mechanism is necessary to "hide" these degrees of freedom locally. Professor
Khoury therefore aims to probe the theoretical underpinnings of this idea, and
fully develop the observational implications of existing screening theories. He
also aims to devise novel screening mechanisms within the framework of
consistent effective field theories. Professor Khoury will also study a new
cosmological framework which he recently developed which might eliminate the
need for an early inflationary period of cosmological evolution. This framework,
which he calls the "pseudo-conformal universe", provides alternate solutions for
many of the classic problems that are also solved by inflation.

Professor Khoury's activities are also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts. Professor Khoury will design a freshman seminar for non-science majors,
with invited guest lecturers from a new public lecture series hosted jointly by
the Center for Particle Cosmology, Penn's Women Studies, and Penn Women's
Center. The lecture series will contribute to broader representation of women in
science by featuring leading women physicists. Professor Khoury will also build
on the series of regular joint workshops he has helped established with
Columbia, NYU, and Princeton in order to develop multi-institutional
collaborations.