* 1145009
* Digitized Heat Transfer: A New Paradigm for Thermal Management of Compact Micro Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 03/31/2011,01/31/2013
* Kamran Mohseni, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2013
* USD 65,056.00

CBET-0756505, Mohseni&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat is an unavoidable byproduct of
the normal operation of an electronic device, generated as a result of
electrical energy being converted to thermal energy during circuit activities.
As the need for fast electronic devices increases, the ability to safely
dissipate large amounts of heat from very small areas is key to many of today's
cutting edge technologies. To this end, cooling of electronic systems (such as
computers, lasers, radars, etc) is becoming a major challenge in the design of
next generation of such devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
investigation will explore the active and on-demand micro actuation and
transport of liquid droplets, a process dubbed Digitized Heat Transfer (DHT),
for effective thermal management of high power compact systems. In DHT,
individual droplets are discretely manipulated. This enables the basic operation
in any fluidic device (transporting, mixing, and analyzing) to be performed in
simple instructions without the need for moving mechanical parts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this investigation, the transport of coolant is
achieved by modification of surface tension forces on a droplet interface by
application of electric forces. Surface tension is a dominant force for liquid
handling and actuation at micro scales. The proposed technique is based on three
observations: (i) by using metals/alloys that are liquid at room temperature
(instead of e.g. water or air) the heat transfer rate of a cooling system can be
enhanced significantly, (ii) moving droplets are dominated by an internal
recirculation (missing in continuous flows) that will enhance mixing and
consequently heat transfer; (iii) electric actuation of a droplet interface is
an efficient, low power, and low voltage actuation technique for manipulating
liquids at micro scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various electric actuation
methods will be investigated by computational and theoretical means. DHT will be
studied at a fundamental level by identifying the relevant parameters and non-
dimensional numbers, and by determining the heat transfer rate for a periodic
array of conductive and dielectric droplets of various sizes. It is expected
that digitized electrohydrodynamics will offer a viable cooling strategy to
achieve the most important objectives of electronic cooling, i.e. minimization
of the maximum substrate temperature, reduction of the substrate temperature
gradient, and removal of substrate hot spots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to the technical advances in thermal sciences, fluid dynamics, and computational
techniques anticipated above, this project provides an application focus that
will be of interest to researchers and students working in electrical, chemical,
mechanical, and aerospace engineering, as well as physicists, biologists, and
medical scientists. Undergraduate research assistants will be sought via
supplementary REU support, and can be expected to come from the previously
mentioned fields. The PI intends to develop a course in micro scale convective
transport and expand his current course on micro and nano fluidics with the
addition of both a fabrication and a computational component. The PI's existing
multidisciplinary courses will be enriched with results from this work,
expanding student exposure to different aspects of micro fluidics. Because of
the multidisciplinary aspect of this subject, wide student interest is expected.
Storytelling will be reinstated in the classroom as a method of not only science
education but also ethics education, history, and community values. A Lilliput
Summer Camp is also proposed, enabling local secondary school students to
participate in a weeklong educational experience with an emphasis micro scale
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;