* 1145993
* Collaborative Research:    Characterizing climate-induced qualitative changes in plant biopolymer composition and their influence on soil processes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Nishanth Tharayil, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 330,622.00

The productivity of an ecosystem depends on the recycling of nutrients through
the process of decomposition. Decomposition is primarily governed by climate and
the chemical composition of plant litter. Traditionally, decomposition rates
have been estimated using concentrations of carbon, nitrogen and lignin in the
litter. However, the structural characteristics of many hard-to-degrade
compounds (biopolymers), including lignins, tannins and cuticular matrices, can
dictate overall decomposition rates. The climate in which plants grow can
strongly influence the structural properties of these compounds. Climate change
thus has the potential to alter decomposition both directly, by changing
temperature and moisture, and also indirectly, by changing the structural
attributes of biopolymers in plant litter, in ways that are not factored into
traditional nutrient cycling models. This project has three long-term goals. The
first goal is to learn how growing season temperature and moisture availability
affect the diversity and chemical properties of biopolymers that govern
decomposition of plant litter. The second goal is to understand how
environmental conditions interact with the chemical composition of litter to
affect decomposition and nutrient cycling. The third goal is to develop and test
models of decomposition that incorporate new knowledge of the roles of climate
and biopolymer properties. The investigators will test these hypotheses using
six plant species from the Boston-Area Climate Experiment, which exposes patches
of old fields with tree seedlings to twelve possible future climates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will improve predictions of
carbon and nitrogen cycling in a changing climate. The results will have
application beyond soil nutrient dynamics, as tannins are relevant to food
quality (as antioxidants), fodder quality and herbivory (as deterrents). The
project will provide undergraduates with opportunities for creative inquiry and
a new course offering, and will develop a summer course for in-service K-12
teachers and non-formal educators. The project also will provide learning and
research experiences to high school students and students from the minority
college in the state through the South Carolina Life program.