* 1145808
* Scaling up nonconsumptive effects of predators: mechanisms driving dynamics over multi-generational time scales in complex communities
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Brian Roth, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2019
* USD 596,573.00

Understanding predator-prey interactions is essential to the stewardship of
ecosystems. For example, invasive predators cause widespread ecological
problems, and other invasive species (plants, animals and microbes) may
influence predator-prey interactions. Typically the ecological consequences of
predators are envisioned as the direct effects of killing prey. Ecologists are,
however, becoming increasingly aware of the importance of non-consumptive
effects of predators, which result from prey behaviors to avoid being killed by
predators. For example, when predator density increases, prey may change their
use of habitat, hide more, and eat less. Behavioral responses to avoid predation
are hypothesized to cost the prey's fitness and may affect the prey population
as much as direct mortality from predation. These effects may then cascade to
affect other species in the ecosystem. A number of short-term studies have
demonstrated that such non-consumptive effects can affect prey growth rate and
death rate in diverse ecosystems. This study is designed to scale up our
understanding of non-consumptive effects in real communities on longer time
scales, in order to investigate the influence of non-consumptive effects on prey
abundance and ecological community structure. The investigators will use a
combination of theoretical and experimental approaches based on a model fish-
zooplankton community, to identify and elucidate non-consumptive effects of
predators that are not predicted to arise from direct effects of predators
killing prey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-consumptive effects arise from a process
common to all ecosystems and therefore this research will elucidate concepts and
approaches that are of general relevance, thereby benefiting the management and
stewardship of diverse ecosystems. In addition to supporting the research
training and mentoring of two graduate students, this project will provide
research experiences for a large number of undergraduate students. The project
also involves outreach to present results to state agencies and citizen groups,
and to develop demonstration modules on lake ecosystems and basic ecological
concepts and issues for presentation to K-12 classrooms.