* 1145585
* Regulation of Protein Phosphatase 2A Activity in Arabidopsis by the RCN1 Protein
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Alison DeLong, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 02/29/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Like animals, plants produce a number of substances that regulate growth and
coordinate developmental transitions and responses to environmental signals.
Ethylene gas is one such regulator of the plant life cycle, playing important
roles in fruit ripening, pathogen defenses and the regulation of cell expansion.
Because overall plant form is determined largely by the degree and
directionality of cell expansion, ethylene is a crucial regulator of morphology,
and ethylene production must be maintained at low levels during phases of rapid
cell expansion, such as early seedling growth. Recent work has identified
molecular mechanisms that program the degradation of specific enzymes required
for ethylene synthesis; this degradation plays a key role in controlling
ethylene production. The PI's group previously identified a highly conserved
protein phosphatase complex that regulates degradation of ethylene-producing
enzymes through dephosphorylation (the process of removing phosphoryl
modifications from specific target proteins, or substrates). This project will
use genetic and biochemical approaches to identify the components of the PP2A
complex that are required, as well as the determinants required for recognition
of substrate proteins. The project outcomes will lead to better understanding of
the mechanisms that maintain optimal levels of hormone production in plants,
allowing adaptive growth responses under conditions of environmental stress or
pathogen attack as well as during normal development. The project will also
provide training for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups and a
graduate student. The Arabidopsis genetic stocks produced in this work will be
contributed to the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center
(http://abrc.osu.edu/).