* 1145697
* Host Tolerance and Resistance: Applying Ecological Concepts to the Dynamics of Parasite-Host Infections
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Matthew Ferrari, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/29/2016
* USD 654,703.00

Individuals vary in their response to natural enemies and this variation has an
important effect on the relationship between consumers and resources. Animals
and plants can tolerate or resist the attacks of their enemies and enemies must
shape their attack strategies to optimize survival and reproduction. A challenge
in the ecology of species interactions is to identify the factors responsible
for this individual variation. At the heart of host-parasite interactions lie
the immunological processes that allow the host to respond to an infection and
the life history strategies that allow parasites to escape host immune defenses
and to maximize survival and transmission. This interdisciplinary project
integrates recent progress in the immunology of tolerance and resistance with
the theory of food web dynamics to examine how the contrasting responses of
tolerance and resistance influence parasite development and fecundity within
hosts and how these responses affect transmission and long term persistence at
host population level. The investigators aim to develop one of the first
population-level studies of tolerance-resistance as defined at the molecular
level. This will be achieved by a combination of detailed laboratory studies,
field monitoring and mathematical modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By identifying
the molecular bases for species interactions, this project will provide novel
insights into host-parasite interactions and will enhance understanding of
community structure, food web dynamics and biodiversity. Parasites represent
serious health and economic threats for animals and humans and an appreciation
of the fundamental processes of host-parasite interaction will accelerate
development of alternative measures for parasite control. Finally, this highly
interdisciplinary study offers numerous opportunities to train graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers in multidisciplinary,
quantitative approaches and analyses.