* 1145347
* Pathogenic Gene Discovery and Elucidation of Genetic Regulatory Networks in the Rice Blast Fungus
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Richard Wilson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2015
* USD 512,955.00

To succeed as pathogens, fungi must adapt their metabolism to nutrient
availability within the host, but little is known about the genetic regulatory
mechanisms involved. The filamentous ascomycete fungus Magnaporthe oryzae is the
causal agent of rice blast disease, which annually results in a 10 to 30 percent
reduction in global rice yield. Traditional plant breeding strategies have
failed to contain this severe threat to global food security; however, because
of the amenability of M. oryzae to molecular analysis, durable control
strategies might emerge from a better understanding of the molecular and
cellular processes underlying the plant-fungal interaction. The goal of this
project is to use mutants of M. oryzae, impaired in their ability to develop in
rice, to unlock the fundamental cellular, biochemical, and genetic regulatory
mechanisms that govern the rice-fungus interaction. Using molecular genetics and
biochemical techniques, it is expected that this project will reveal essential
new knowledge about the integration of metabolism with gene expression in M.
oryzae that will likely shed light on important genetic control pathways in
other pathogenic fungi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will promote the
pathogenic gene discovery process as a tool to train students and inspire
underrepresented minorities to pursue a career in science. Central to our
research ethos will be the integration of undergraduate, graduate, and
underrepresented high school students and teachers, representing diverse
sections of the community, into the process of pathogenic gene identification
and characterization. The M. oryzae- rice interaction will be used to inform
undergraduate students of the importance of fundamental concepts in genetics and
biochemistry, to allow graduate students and postdoctoral research associates to
develop as mentors and teachers, and to involve high school students in real-
world problems that, through their participation in EPSCoR summer camps
supervised by the PI, will inspire them to undertake a career in science.