* 1145508
* BIODIVERSITY IN THE PARASITIC FLUKE GENUS ALLOGLOSSIDIUM: EVOLUTIONARY ORIGINS OF CHANGES IN LIFE CYCLE COMPLEXITY
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* William Font, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2018
* USD 729,875.00

Parasite life cycle complexity, which encompasses both host species and number
of hosts in the life cycle, is one of the most fundamental and intriguing
components of parasite ecology and evolution. However, because there remains a
significant amount of undescribed parasite biodiversity, little is known about
the evolutionary patterns or consequences of changes in life cycle complexity.
This study aims to use morphological and molecular data to discover new species
in the trematode (fluke) genus Alloglossidium. What makes this genus fascinating
is that among known species there is variation in the number of hosts needed to
complete the life cycle (2 or 3) and variation in the use of final host species
(crayfishes, catfishes, leeches). Thus, this project will also use the genus
Alloglossidium as an exemplary model to test evolutionary hypotheses about the
origins of different life cycles and test for relationships between life cycle
changes and morphological changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
scientifically important because it will contribute to a better understanding of
the evolution of life cycle complexity in parasites of animals. Such knowledge
is necessary to provide key insights into infectious disease transmission and
the potential for parasites to infect new host species. Broader impacts include
research and educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
in important areas such as parasitology, taxonomy, and molecular phylogenetics.
Undergraduates will be recruited from the Texas A&amp;M Regents Scholars (low
income, first generation students) program and Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation. To facilitate outreach to a broader audience such as
K-12 educators, a web-based field guide will provide free educational resources
and natural history facts on the parasites and host organisms in this study.