* 1145654
* Iridescent Color Signals in Context: Interactions among Behavior, Perception, Function, and Light Environment
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Ronald Rutowski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2016
* USD 390,000.00

The visual signals of many animals include iridescent colors which have the
unique property of changing dramatically in brightness and hue when the viewer
position changes relative to the reflecting surface. Understanding the
production and perception of these directional color signals in nature is a more
complex problem than for non-directional colors. This study will explore a
beautifully iridescent and common butterfly, the Pipevine Swallowtail. This
butterfly has large iridescent areas on the lower wing surface that signal this
species distastefulness to potential predators, and also on the upper wing
surfaces (males only) which is used by females in mate choice. Experiments and
observations in the field, lab and a large butterfly enclosure at a botanical
garden will evaluate the relative positions and movements of sender and intended
receivers, the perceptual capabilities of intended receivers, and the available
illumination in nature. This will be done separately for each wing surface with
careful attention to the function of each signal and the context in which it is
viewed by intended receivers - females for the upper wing surface and predators
for the lower wing surface. Behavioral experiments will explore the implications
for the directionality of iridescence for signal detection and effectiveness.
Overall this study has the potential to transform our views of how iridescent
color signals in animals in various contexts are actually viewed and used in
nature. In addition to the intellectual merits, the broader impacts of the
proposed research include providing research training experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students, especially for groups underrepresented in
the sciences, stimulating the interest of a broad audience through publication
in technical journals and popular literature, and outreach activities using
established web sites (http://rutowski.lab.asu.edu and
http://askabiologist.asu.edu/) and local public natural history organizations.