* 1145127
* Generation of Large Geochemical Data Sets for Single Units of Volcanic Rock: Application of Portable XRF Spectrometry to Zoned Ignimbrites
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* John Wolff, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2014
* USD 217,295.00

High-quality chemical analyses of Earth materials are dominantly conducted in
fixed-site laboratories and involve lengthy sample preparation procedures.
However, recent technical advances in instrumentation hold the promise of a
fundamental shift in geochemical practice. The advent of reliable, high-
precision, field-portable analytical instruments is opening a new era in which
an increasing proportion of data from volcanic and other rocks will be obtained
in the field in real time or near-real time (for example, a fully functional lab
could be set up at a field base camp), and high-quality rock analyses can be
obtained ever more cheaply and quickly. This project will deploy a portable
spectrometer to address an outstanding problem in volcanology that has defied
conventional geochemical analysis due to the large number of data points needed,
namely the behavior of magma during super-eruptions. Since the 1980s, numerous
models and simulations of large volcanic eruptions have been constructed, but
their predictive value is largely untested because there is a critical shortfall
of data from the products of past super-eruptions. Analysis of a sufficient
number of samples in conventional labs simply takes too long and is too
expensive. This project will be a test case for the technology, methodology and
utility of increasing the number of chemical analyses from the products of a
single super-eruption by an order of magnitude or more (thousands rather than
tens to hundreds of samples) over current practice.

Understanding the compositional structure of zoned silicic magma systems is
hampered by a lack of geochemical data. The problem is not that of establishing
the range of compositions that are present among eruptive products, nor of
investigating the ultimate origins of the magmas; existing data sets are
probably already sufficient to address those questions. Rather, the issue is one
of analyzing enough samples at numerous locations in order to obtain a
statistically valid picture of the tuff?s compositional architecture. The number
of analyses required is too large (>1,000) to feasibly accomplish using
conventional methods such as wavelength-dispersive X-ray fluoresence, and in any
case, a complete analysis of each sample is not needed as long as the range of
compositions present has been established by conventional methods on a smaller
number of samples (~100). Portable X-ray fluorescence (PXRF) technology has
advanced to the point where it is ideally suited to such an investigation,
because for some elements, especially the critical trace elements Rb, Sr, Y, Zr,
Nb and a few others which typically exhibit large variations in zoned rhyolitic
tuffs, the precision and accuracy approaches that of full-size wavelength-
dispersive XRF. Using PXRF, thousands of analyses can be obtained at very low
cost during the course of a two-year research project, starting during
fieldwork. This project will acquire a PXRF instrument and develop methods for
zoned ignimbrites by carrying out a case study on the 1.61 Ma Otowi Member of
the Bandelier Tuff, Valles caldera, NM. On the basis of existing data, overall
compositional variations in this unit are sufficiently understood to enable a
few elements to be used as proxies for the whole composition. The research will
focus on the incompatible elements Zn, Rb, Y and Nb, which exhibit 3-fold to
4-fold variations from early-erupted to late-erupted tuff, and are present at
sufficient concentrations to enable high-precision determinations by PXRF. With
a large enough data set, a 'sample' of tuff (e.g. many pumice clasts collected
from within a 1 m vertical range at a single location) can be described by the
distribution of compositions within it, rather than by a single data point as is
currently the case. This will then provide a basis for interpreting
compositional patterns in the tuff in terms of eruptive and depositional
processes, with the goal of 'putting the magma back into the chamber' to arrive
at a model of zoning that is more quantitatively constrained than is possible
with a conventional data set.