* 1145271
* Interdisciplinary Studies of the Galapagos Earth System
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Dennis Geist, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2018
* USD 252,858.00

Interdisciplinary Studies of the Galapagos Earth
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This proposal is an
accomplishment-based renewal of a grant that funded field-based research in
volcanology, petrology, and geobiology in the Galápagos Archipelago. The new
proposal is to continue these studies, but each component has newly designed
hypotheses and field and laboratory studies to address those hypotheses. The
volcanologic study is to fund 4 years of data acquisition of the 10-station
continuous GPS network on Sierra Negra volcano. Sierra Negra has displayed
remarkable extents (meter-scle) and geometries of surface deformation over the
past 11 years. We hypothesize that the deformation is due to the filling and
pressurization of a 1.9 km-deep subcaldera sill. The magma is accommodated by
elastic domical uplift of the chamber?s roof, punctuated by trapdoor faulting.
Because nearly the entire amount of deflation that accompanied the 2005 eruption
has now been recovered, there is good reason to believe that an entire inter-
eruptive cycle might be captured within the next few years, making the proposed
measurements both timely and opportunistic. The Galápagos continues to be a
natural laboratory for evolutionary studies and is a premier locality for
understanding the relationship between the geologic template and biological
evolution. This proposal will help fund two such studies. The first is to
establish a paleogeographic history of the islands, which is crucial for
understanding the phylogeographic pathways that relate diversified organisms.
The paleogeographic models require an estimate of the age of emergence of the
islands and their subsidence history. The second study will attempt to relate
the geologic history of an island to the islands? biodiversity, which is
measured by the species richness of taxonomic groups. These studies are in
collaboration with biologists and have already yielded important results. The
third component of the proposal is a petrologic study of Rabida volcano. Rabida
has erupted a diverse sequence of lavas, ranging from basalt to trachyte, and
the volcanic deposits contain xenoliths of intrusive rocks. It is hypothesized
that the xenoliths are from the mature and dying phases of the volcano?s
history, thus their geochronology would establish the duration of volcanism at a
Galápagos volcano, a crucial parameter for understanding the geologic history of
the archipelago and one that is currently poorly constrained. The
crystallization ages of the xenoliths will be measured by the U/Pb method,
utilizing the ion microprobe at UCLA (other studies have shown that this is a
robust method for oceanic xenoliths). The cumulate complement to the eruptive
rocks will also test various hypotheses that have been put forth for the
lithospheric evolution of Galápagos magmas. First, an evolutionary model has
been proposed, and the compositions of the intrusive rocks should progress from
primitive olivine gabbros to intermediate and evolved oxide-rich rocks. Second,
the major petrogenetic processes have been proposed to be fractional
crystallization and melt-crystal reaction in a thermally buffered mush column.
The compositions of the xenoliths and their constituent minerals, determined by
electron microprobe and LA ICPMS, will help evaluate these hypotheses. Having
the intrusive complement to the erupted liquids in such a diverse suite is a
rare opportunity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The recently expired
grant funded the thesis work of 2 undergraduate and 6 graduate students, each of
whom has gone on to further graduate education or a career in science. Most of
the students have been coauthors on papers, and all have presented their
Galápagos work at international conferences. This renewal will enable a new set
of students to pursue similar research. The grant will also help the PI to
continue to assist several agencies of the Ecuadorian government in hazards
assessment and volcano monitoring, and continue outreach efforts to the local
population and U.S. schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Panel
Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The panel concurred with mail reviewers positive
assessment of the accomplishments made by the PI based on previous NSF funding
for studies in the Galapagos. A major strength of the PI's work in the Galapagos
islands has been its interdisciplinary nature, involving collaborators from
geophysics to biology that complement his own strengths in petrology and
geochemistry.