* 1145922
* Biological Inventory of the Amphibians and Reptiles of Laos
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Bryan Stuart, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2016
* USD 402,000.00

Little is known about the amphibians (frogs, salamanders, and caecilians) and
reptiles (turtles, lizards, and snakes) of the Southeast Asian country of Laos.
Laos has been plagued by war, instability and isolation from the West, and this
has led to a long gap in wildlife research. An improved political situation has
made new fieldwork possible, and Laos is now known to contain a high diversity
of amphibians and reptile species, many of which occur only there. New country
records and entirely new species to science are being rapidly discovered in
Laos. Low capacity and poor infrastructure impedes such research by in-country
scientists. This three-year project will undertake surveys of amphibians and
reptiles, and their parasites, at nine priority field sites across Laos. The
work will be undertaken collaboratively between U.S. and Lao biodiversity
scientists in partnership with a U.S. non-governmental wildlife conservation
organization.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of which species occur where is
fundamental to global biodiversity conservation. Many species of amphibians and
reptiles in Laos are at risk of extinction, primarily due to habitat
destruction. This project will provide essential information on the biology of
amphibians and reptiles in Laos to conservation managers, the international
scientific community, and the U.S. public via museum exhibits. A U.S.
postdoctoral scholar and Lao graduate students and scientists will receive
extensive training in field research and museum science to ensure project impact
on the next generation of biodiversity scientists and stewards.