* 1145355
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Does Sequential Speciation Amplify Biodiversity across Trophic Levels?
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Andrew Forbes, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2016
* USD 343,966.00

The project will determine whether the creation of new species provides an
opportunity for other organisms to take advantage of this and speciate in kind.
In particular, the research will test whether when fruit flies of the genus
Rhagoletis speciate by shifting and attacking new host plants, the parasitic
wasps that attack the flies also speciate by following the flies and
specializing on the new fly resources. The question is important for
understanding nature because there are more species of plant eating insects like
Rhagoletis and the parasites that attack them than any other types of life forms
on Earth. Thus, understanding whether speciation has rippling effects through
ecosystems to sequentially amplify the creation of new species has important
implications for understanding the basis for
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to helping integrate science
training, education, and research activities at the local, university, and
international levels, the project also has practical benefits for U.S.
agriculture. Rhagoletis flies are serious pests of apples, cherries,
blueberries, and several other economic crops. The question of whether the fly?s
parasitoids have formed new species, therefore, has important repercussions for
developing effective integrated pest management strategies. Specifically, if
different wasp species attack each fly, then biocontrol efforts would need to
rear and release each of the wasps separately to control each of the fly pests.
In contrast, if the wasps are all part of the same population, then a one-size-
fits-all strategy focused on mass release of a single cultured wasp strain may
succeed.