* 1145239
* Travel Support for 2nd Annual  AMA-IEEE EMBS Conference, October 16-18, 2011, Boston, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Nicolas Chbat, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 08/31/2012
* USD 25,000.00

1145239 Chbat

The conference will provide a unique opportunity to achieve genuine
interdisciplinary work involving clinicians and engineers. The format of the
conference will facilitate the exchange of information between individuals with
clinical and individuals with technical expertise. Clinicians will be provided
up-to-date information about technology relevant to implement Personalized
Medicine strategies. Engineers will be given the opportunity to find out what
are the major roadblocks toward the improvement of Healthcare via the four
selected themes: Healthcare Reform and Health IT Adoption,, Workflow and Health
IT, Clinical decision Support Systems and Individualized Medicine, and Improving
Outcomes and Quality.

The organizers will provide the public at large with access to the conference
material by implementing multiple strategies. First of all, they have set up a
blog on the conference website. The blog will provide individuals interested in
the conference with the opportunity to shape the conference by posting
questions, by proposing discussion topics, and by providing information about
their own work. Secondly, all the conference abstracts will be made available to
the public at large via an open access initiative that the organizer will
implement on the conference website. In other words, abstracts will be posted on
the conference website. Finally, they will select contributions among those
presented at the conference for the first issue of a new magazine that AMA and
IEEE EMBS intend to launch within a year from completion of the conference.