* 1145541
* Research in Disabilities Education Synthesis Project (RDE-SP)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* B Jan Middendorf, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2015
* USD 637,678.00

The "Research in Disabilities Education Synthesis Project" is conducting a four
year synthesis research project to summarize the contributions of the NSF's
Research in Disabilities Education (RDE) program. The activities include
investigating, synthesizing and reporting the findings and contributions from a
decade (2001-2011) of funded projects from RDE. The intent is to inform
secondary and postsecondary stakeholders about lessons learned in broadening the
participation of students with disabilities in STEM, as well as providing NSF
with a summary of the accomplishments of the RDE programs from 2001-2011.
Several basic synthesis research questions guide this
work:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How well have RDE projects met their project
goals? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. How have projects impacted their target
audiences (e.g. faculty, students, teachers, and
parents)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. In what ways have RDE projects contributed to
the goals of RDE, HRD, EHR and NSF?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. What is the
contribution of the RDE-funded Research/Demonstration and Alliance/Enrichment
projects to the knowledge base of STEM education of students with disabilities
(SWD), educational transitions within the STEM "pipeline," student success in
STEM courses and programs, and other related topics?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5.
What is the impact of RDE-funded Alliances to the number and quality of SWD
transitioned, retained, and completing associates or bachelors? degrees in STEM
fields and the number of completers entering the STEM workforce or graduate STEM
programs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;6. What other or unexpected outcomes were
produced by these sets of RDE projects?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;7. What are the
primary lessons learned about the RDE program that can be elicited from the
answers to questions 1-6?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissemination plan for this
research project includes a technical report to NSF, an executive summary report
suitable for broad dissemination within the government, a slide set for
distribution, peer-reviewed journal articles, research presentations at
conferences and meetings, and user-friendly reports placed on accessible
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inclusion of an independent evaluator, Dr.
Carol Fendt, a Senior Researcher and the Co-Director of the PRAIRIE Group at the
University of Illinois at Chicago, will provide the project leadership team an
external perspective to ensure the project activities are being executed as
planned. Dr. Fendt will address the following evaluation questions:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the extent to which the researchers are meeting
their goals and progressing according the project timeline and plan?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Were expectations reasonable and were modifications of
the project work plan necessary? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Did processes operate
as expected?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this research have the
potential to significantly inform the direction of research about the STEM
learning and education of students with disabilities. The long-term benefit is
improved, and more focused, research that leads to advancing the educational
knowledge base.