* 1145840
* RUI: The role of protein acetylation in stress responses and in setting tolerance limits in differently adapted mussels (genus Mytilus): a comparative proteomics approach
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Lars Tomanek, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* scott santos
* 01/31/2017
* USD 550,070.00

This study focuses on the role of protein modification in responses of marine
organisms to a variety of environmental stressors. The characteristics of such
responses may determine tolerance limits to these stressors, and are largely
controlled by protein catalysts that govern many cellular processes. This
research will determine whether a specific protein modification is involved in
responses to environmental stress by marine mussels, and assess its role in
setting tolerance limits to heat stress, oxygen limitation and ocean
acidification. A change in protein abundance is a key indicator of how cells
protect themselves from structural damage and readjust cellular processes to
maintain cellular function in a changing environment. Protein synthesis and
degradation are costly processes; therefore other means of controlling protein
function have evolved. Protein function can be greatly modified by the addition
of a number of chemical groups after protein translation (i.e., post-
translational modifications or "PTMs"). Recently, it has been shown that a broad
range of cellular functions are regulated by enzymes called acetylases and
deacetylases, which add or remove an acetyl group to or from proteins. Sirtuins,
one class of deacetylases, are now known to affect many cellular processes that
link the cell cycle to energy metabolism and oxidative stress. Preliminary
observations by the principal investigator using two independent proteomic
methods demonstrated that heat stress changes the abundance of sirtuins, and
that 18-55% of proteins are affected by sirtuin-induced deacetylation during
heat stress in gill tissue of two blue mussel congeners (Mytilus) that differ in
thermal tolerance, a heretofore unknown scope of activity for any PTM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will assess the global role of (de-)acetylation
during the cellular response to heat stress, oxygen limitation and ocean
acidification, evaluate the importance of (de-)acetylation in setting tolerance
limits, and establish the contribution of various deacetylases to patterns of
protein acetylation. This research will help establish the general importance of
(de-)acetylation as a key regulator of protein function in response to
environmental stress in marine organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
and graduate students, as well as visiting scholars will be trained in proteomic
techniques, including mass spectrometry. The principal investigator has
collaborated with a number of colleagues to build a community around
environmental proteomics, has organized a symposium on the topic at a recent
conference, and is developing a two-week training course on proteomic
techniques. He is disseminating his research in a number of public lectures on
adaptation of organisms to rapidly changing environmental conditions. His work
is providing insights into mechanistic determinants of species, distribution
patterns, and is contributing to the goal of predicting the effects of climate
change.