* 1145468
* Behavioral and evolutionary causes of within-population assortative mating in threespine stickleback
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Daniel Bolnick, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* emilia martins
* 09/30/2016
* USD 559,727.00

Project description: Positive assortative mating occurs when individuals select
mates who are more similar to themselves than expected by chance. A recent
analysis of more than 1,000 case studies found that positive assortative mating
is the rule rather than the exception within human and non-human animals.
Positive assortative mating maintains genetic variation in populations, biases
genetic mapping studies (e.g., to find disease-causing genes), and may drive the
origin of new species. In light of the important genetic effects of assortative
mating, it is surprising that little is known about its behavioral and
evolutionary causes. The investigator will conduct experiments to test competing
hypotheses as to why positive mating evolves. Specifically this study will (1)
evaluate the frequency and strength of assortative mating within 20 populations
of an important model organism (the threespine stickleback, Gasterosteus
aculeatus), (2) identify the mate-choice behaviors that generate assortment, and
(3) test whether assortment is favored by direct versus indirect selection,
and/or disfavored by costs or barriers to signal transmission. Notably, this
work provides the first field-based empirical test of the long-standing theory
that disruptive natural selection favors positive assortative mating. This
hypothesis, if true, would change our view about how new species
arise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance: The project will improve our
understanding of the causes and incidence of assortative mating. By focusing
attention on this form of non-random mating, the work will increase awareness of
the high frequency of assortment and therefore the need to account for non-
random mating in genetic and association mapping studies in both evolutionary
biology and medicine. In addition, the project will pair scientists with high-
school biology teachers and pre-service teachers-in-training. This will give
K-12 science teachers practical experience in biological research, and foster
communication between scientists and current and future teachers.