* 1145750
* 2012 CSHL 77th Symposium:   Plant Biology Conference
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2012
* USD 30,000.00

77th Annual Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology, May 30 - June
4, 2012 The Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology bring together
scientists from all over the world to present and evaluate new data and ideas in
rapidly moving areas of biological research. Plants are integral to human
wellbeing, and many species have been domesticated for over ten thousand years.
During the past several decades plant biology has been revolutionized first by
molecular biology and then by the genomic era. With the genomes of more than
thirty plant species now available and many more planned in the near future, the
impact on our understanding of plant evolution and biology continues to grow.
Our increased ability to engineer plant species to a variety of ends may provide
novel solutions to ensure adequate food production and renewable energy even as
climate change impacts our environment. The Symposium will span a broad range of
areas of investigation including genetics, biochemistry, molecular and cell
biology, developmental biology, physiology and population/evolution studies at
levels ranging from the single cell to the entire organism and from single genes
to genomes; plant-specific areas are anticipated to feature broadly. Fundamental
biological discoveries will be balanced with applications relevant to societal
wellbeing including improved crops, fuel and habitat. The Symposium seeks to
nurture the next generation of plant scientists by providing outstanding younger
scientists with an opportunity to interact with and learn from their peers and
more senior scientists. Much of the research will be presented in the form of
posters, providing younger scientists with the opportunity to develop their
ideas, their presentations skills, and their interactions with other members of
the scientific community. Representation of women at the Symposium at both
junior and senior level is important, since role models play a key role in
attracting newcomers to any field. Equally, the Laboratory encourages minority
scientists to attend and present their latest research. Through panel
discussions, the Symposium also aims to encourage scientists to consider the
impact of their own research in the context of how society views the associated
risks and benefits. Thus the Symposium aims to empower a broad and diverse
community of current and future plant scientists. The Laboratory also plans to
disseminate this synthesis of current thinking to a broader audience. In-depth
interviews with leading scientists undertaken during the Symposium provide an
alternative snapshot of the state of current research and are made freely
available online to a broad audience. Finally, the local community is engaged in
the general theme of the Symposium through a public lecture delivered by one of
the Symposium participants to a mixed audience of scientists and laymen.