* 1145200
* Building capacity in Bayesian analysis for practicing ecologists
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* James Clark, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2017
* USD 383,005.00

Traditionally, ecologists used designed experiments and associated statistical
procedures to learn about the environment. Although this approach provided
valuable insight, it has become clear that many pressing problems in ecology
cannot be solved using classical methods for design and analysis. In particular,
ecological researchers need new methods to honestly represent uncertainty, to
use data from multiple sources, to estimate quantities that cannot be observed,
and to make forecasts about the environment. Hierarchical Bayesian methods meet
these needs, allowing investigators to address questions that heretofore were
seen as too complex to answer. Many ecologists at universities and management
agencies recognize the promise of these methods but lack an efficient way to
learn them. The research team will offer intensive training on hierarchical
Bayesian methods to post-doctoral researchers, academic faculty, and scientists
at agencies and non-governmental organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation by groups under-represented in science will
be enhanced by holding one of the workshops at the University of Puerto Rico in
Rio Piedras. A listserv on the application of Bayesian methods in ecology will
be developed. A website with open access to training materials will be
maintained. The impact of the project will be amplified several fold as newly
trained scientists apply Bayesian methods in their research, teaching, and
decision-support.