* 1145175
* Biomimetic Fabrication and Catalytic Application of Pd Nanoparticle Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Marc Knecht, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2015
* USD 384,241.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Nature has provided organisms with the ability to produce
intricate architectural nanostructures of unique and specific compositions. In
some cases, preparation of these structures is mediated by peptides that can
nucleate, grow, and passivate nanostructures with high specific control over the
composition. In order to mimic these natural processes in the laboratory,
scientists have isolated peptides from biological organisms and have also
prepared them by synthetic combinatorial methods. The latter strategies are
promising as they mimic biological methods; however, the degree of functionality
of these biomimetic materials, and their structure/function relationship, is not
well understood. The goal of this proposal is to develop biomimetic methods for
the production of complex functional materials. The first objective is to
explore the shape-based synthetic capabilities of peptides. The PI will employ
the self-assembling R5 peptide of diatoms implicated in the biosilicification
process to template the fabrication of non-spherical Pd nanomaterials. The
second objective focuses on the catalytic activity of these structures in which
the inorganic components are likely to be encapsulated within the peptide
framework, which may act as a selective gate for catalytic reactivity. The final
objective explores the conversion of these materials to heterogeneous systems.
By attaching the materials on carbon nanotubes (CNT), the composites could be
used for facile separation of the catalysts as well as structures to probe the
catalytic mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The PI will work to
improve the retention rate of Chemistry students at the University of Kentucky
using science based cinema as a method to capture student interest and
attention. Retention is of significant concern in the Chemistry Department,
where retention rates fall below the University average. The principal reasons
for low student retention are thought to be large class sizes that lead to an
impersonal atmosphere. For Chemistry majors a substantial portion of their
instruction during their first two years within the program is in large lecture
classes. To help counteract this problem, the PI proposes to develop a Chemistry
Department cinema series designed to stimulate interactions between students at
all levels with Chemistry faculty. The PI is the faculty advisor for the Student
Affiliates of the American Chemical Society. In the context of the Affiliates
meetings, films will be presented that address current scientific issues and
issues of science policy. Following each such presentation an open forum will be
held, led by experts in the topic areas of the film. It is hoped through this
activity to engage the students in thinking about the scientific issues involved
and the importance of science in society and to increase the students' awareness
of the opportunities that pursuit of the Chemistry major can open to them. At
the same time, the students will become better acquainted with the wide range of
faculty, research opportunities, and other resources available to them on the
campus.