* 1145407
* Molecular Basis of the Effects of Hydrostatic Pressure on Protein Stability
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* George Makhatadze, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Dr. George I. Makhatadze, from the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
will investigate the effects of hydrostatic pressure on the stability of
proteins and enzymes. This work is the first step in understanding
quantitatively the relative contributions of changes in volumetric properties
(volume and thermal expansion coefficient) on protein unfolding. Site-directed
variants of model proteins (eglin c, ubiquitin, acylphosphatase) with large-to-
small non-polar substitutions in the protein core will be studied using the
novel method of pressure perturbation calorimetry, which allows direct
measurements of volume changes upon unfolding. The results of these experiments
will be combined with structural and computational methods to provide
quantitative estimates of the contribution of cavity formation and non-polar
hydration to volume changes upon protein unfolding.

The proposed experiments will provide the first systematic study of the detailed
mechanism of the effects of hydrostatic pressure on protein stability using a
combination of site-directed mutagenesis and a variety of biophysical and
computational tools. It is expected that the knowledge accumulated as a result
of these experiments will lay the foundation for future studies of these
fundamentally important issues, with broad implications for the use of proteins
and enzymes in biotechnology, including renewable energy, green catalysts, and
new biomaterials. Dr. Makhatadze is actively involved in graduate and
undergraduate education and curriculum development. In addition, students at all
levels (high-school, undergraduate and graduate) are participating directly in
both the computational and experimental aspects of all research efforts in the
his laboratory.