* 1145861
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Mechanisms of tree recruitment limitation across a savanna soil moisture availability gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Todd Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2016
* USD 364,247.00

Tropical grasslands, or savannas, cover over 20 percent of the land on Earth,
support most of the world's livestock and wild herbivores, and thus feed a large
fraction of the world's population. At their edges, savannas often grade into
forest, and they can shrink or expand depending on whether the forests advance
or retreat. Three major factors seem likely to account for the boundary between
savanna and forest: fire that kills trees, rainfall that sustains them, and the
grazing of the herbivores on tree seedlings and grass. This project will mount a
very large field experiment in one of the most productive savannas in the world,
the Serengeti of Tanzania, to test which combinations of fire, water, and
grazing best maintain savanna. Researchers from the U.S. and Tanzania will plant
seeds and seedlings of dominant trees into fenced or unfenced, and burned or
unburned areas within different sites that range from low to high rainfall, and
then measure the success of the trees over three years.

Besides giving us new understanding of why savannas occur where they do and how
their boundaries may change in the future, knowledge important to our ability to
manage livestock and provide food, this research will train new scientists,
promote international collaboration, and build the capacity for science in the
developing world. The project will help train two Tanzanian researchers plus a
Tanzanian graduate student at the University of Missouri and a postdoctoral
scholar at Wake Forest University in North Carolina. To build scientific
capacity in Africa, the project will offer annual workshops on data collection
and statistics for students at Tanzania's Sokoine University of Agriculture.