* 1145367
* ABI Development:   Association of protein helices in membranes: from physics to biology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Andrei Lomize, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 12/31/2015
* USD 672,514.00

An award is made to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor to develop a new
computational method, associated web server, and a database for structural
studies of transmembrane (TM) alpha-helical complexes. Motivated by the lack of
systematic analysis of single-spanning (bitopic) proteins, the most abundant
class of membrane proteins, we propose to create web resources for modeling
alpha-helix association in membranes and to apply these resources to study
bitopic proteins from six organisms representing all kingdoms of life. These
proteins frequently self-associate via TM alpha-helices to perform their
functions as receptors, channels, auxiliary transport proteins, enzymes,
structure/adhesion proteins, or regulators. A proposed physics-based method will
implement our anisotropic solvent model of the lipid bilayer, template-driven
helix docking, and new interatomic potentials that reproduce free energy of
helix association in membranes. The new web tool, TMDOCK, will calculate three-
dimensional structures and stabilities of TM helices, their dimers, and
symmetric homo-oligomers. The Membranome database (http://membranome.org) will
organize the obtained models and provide structural classification,
intracellular localization, topology, domain organization, and functional
annotation of proteins. Analysis of TM helical oligomers will be performed to
reveal evolutionary trends in self-association of helices in different
functional categories of bitopic proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have a broad impact for researchers studying membrane-active peptides and
proteins by providing the first easy-to-use web server that is practical for
high-throughput modeling of helix complexes in membranes. The availability of
this tool to the scientific community will accelerate structural and functional
studies of membrane proteins, facilitate understanding of mechanisms of pore and
channel formation by antimicrobial peptides and polypeptide toxins, enable
modeling of bihelical TM proteins, identify folding intermediates of polytopic
proteins, and assist in de-novo design of self-associating peptides with
potential use in pharmacology and bio-nanotechnology. The Membranome database
will be an important resource with multiple purposes ranging from education to
cutting edge academic research. It will consolidate our knowledge on bitopic
proteins and facilitate comparative analysis of these proteins. Rich graphics,
interactive visualization tools and tangible molecular models based on protein
structures from the database will provide a valuable educational resource.