* 1145890
* All Diptera Biodiversity Inventory of a Tropical Mid-Elevation Site
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Brian Brown, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 899,996.00

Surprisingly little is known about how many species are on our planet. Most of
the known species occur in the tropics, and most of these are insects. This
project will inventory all of the different species of true flies (Diptera) at a
single site in Costa Rica. Because this is the first time such a study has been
attempted, the number of species is unknown, but is expected to be extremely
high, with many new to science. Intensive collections will be made, and 46
experts from around the world will collaborate to study each of the 89 families
of flies. At least 3,000 species are expected to be present at the study site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biodiversity on our planet is in serious trouble.
Threats to mammals and birds are well studied but virtually nothing is known
about the hugely diverse insects. As decomposers, pollinators, predators and
much more, insects are vital components of ecosystems. The widespread
destruction of habitats almost certainly means that thousands are going extinct
every year, eliminating their important ecological services, and their potential
to inform science. This survey will, for the first time, provide vital
information of how many species of a major group of insects live in a tropical
ecosystem. In addition, the investigators plan significant public outreach. As
an example, many people are familiar with the idea that there are large numbers
of species on our planet and that many are under threat by such phenomena as
global warming, ozone depletion, pollution and deforestation. Few, however,
understand how scientists actually go about studying and interpreting
biodiversity. A portion of the web site will describe the expedition to study
the diversity of Diptera at a tropical site and will include copious photographs
and a number of videos. The vernacular the investigators plan to use and the
visual media to be employed will be directed to the general public, showing how
scientists begin by being puzzled by, in this case, the tremendous diversity of
flies in a tropical land. The site will describe the scientists? levels of
ignorance and then, step by step, portray how they sample, sort and discover the
species that are living there. Some presentations will additionally relate
interesting stories of some of the species discovered.