* 1145987
* Collaborative Research:   ABI Development:   Development and Application of Graphical User Interfaces for System Building and Analysis of Membrane Simulations
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Wonpil Im, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 05/31/2016
* USD 333,712.00

This collaborative project aims to develop graphical user interfaces (GUIs) that
allow both expert and non-expert users to easily setup, perform, and analyze
various membrane simulations. These toolsets will greatly reduce the learning
curve that typically prevents non-experts from utilizing simulations to study
membrane systems. Based on the Membrane Builder software in CHARMM-GUI
(www.charmm-gui.org/input/membrane), the project has three specific aims. In AIM
1, a cross-platform, standalone GUI toolset will be developed to perform
analyses of membrane simulation trajectories from various simulation programs
including CHARMM, Amber, GROMACS, and NAMD. In AIM 2, Membrane Builder will be
further developed by (i) including more (biologically important) lipid
molecules, (ii) developing tools to build monolayer, micelle, and vesicle
systems, (iii) providing simulation inputs for GROMACS and Amber packages
(Membrane Builder currently provides the inputs for CHARMM and NAMD programs).
In AIM 3, Membrane Builder/Analyzer will be used to study (i) the influences of
chain saturation, chain length, cholesterol concentration, and lipid head groups
on lipid properties, (ii) membranes with the phosphoinositol signaling lipid,
and (iii) membranes with sphingolipids and cholesterol. Such studies will also
provide the lipid structural libraries as well as the equilibrated systems of
these membranes to facilitate the building of mixed lipid systems in Membrane
Builder. Membrane Builder/Membrane Analyzer will be hosted in the CHARMM-GUI web
server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological membranes and membrane-associated
proteins/peptides play important roles in many cellular processes (transport of
nutrients and facilitating function within the cell) and in bioengineering /
biotechnology (possible vehicles for vaccines/drugs and models for solid-support
lipid monolayers for technological assessment of membranes). Therefore, studying
the phenomena related to lipid membranes and membrane proteins in atomic detail
has been of great interest. Molecular dynamics simulations (time progression of
molecules to probe their function) have been particularly useful in
understanding the dynamics and the underlying energetics of membrane proteins,
which is difficult to extract from experimental data alone. Thus, computational
modeling and simulations of membranes and membrane proteins can supplement
experiments in understanding their structure and function at the
molecular/atomic level. This project seeks to foster synergistic scientific
research and education by providing the Membrane Builder/Analyzer GUI resources
for any general membrane or membrane protein simulations to students and
researchers in a wide array of research contexts and multiple simulation
communities. In particular, the team will organize a workshop to directly
interact with the user community, and also develop a summer program for local
high school students to provide research experience in membrane simulations
using Membrane Builder/Analyzer.