* 1145777
* Preparation of Two Taphonomic Reference Collections for Deposit in the National Taphonomic Reference Collection, Smithsonian
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Diane Gifford-Gonzalez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2015
* USD 45,761.00

Taphonomy, the study of how organisms fossilize, has emerged as pivotal to
reconstructing ancient human lifeways, through analysis of animal bones from
archaeological sites. Using taphonomic analysis, paleoanthropologists are able
to decipher the source of bone accumulations at sites and provide evidence
relevant to assessment of the hunting and scavenging activities of early
hominins, their diet, and their utilization of skills and technologies when they
migrated out of Africa and into Eurasia.

Taphonomy studies ancient bones to infer the processes that produced
modifications to them, but this could never proceed without well-documented,
modern reference specimens that definitively link unique bone modifications to
the specific agents inflicting them. This project will accomplish preparation of
nearly 4000 irreplaceable taphonomic specimens for curation in the Smithsonian
Institution's new National Taphonomic Reference Collection (NTRC). These
collections, accumulated by investigators who pioneered experimental, ethno-
archaeological, and landscape-scale taphonomic research in North America and
Africa, cannot be reconstituted, given current legal, political, economic, and
ecological circumstances. Researchers from three continents have already
utilized the collections to study bone modifications, and the value of the
collections to research and teaching will continue and strengthen following
their curation at the Smithsonian; the NTRC is the first taphonomy repository
globally and will be a magnet for US and international paleoanthropological and
paleontological researchers.

The investigators will prepare the collections to meet the NTRC's strict
standards for documentation and pest prophylaxis at the federally-compliant
facilities at University of California, Santa Cruz. Intensive involvement of
undergraduate students through the university's internship program will provide
invaluable training and hands-on experience with essential biological
collections in contributing to US federal research infrastructure development.