* 1145762
* RUI: Conceptual Foundations of Language: Infants' Representations of Sources and Goals in Events
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Laura Lakusta, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 01/31/2017
* USD 384,460.00

Consider the event of a dog dashing out of a doghouse and jumping into a pool.
Even infants can think about such events, and then, as young children, they are
able to readily talk about them. How is this accomplished? The task is far from
simple; language represents an event's components in a highly abstract format
(e.g., in the English language, "the dog" is mapped into a Noun Phrase,
"dashing" is mapped into a Verb Phrase, and "into" is mapped into a
Prepositional Phrase). Do infants also represent an event's components
abstractly; for example, do they represent the specific dog in the event as
belonging to a class of things in the world referred to as "dogs"? Or, do
infants represent an event's components concretely; for example, do they
represent the dog in the event only as their specific dog Toto? Further, does
learning language influence the way infants think about the world? The proposed
studies will address these fundamental questions by exploring how infants
represent two understudied components of motion events--starting points ("out of
a doghouse") and endpoints ("into a pool"). The proposed research will use an
infant-controlled looking time method to test whether infants represent starting
points and endpoints across different motion events abstractly. Further, the
proposed studies will use two measures of language development to explore
whether and how infants' representations of starting points and endpoints are
related to the acquisition of language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from
the proposed research will have significant implications for theories in
developmental cognitive psychology, as well as linguistics, and will impact
society more broadly, as well as students. In regards to theory, the findings
will shed light on the possible mechanisms of language acquisition (how does
language influence how infants represent events?), as well as the nature of
infant event representations (are infants' representations abstract or are they
narrow and concrete?). Further, the findings will be pertinent to fundamental
questions in linguistic theory, such as, do language representations directly
reflect the nature of human cognition, including thought in infancy? Second, in
regards to society, the proposed research will contribute to a more thorough
characterization of cognitive and language development in typically developing
children, which can then be applied to children who may be developing
atypically. Lastly, in regards to students, this project promotes the
involvement of students from underrepresented groups by involving a diverse
group of undergraduate and Master's level graduate students. Students will be
mentored on all aspects of the research project, thus exposing them to the rigor
and merit of scientific research.