* 1145291
* EAGER: Human Computation: Integrating the Crowd and the Machine
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Albert Lin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2013
* USD 66,002.00

Because both information and connectivity are more available today than ever
before thanks to digital technologies, questions can now be addressed by
enlisting massive human demographics to supplement the limitations of computer
computation. This is especially relevant in the case of visual analytics, where
human intuition remains far superior to existing computer object recognition
algorithms. While algorithms are limited by pre-labeling requirements, humans
can perceive subtle variations and nuances to identify and classify unexpected
objects. These tasks, however, are often too massive in scale for a single human
to accomplish. Distributing this task over a massive network not only succeeds
in categorizing data, but generates massive quantities of human quantifiers
(training data) to potentially teach computer vision algorithms to mimic human
perception in order to distinguish the normal from the
abnormal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory project will combine collective
human visual perception with machine learning and object recognition, through a
study of 1.25 million crowd-sourced inputs provided by over 6,000 volunteers
labeling satellite imagery in a search for anomalies in northern Mongolia. These
data, collected from June 2010 to the present via an online platform developed
by the PI in collaboration with National Geographic Digital Media, afford an
ideal "case study" environment to investigate the nature of crowd generated data
and methods that distill the wide variability of human input into computational
algorithms. The online participants, excited by the potential of discovering the
tomb of Genghis Khan, examined massive amounts of ultra-high resolution
multispectral satellite imagery to label loosely defined anomalies into various
categories. Trends that emerged from the massive volume of labels represent a
collective human perspective on what the images contain. A team led by the PI
traveled to Mongolia to ground-truth areas of high user input convergence. The
resulting ground-truthed anomalies provide a unique opportunity to both
accurately measure the quality of human/automated analysis and to investigate
the effect of supplementing noisy crowd-sourced data sets with small pools of
absolute data in machine learning. In the current project the PI will develop a
framework for applying and evaluating the following three research phases
designed to study the nature of large scale human generated data for integration
into supervised learning algorithms:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Consensus
Clustering - Tag evaluation mechanisms based upon the volume and consistency of
neighboring tags and the ability of the individuals creating those tags.
Unsupervised methods for "merging" labels will also be applied for extended
anomalies such as roads and rivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Feature Vector
Extraction - Both the type of features (e.g., color, luminance, edges and
gradients, scale, orientation, etc.) and the extent of the neighborhoods (e.g.,
local, wide and global) required to detect anomalies are unknown a priori. Thus,
the aim is to determine sufficiently diverse features to capture all relevant
cues within the image.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Machine Learning - Dominant
features representative of, and excluded from, pixel groups of given categories
will be determined from the results of Phase 2
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In this exploratory study the PI
will lay the foundation for extracting new machine/human collaborative
opportunities from the resource of the crowd. Understanding the bonds between
human and computer intelligence will have a profound impact on many branches of
science. Thus, concepts developed in this effort may ultimately prove
transformative by affording migration of crowd-sourcing from a project-based
tool for distributed analytics into a portal bridging collective human
perception and machine learning.