* 1145017
* Collaborative Research:  Frequency-dependence and its effects on ecological invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2016
* USD 509,999.00

Ecological invasions occur when a species moves into an area where it was
previously absent. Following this introduction, the population grows and the
area occupied expands. If the species is a pest, the ecological and economic
costs can be extreme. A key property of species invasions is the speed with
which the species spreads across the landscape, the invasion speed. Mathematical
models exist to calculate invasion speeds from basic demographic information,
such as birth and survival rates, and from individual movements. Most models,
however, ignore differences between male and female demographic and dispersal
rates. These gender differences are suspected of limiting the success of real
invasions, but are almost completely unexplored in the theory of invasions. This
project will develop mathematical models for biological invasions in order to
account for the interaction between two sexes. The theory will be capable of
incorporating a variety of demographic, dispersal and environmental data. The
first step will be to analyze models that distinguish only the sex of
individuals. In reality, however, interactions between males and females, such
as mating and reproduction, are usually age specific. Therefore the second stage
of this research will analyze models that include both sex and age.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will promote teaching, training, and
learning through presentations in courses and workshops for diverse
participants, both in the United States and abroad, and by providing independent
research experiences for undergraduate students. The models that will be
developed will be broadly useful to ecologists and resource managers, and will
inform efforts to conserve threatened species and to control populations of
invasive and pest species. Incorporating sex differences in general models of
population dynamics will expand our understanding of species invasions and
reveal the situations in which these factors must be taken into account in
applications.