* 1145230
* RUI: Tectonic Development of the Yanshan Fold-Thrust Belt, Northeast China
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Tim Cope, DePauw University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2015
* USD 218,079.00

This study investigates the complex, episodic development of an ancient mountain
belt (the Yanshan belt), relics of which now form the rugged terrain underlying
the Great Wall of China north of Beijing. Recent work in the Yanshan belt has
begun to document a complex geologic history that includes multiple, cyclic
episodes of crustal shortening, extension, and volcanism that took place from
approximately 200 to 100 million years ago. The causes of this tectonic
cyclicity are presently unclear (although multiple potential drivers exist), in
part because the timing and geographic extent of each individual event is
imprecisely known. The purpose of this study is to use field geologic mapping,
sedimentary basin analysis, geochemistry, and radiometric dating (U-Pb zircon
dating of volcanic and plutonic rocks, and detrital U-Pb and Hf dating) to
better constrain the age and extent of the multiple events evident in the
geology of the Yanshan. Resultant data would have bearing on major questions
such as: (1) Can the variety of structures developed in the Yanshan be
deconvolved into individual events that tie to discrete plate boundary
processes, or is deformational complexity in the Yanshan the result of long-
term, progressive deformation associated with multiple drivers?; (2) Can the
magnitude of shortening be quantified in the Yanshan belt?; (3) When and by what
process did lithosphere loss occur in the eastern North China craton?

Establishment of a robust tectonic history for the Yanshan region will place
much-needed additional constraints on key events in the evolution of eastern
Asia. These events include multiple continental collisions that were responsible
for the early assembly of Asia, the initiation and development of the western
Pacific plate boundary, and a mysterious loss of the ancient continental
lithosphere that once underpinned the Yanshan belt and surrounding regions. This
work may also yield insights into the development of mountain belts in general,
including how crustal extension, compression, and volcanism interact in time and
space during mountain building, how the continental crust and lithosphere
respond to repeated magmatic and tectonic events, and how the lithosphere and
mantle interact during crustal thickening.

This project is an extension of a long-term collaborative venture between the PI
and Chinese researchers from China University of Geosciences, Beijing. The
project will support summer research in China for DePauw University
undergraduate students and foster collaborative relationships between these
students and students from China University of Geosciences, Beijing. This
project is supported by the Earth Sciences Division Tectonics Program and the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.