* 1145718
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Robotic Exploration of the Mersa/Wadi Gawasis
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Kathryn Bard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

1145718 &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research
project by Dr. Howard Choset, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania in collaboration with Dr. Mohamed Abd El-Maguid, Supreme Council
for Antiquities (SCA), Alexandria, Egypt. The project will establish a long-term
collaboration between the two sides to use robots to inspect regions of
archeological interest that are too dangerous for people to enter. The specific
area of interest lies in the Mersa/Wadi Gawasis region of Egypt which contains
many man-made caves that were used to store pieces of ancient ships. This region
has now gained considerable interest by Egyptologists. Dr. Kathryn Bard of
Boston University and Rodolfo Fattovich of the University of Naples
"l'Orientale" have been active in this area, and Dr. Abd El-Maguid has joined
with them to assist in excavations and in determining historical significance.
He is an expert in underwater archeology in Egypt. Drs. Bard and Fattovich have
identified two specific caves that contain artifacts of great interest and are
looking at another location for a man-made storage facility. All of these areas
are not safe for people to enter. The PI has developed robots, called snake
robots, because they articulate and maneuver through cluttered spaces, much in
the same ways biological snakes do. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
The research will explore the use snake robots to identify and perhaps retrieve
items from these caves in collaboration with the Egyptian scientist. This grant
would support an expedition to inspect the cave entrances with robots to locate
artifacts of deep interest to the history of Egypt, its historical Naval
capabilities, and its relationship with the city of
Punt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The PI and his Egyptian collaborator
believe that the use of robots in the Gawasis is just the beginning, and that
this work will lead to new area of robotics called Robotic Archeology. In this
new field of robotics, archaeologists can use robots as tools to explore and
investigate important archaeological sites without disturbing the surrounding
areas, which often happens when people enter such locations. While exploring
such regions, the robot is able to construct a map of the site, which in turn
can be viewed by others. This map will provide a three-dimensional view of the
location, allowing anyone, both archaeologist and non-specialist alike, to
remotely and virtually visit a location of great national interest. The proposed
work will also contribute to education aiming at engendering science and
engineering interest in middle school students. In particular, the PI will visit
schools around Pittsburgh and talk about robotics, drawing on the application of
archeology for subject matter. It is quite likely that archeology and the
application of robotics to it will compel students of all ages and raise
interest in history, science and engineering. The US PI will also develop lab
modules for the undergraduate robotics with the theme of looking for concealed
artifacts in difficult-to-negotiate environments.