* 1145183
* Collaborative Research: Constraints on Initiation of Low-Angle Normal Faults Within the Seismogenic Regime
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Barbara John, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 252,932.00

Low-angle normal faults are widely recognized in extended continental and
oceanic lithosphere, yet the mechanisms influencing their initiation and
protracted slip at shallow depths through the seismogenic crust remain
controversial. Compilations of normal faulting earthquake focal mechanisms show
only a small fraction of all earthquakes on faults dipping less than 30°, and
fault mechanics predicts that normal faults with dips less than 30° should
neither form nor be reactivated unless they are anomalously weak. In contrast,
field observations indicate that slip within the seismogenic crust has occurred.
To address this paradox, we are conducting multidisciplinary field and
laboratory structural and isotopic studies of a very well exposed low-angle
normal fault in the Chemehuevi Mountains of California. Our investigation will
provide macro- and microstructural characterization of natural fault rocks and
documentation of the role of fluids during initiation and slip along the fault.
These observations will be combined with laboratory experiments by colleagues in
Europe and recent microseismicity studies, to address processes allied with low-
angle normal fault initiation. The study site is the near-ideal natural
laboratory to address the relationship between internal structure and mechanical
behavior of low-angle normal faults, because 1) regional mapping has established
key areas of fault exposure; 2) the footwall is underlain by undeformed
granitoids, and it can reasonably be assumed that the protolith is dominated
mechanically by a two-phase mixture of quartz and feldspar; 3) the fault system
comprises multiple low-angle normal faults with variable slip (about 2 to 18
kilometers) and is well exposed (greater than 18 km down dip and 25 km along
strike), facilitating analysis of spatial variations in deformation mechanisms
from initiation to maturity, and 4) the thermal history of the footwall is well
documented, providing an opportunity to examine rocks with initial ambient
temperatures between approximately 150-400°C across the brittle-plastic
transition.

To illuminate the microstructural evolution and fault weakening mechanisms that
lead to low-angle normal faulting, we are integrating field observations with
petrographic, SEM (EBSD, image analysis characterization of microstructures, and
cathodoluminescence), and stable isotope studies. low-angle normal faults
exposed in the Basin and Range provide key examples of this globally significant
class of faults and highlight questions about slip at gentle dips in the brittle
crust, yet initiation of these fault systems has previously received little
attention. In situ stable isotope analyses by ion microprobe allow us to ?see
through? secondary alteration during the late slip and fluid migration history
and correlate detailed microstructures with associated fluids. By combining
these field and laboratory investigations with experimental studies by
colleagues in Europe, this research bridges disciplinary boundaries in an effort
to transform the understanding of frictional-viscous processes and their
manifestation in the geologic record. Collaboration with scientists in Norway
and Switzerland will contribute to scaling of laboratory experiments, providing
relevant information for earthquake hazard assessment. Undergraduate students
will be engaged throughout the project in field and laboratory studies, gaining
experience conducting individual research and outreach. Outreach to the broader
community is being achieved through the development of virtual field trips using
Google Earth and associated educational materials designed for grade school
through college students.