* 1145174
* Systematics of Magnaporthaceae: Understanding Evolution of the Rice Blast Fungus and Allied Species Using Phylogenetic, Phylogenomic and Comparative Genome Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Debashish Bhattacharya, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/29/2016
* USD 551,213.00

The family Magnaporthaceae contains devastating fungal pathogens of cereals and
grasses, such as the rice blast fungus and summer patch pathogen of turfgrasses,
which are popular model systems in studies that seek to understand pathogenesis
and fungal biology. Despite their ecological and economic importance, the
relationships of Magnaporthaceae to other fungal families and of the constituent
genera to one another remain ambiguous. This hinders advancement toward the
understanding of pathogenesis and ecological success. New DNA sequence data will
be generated for representative species using next-generation sequencing
methods. The objectives of the study are to: 1) circumscribe the Magnaporthaceae
and to resolve relationships of and within the family using phylogenetic and
phylogenomic analyses; 2) generate draft genome assemblies of selected species
in the Magnaporthaceae; 3) discover and describe new species in the
Magnaporthaceae. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnaporthaceae serves as a model system
for understanding interactions between fungal pathogenic organisms and their
host plants. The novel data will augment a rapidly growing number of fungal
genomes generated by NSF-funded "tree of life" projects and other national and
international initiatives. They will lead to a better understanding of the
evolution of genomes and gene families and of how this evolution leads to the
ability of fungi to become pathogenic.