* 1145241
* Workshop: Integrative organismal biology of adaptive processes, September 19-20, 2011, Arlington, VA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Dietmar Kueltz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 60,401.00

Many sub-disciplines of biology have reached a state that calls for integration
and consolidation of existing approaches, terminology, and knowledge as well as
more efficient and wide-spread utilization of modern technologies to enable
fundamentally new insight into principles of organismal biology. The goal of
this workshop is to explore and devise future strategies for revealing and
explaining fundamental principles that determine interactions between organisms
and their environment and to bridge the gap between divergent sub-disciplines of
organismal biology. To achieve this goal the workshop will bring together
scientists who normally do not interact routinely but represent traditionally
divergent sub-disciplines of biology. The common denominator of this workshop
will be that all of those scientists are leaders in one or more aspects of
organismal biology with emphasis on the study of how organisms interact with the
environment. Gaining a broad perspective and input from such a diverse group of
scientists is critical for assessing the current state of the science of
organism-environment interactions and for launching a creative and ground-
breaking dialogue about the tools and mechanisms that would be most efficient to
move the field forward. Workshop participants will identify emerging themes and
opportunities for progress vital to addressing fundamental questions pertaining
to principles of organism interactions with the environment. The workshop will
identify avenues that will facilitate productive interactions among a broad
array of investigators studying responses of a large number of species to the
environment. The goal of those interactions is the development of well-
coordinated community-based scientific research and training efforts that will
lead to breakthroughs in understanding the biology of organisms. A fresh and
more coherent, well-integrated outlook on organismal biology, which incorporates
key concepts of modern systems biology, will likely change the way biology is
taught at all levels ranging from K12 to graduate education. This would be
achieved by providing a framework of knowledge and approaches that can serve as
the glue for tying together seemingly disparate details and facts elucidated by
modern biological research into a common whole that students can relate to from
an intuitive perspective.