* 1145194
* What Controls Mafic Eruption Style? The Causes and Consequences of Coupled Vesiculation and Crystallization Kinetics in Ascending Basaltic Andesite Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Jessica Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2016
* USD 399,724.00

What controls mafic eruption style? The causes and consequences of coupled
vesiculation and crystallization kinetics in ascending basaltic andesite magmas.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Explosive eruptions involving mafic magmas pose important
implications for hazards near active volcanoes. In particular, Strombolian
eruptions produce large volumes of fine ash, high ash plumes, and large
dispersal areas that may severely impact surrounding populations. Numerous
studies suggest that explosivity is related to expulsion of gases from
ascending, decompressing magmas that in turn depends on porosity-permeability
properties of the magma and fragmentation style. In an attempt to elucidate the
degassing process and its effect on eruptive style, it is proposed to
investigate experimentally the development of permeability in experimentally
decompressed mafic silicate melts with particular focus on the role of
crystallization in mafic magmas as a control on eruptive style. Specifically,
how does syn-ascent microlite crystallization influence development of connected
vesicle networks and the percolation threshold, and how do these factors
influence gas separation in the conduit and transitions in eruptive style?
Hypotheses to be tested include: [1] Are crystal number densities related
directly to decompression rate (i.e., due to rapid crystallization of hydrous
mafic melts during vesiculation)? 2) Is melt permeability inversely related to
magma viscosity? 3) Does decompression足driven crystallization change the
percolation threshold (i.e., by limiting bubble expansion or by spatial control
on bubble placement)? 4) Does decompression rate affect the style of mafic
eruptions by controlling degassing efficiency and the depth and efficiency of
syn足eruptive crystallization? These questions will be investigated via
decompression experiments on synthetic basaltic andesite melts similar in
composition to those erupted at Okmok volcano (Alaska), and with both pure water
and mixed H2O足CO2 fluid phase to examine the influence of CO2 on crystallization
and vesiculation kinetics. The experiments will be compared with natural samples
from the mid足Holocene Middle Scoria Okmok volcano, which produced violent
strombolian to subplinian and vulcanian eruption deposits. A ?permeameter? will
be constructed to measure permeabilities of both experimental and natural
samples to estimate percolation thresholds, and the results will be used to
model gas segregation and fragmentation during explosive mafic eruptions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will support a PhD student,
and undergraduate student assistant at UAF. A new link will be forged with the
UAF Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program (ANSEP) with the aim to hire
Alaska Native undergraduate student(s) to perform research for the project. The
project will also involve international collaboration with volcanologist Kathy
Cashman (University of Bristol). The PI?s association with the Alaska Volcano
Observatory also facilitates application of this research to assessment of
volcanic hazards related to violent mafic eruptions at active volcanoes in
Alaska and Cascadia. Development of new research equipment in the UAF
Experimental Petrology lab will also enhance the infrastructure at UAF and
provide new equipment that could fill research needs beyond geology and
volcanology studies, including applications in other physical sciences and
engineering disciplines.