* 1145011
* A Model of Vowel Production in Children
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Brad Story, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 05/31/2017
* USD 253,318.00

During the period of time a child acquires the capacity to produce speech, their
anatomical structure is continually developing and growing. Consequently, the
characteristics of the speech sounds they produce also change over time, and are
considerably different from those of an adult. Learning to produce intelligible
speech sounds would seem to be a daunting task for a child. Nonetheless,
normally-developing children acquire the ability to produce most speech sounds
by age six. The overall aim of the proposed research is to better understand how
children accomplish this remarkable feat. The researher's approach is to
investigate the mechanisms of children's speech by developing a computer-based
model of the trachea, larynx, throat, mouth, and nasal passages that will be
configured to represent children 2 to 6 years of age. This model is capable of
producing realistic simulations of vowels, syllables, words and sentences. These
simulated speech samples can be studied with respect to how the structure of the
child-like system influences the generation of sound waves and how those waves
are shaped into the sounds of speech. The simulations will also be compared to a
database of audio recordings of the speech of similarly aged children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common view of sound production for speech over the
last 50 years has been largely based on what is known about the adult male as a
talker. This view and associated theory has been remarkably successful as a
description of adult male speech. It is the prevailing description in most
speech science textbooks and is the basis of many types of speech synthesis and
speech analysis systems in use today. This research project will challenge this
view by proposing that the speech sounds of children are generated with
mechanisms that are fundamentally different from adults. Results of this
research project will enhance and expand theories of speech production and
speech development in children, and will contribute to education in the area of
speech science. In addition, the project will impact the next generation of
systems for speech analysis, synthesis and recognition.