* 1145716
* Control of neuronal migration by Fasciclin II and Rasputin
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Philip Copenhaver, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 02/29/2016
* USD 518,000.00

During brain development, nerve cells must migrate considerable distances to
reach their final locations before they can connect properly to other nerve
cells. Although many different signals affect this process, the complexity of
higher mammals has made it difficult to determine how specific proteins control
cell movements within the brain. As an alternative strategy, simpler insect
nervous systems can be used to model how particular types of proteins affect
cell behavior, providing the framework for testing the role of related proteins
in higher animals. This project will exploit the unique advantages of insect
preparations to define the role of an important class of cell surface receptors
called "Ig-CAMS", which are found in all nervous systems but whose functions are
poorly understood. Time-lapse imaging and fluorescent labeling will be used to
determine how different Ig-CAMs control distinct patterns of cell movement. A
combination of molecular and biochemical methods will then be used to test the
role of newly discovered "adapter" proteins that govern the effects of Ig-CAMs
at specific times and places. The results of these studies will reveal new
principles about how these protein classes function in more complex organisms,
including the human brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore an
important aspect of nerve cell guidance that plays a major role in controlling
the formation of the brain. Because insect model systems are relatively
inexpensive and easy to manipulate, the proposed studies will provide valuable
training opportunities for students and educators from a variety of backgrounds,
including undergraduates lacking prior research experience. This grant will also
support ongoing efforts to encourage participation by women and underrepresented
minorities in scientific discovery. The ultimate goal of this project will be
improve current knowledge about the fundamental mechanisms that control cell
migration in the developing nervous system.