* 1145349
* Maintaining Relationships with Chronically Insecure Partners: Interpersonal Security Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Edward Lemay, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 10/31/2013
* USD 147,513.00

A common assumption made by scientists who study close relationships is that
people who have chronic insecurities about interpersonal acceptance tend to
undermine their close relationships by engaging in destructive behaviors (e.g.,
criticism, hostility), which eventually elicit rejection by their partners. A
limitation of this view is that it ignores how partners of people with chronic
insecurities can actively improve and maintain their relationships with insecure
individuals. Dr. Edward Lemay (University of New Hampshire) proposes and tests a
model regarding how partners may shape insecure individuals thoughts and
feelings about interpersonal acceptance, as well as the effects of insecure
individuals on their partners&lt;br/&gt;own thoughts, feelings, and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Five studies will test the model using a
combination of methods, including laboratory manipulations, longitudinal
designs, behavioral observation studies, and reaction time measures. The studies
answer several important questions: (a) How does having an insecure relationship
partner affect attention to and memory for the partner's behavior? (b) What
motivations do people have when they interact with an insecure partner? (c) What
behaviors do people enact during such interactions? (d) Are people's efforts to
make their insecure partners feel valued usually successful? (e) Do people's
special efforts to make insecure partners feel accepted and valued predict long-
term quality and survival of relationships? The studies also examine whether
these processes depend on other relationship factors, such as the degree to
which the partner feels dependent on the insecure individual, and the partner's
cognitive abilities, such as their ability to control impulses and their memory
functioning. Answers to such questions will represent important insights into
the relationship dynamics that occur when one partner tends to be insecure about
interpersonal acceptance. This includes the active role of partners in
contributing to such relationships and the consequences of interpersonal
insecurity for a partners psychological functioning.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With
regard to broader impacts, the project will provide valuable training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, new measures
of the main study variables will be further developed during the course of this
project, which will be available for other researchers who are interested in
studying interpersonal relationships. Finally, improved knowledge of the
relationship dynamics associated with chronic insecurity has implications for a
variety of important social issues including divorce, mental health (e.g., the
mental health consequences of chronic insecurity), and the degree to which being
in a close relationship is good for people's physical well-being. Finally, this
work could have important implications for how to help people have happier
relationships in that it will help identify what kinds of "supportive" behaviors
are likely to be helpful when one has a chronically insecure partner and what
kinds of supportive behaviors may yield little or no relationship benefits.