* 1145552
* RUI: Climate change and birds: links among earlier nesting, migratory strategies, and warmer winters
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Julie Heath, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2016
* USD 162,500.00

Climate change effects on the timing of breeding seasons have been well
documented for many bird species. Birds may breed earlier because warmer spring
temperatures cause earlier plant growing seasons and, consequently, insect prey
becomes more abundant earlier in the year. In southwest Idaho, American kestrels
are breeding almost a month earlier than they did 20 years ago; however, spring
temperatures and plant growing seasons have not changed significantly during
that time period. One explanation is that more individuals are spending the
winter on or near their breeding ground. If so, it is important to understand
the fitness consequences of this shift in behavior. This project will examine
whether kestrels that remain on the breeding area year-round 1) nest earlier in
the year, 2) obtain better territories or 3) produce more offspring, compared to
kestrels that leave the breeding area for the winter. While many studies have
suggested how climate change may negatively affect bird populations, in this
system, milder winters may be resulting in more year-round residency, earlier
breeding, and potentially, population stability or growth.

This project will promote partnerships among community members, including
private landowners, universities, and local non-profits. It will also provide
education and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
while supporting an early-career female researcher. Results from this project
will be relevant for nationwide bird monitoring programs and management plans.