* 1145212
* Collaborative Research: Precambrian Crustal Evolution in Western Laurentia: Implications from the Sawtooth Metamorphic Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* David Foster, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 288,182.00

Earth scientists from Louisiana State University and the University of Florida
are collaborating on an investigation of a unique segment of Precambrian (>550
million years old, m.y.o.) continental crust brought to the earth?s surface by
the ~50 m.y.o. Sawtooth batholith in eastern Idaho. This crust is unique because
it lies between some of the oldest crust in North America (exposed in SW
Montana) and some of the most recent additions to the North American continent
in western Idaho (Blue Mountains). This research will test a wide range of
hypotheses for the formation and evolution of this crust: Is it an independent
terrane accreted to North America in the recent past, or does it show
geochemical ties to the old (>3000 m.y.o.) crust exposed in SW Montana? Does it
record evidence of a ?vanished? episode of mountain building similar in age to
the Grenville orogeny that formed much of eastern North America 1000 m.y. ago?
If accreted to North America in the Precambrian, does it provide insight the
fragmentation of North America that occurred 500-700 m.y.o ago? Specifically,
the team will investigate the origin of metamorphosed sedimentary rocks that
carry information about the nature of continental crust exposed at the time they
were deposited. The temperature and pressure history of this crust, which will
constrain the time at which it was appended to North America and the mechanism
by which it was appended. Elemental abundances in the metamorphosed igneous
rocks will give important clues to the environment in which they formed, while
isotopic compositions will constrain the amount of new crust vs. recycled crust
that is preserved. A large fraction of the crust that lies between the Archean
(>2500 m.y.o.) crust of SW Montana and the <200 m.y.o. crust of western Idaho is
buried beneath younger rocks, making the Sawtooth terrane a very important
window into crustal evolution in western North America.

This research will be carried out by a team that includes members from
underrepresented groups and women who will be trained in important quantitative
techniques applicable across a range of STEM disciplines. The team will also
participate in the public-private partnership between LSU Geology & Geophysics
and Marathon Petroleum Corporation (Geoscience Diversity Enrichment Program)
that is focused on increasing STEM participation. The public will also benefit
by our partnership with the Sawtooth National Recreational Area (U.S. Forest
Service), leading to better educational materials distributed in the Sawtooth
National Recreational Area. In detail, this team (faculty and students,
undergraduate and graduate) will employ and provide training in the following:
1) We will conduct U/Pb radiometric dating of zircons to determine original
crystallization ages of igneous rocks and the origin of sediment deposited in
protoliths to the metasedimentary rocks using laser ablation to sample
individual crystals in the ICP-MS laboratory at the University of Florida; 2)
Elemental analyses by a combination of x-ray fluorescence and ICP methods at the
University of Florida; 3) The electron microprobe laboratory at LSU will be used
to measure elemental abundances in individual minerals, which can then be used
to determine the burial conditions and pressure-temperature path of the Sawtooth
crust (thermobarometry); 4) U-Th-Pb (radiometric) dating of texturally and
petrologically constrained monazite and titanite will provide a definitive age
for the metamorphic event(s) recorded in the Sawtooth crust needed to develop
Pressure-Temperature-time path(s) and determine the tectonic setting of
metamorphism using facilities at the University of Florida and the University of
Massachusetts; and 5) Measurement of K-Ar systematics (40Ar/39Ar) will help
assess the most recent, post-metamorphic, thermal history of the terrain.
Students from both universities will cross-train in these techniques as part of
their thesis and dissertation research, and will then be well prepared to meet
the technologically challenging opportunities afforded members of the country?s
STEM workforce.