* 1145902
* Collaborative Research:   Does Anti-predator Behavior Modify Indirect Effects of Top Predators?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Aaron Wirsing, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 796,302.00

Predators can benefit plants by scaring away herbivores and preventing
overgrazing in a process known as a "trophic cascade." Biologists have assumed
that each predator creates one kind of trophic cascade. A tiger, for example,
scares herbivores away from and protects plants growing in the area it patrols.
Evidence suggests, however, that not all herbivores respond uniformly to the
fear of predators. Instead, in ecosystems with multiple herbivores, each one may
avoid the area where it is least likely to escape the predator, and these areas
might differ. If so, then predators could trigger an array of trophic cascades,
benefiting plants eaten by any particular herbivore where it is most likely to
be caught. To understand how a predator shields plants by scaring away
herbivores, biologists must identify the area, or habitat type, where each prey
species is least likely to escape. Such identification requires knowledge of
prey escape tactics. The proposed research will use escape tactics of two
herbivores in Washington -- mule and white-tailed deer -- to predict changes to
their habitat use caused by the recent return of the gray wolf. Mule deer are
slow, and use their agility to escape predators. They would be expected to shift
to rough terrain where their agility is advantageous, and avoid smooth terrain
where escape requires speed. White-tailed deer are fast and escape predators by
sprinting away; when frightened by wolves they would be expected to avoid rugged
terrain where their speed is neutralized. Consequently, wolves would be expected
to protect plants eaten by mule deer that grow on gentle terrain, and plants
eaten by white-tailed deer that grow on rugged terrain. This project will change
the way that the ecological role of predators is understood, by highlighting the
importance of prey escape behavior in driving how predators affect plants and
shape ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research
include training of two doctoral students, establishment of a long-term study of
the ecological impacts of wolves as a means to inform conservation policy, and
initiation of an outreach program incorporating teacher training, public
lectures, and video lesson plans for secondary school classrooms.