* 1145223
* Evaluating the Role of Glaciation on the Structural Configuration of the Southern Alaska Syntaxis
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Saad Haq, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2017
* USD 318,968.00

The role of glaciation on the tectonic configuration of convergent margins is a
first order question that remains largely unanswered. The eastern Gulf of Alaska
is arguably the best place on Earth to study the coupling of glacial erosional
processes and tectonics. The coastal mountains in this area, the Chugach and St.
Elias Ranges, contain the largest non-polar ice fields on earth and are
characterized by the most erosive agents on earth, tidewater glaciers, and are
part of a wide zone of deformation that forms along the southern Alaska
syntaxis. This structural, depositional, and climatic framework of the Gulf of
Alaska provide the ideal study area to understand the relationship between
glaciation and tectonics. Few places on earth have the extreme exhumation,
erosional, and depositional rates that have been documented as in the syntaxial
corner. Many recent studies provide evidence for intensified rock uplift in
response to focused erosion by glaciers but the structural mechanics that are
responsible for the reorganization of the mountain belt are not well understood
in Alaska or elsewhere. This project has two basic goals: 1) to refine the
structural cross-sections of the region using geologic data and, 2) develop
mechanical analog models that account for the role of glacially driven erosion
and deposition (amount and location) on the reorganization of deformation along
the geologically and geometrically complex plate boundary of the Alaskan margin.
Analog modeling will utilize state-of-the-art kinematic analysis to understand
the development and evolution of structures.

The influence of glaciers in Southern Alaska, and in general, on tectonics is
directly related to variations in climate, however, most models for the
mechanical development of convergent margins are disconnected from the role of
glaciations in mass redistribution and the coupled tectonic response. This
modeling study will help to quantify the general mechanical response of Coulomb
wedges to highly localized glacial erosion, which occurs on geologically rapid
time scales, and more specifically will put constraints on the style and
evolution of deformation along the Alaskan convergent margin. This work will
help to elucidate both short and long-term response of mountain belts, including
changes in uplift and strain patterns, due to rapid loading and unloading, that
can occur during periods of rapid climate change. The project has a significant
outreach and education component that seeks to increase diversity in the
geosciences by working with high school Native American students from rural
Alaskan communities.