* 1145636
* Collaborative Research: How Mountains Maintain Biodiversity: A Multidisciplinary Characterization of a Pleistocene Refugium in the Interior Pacific Northwest
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Daniel Gavin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 188,400.00

Understanding the responses of species to historical climate shifts can inform
predictions of the future impacts of climate change on ecosystems. Mountains
contain a wide range of habitats and diverse species, which have been shaped by
a history of major climate changes since the last ice age. These changes have
resulted in rapid and major changes in vegetation such as shifts from tundra to
forest. Mountainous regions are also thought to harbor biodiversity in refugia
during otherwise inhospitable climate periods. This project will characterize an
ice-age refugium in steep terrain in northern Idaho that may have harbored a
wide diversity of plant and animal species, and thus illuminate how mountainous
terrain may buffer populations through major climate changes. Focusing on two
dominant tree species in northern conifer forests (western redcedar and mountain
hemlock), this project will integrate three methodological approaches to
leverage their strengths in inferring past population sizes and locations.
First, cutting-edge DNA-sequencing methods will reveal the genetic footprints of
species' migration pathways and test for the existence of refugia. Second, new
paleoecological records of pollen and macrofossils will reveal the regional
plant species composition and climate during the coldest periods in the past
50,000 years. Third, simulations of historical climate across the complex
mountain landscape will be combined with information on the physiological
tolerances of each species (e.g., cold hardiness), to reveal the most likely
locations of refugia within this region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary approach of this project provides an opportunity to train the
next generation of biogeographers, who will need these traditionally distinct
skill sets in genetics, paleontology, and landscape modeling to forecast
ecological impacts of future climate change. Graduate students will rotate among
genetics, paleoecology and landscape ecology labs to achieve this training goal.
In addition, a curriculum workshop will be conducted for high school teachers,
and used to develop lessons for hands-on activities.