* 1145408
* Collaborative Proposal: ARTS: Revisionary systematics of fossil and living Caribbean faviid and mussid reef corals (Cnidaria, Anthozoa, Scleractinia)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Peter Makovicky, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 03/31/2013
* USD 55,536.00

Coral reefs are among the most diverse marine ecosystems and are increasingly
threatened by climate change, ocean acidification, overfishing, and
anthropogenic disturbance. They are constructed by 18 families and >800 species
of reef-building coral. The traditional classification scheme of reef-building
corals based on macromorphology indicate that few groups have distributions
limited to the Caribbean. Recent molecular analyses, however, disagree with the
traditional classification and have identified a previously unrecognized,
exclusively Caribbean lineage. These findings indicate reef-building corals are
in need of a complete re-evaluation. This collaborative project will assess the
diversity and clarify the taxonomy and relationships between a group of
Caribbean reef corals from related Mediterranean and Indo-Pacific species
beginning ~55 million years ago. The project will analyze 79 living and ~380
fossil species. Molecular and morphological datasets will be integrated for the
first time, and include novel microscopic features. The evolutionary history of
Caribbean reefs will be reconstructed, and the effects of past biogeographic
events on present-day biodiversity will be assessed.

A postdoctoral scholar, graduate student, and four undergraduates will be
trained in coral systematics. Results will be publically disseminated through
peer-reviewed publications and electronic sources via an online taxonomic
database, Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America (NMITA)
(http://nmita.iowa.uiowa.edu/), and the Encyclopedia of Life (http://eol.org).
Project results will influence conservation priorities that are based on species
numbers without consideration of evolutionary distinctiveness.