* 1145062
* EAGER:  Multiphoton Polymerization with Optical Trap Assisted Nanopatterning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Craig Arnold, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides funding
to develop an innovative 3-D additive manufacturing process capable of producing
uniform metal and polymer features with nanometer resolution for applications in
optics, photonics, biomaterials and other areas. Here, we propose to combine the
patterning resolution and scaling benefits provided by the recently developed
optical trap assisted nanopatterning method with the 3-D additive capabilities
of ultrafast multiphoton polymerization processing. However in order to achieve
this goal, it is necessary to attain a deeper understanding of these processes
and demonstrate the feasibility of such a combined approach. To this end, this
proposal will focus on experimentally and numerically probing fundamental
proof?]of?]principle questions related to the compatibility of ultrafast laser
processing and polymer precursor solutions with optically trapped microspheres,
and the ability to polymerize precursor solutions in the vicinity of
microspheres without contamination or redeposition. Numerical studies will
include finite difference time domain simulations for optical propagation
through the liquid solution and polystyrene microspheres. Whereas, experiments
will use both in situ imaging during laser processing and ex situ
characterization to identify the material response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will have a profound impact on a number of diverse
application areas where multiscale and multifunctional 3-D architectures are
needed to advance functionality, such as in photonic materials, optoelectronics,
microfluidics, tissue engineering, etc. Broad dissemination in these areas
through publications and international presentations will ensure researchers
gain widespread benefit from our studies. But perhaps more importantly, the
success of this research will provide a demonstration of feasibility that is
necessary to secure funding through traditional vehicles in order to further
develop this potentially transformative materials processing approach. Finally,
we envision this research as a seed for an international collaboration between
researchers at Princeton and University of Erlangen-Nurenberg, School of
Advanced Optical Technologies (UEN-SAOT) in Germany for 3-D laser based
manufacturing. To this end, funds have been allocated to support the travel to
UEN-SAOT where the PIs will help train other researchers and students in this
developing technology.