* 1145437
* Collaborative Research:   Biotic Inventory of the Amphibians, Reptiles and Associated Parasites of the Central African Lowland Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Kate Jackson, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* ashley dowling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 159,968.00

The goal of this project is to understand the taxonomy and evolutionary history
of amphibians, reptiles and their endoparasites in one of the most poorly known
regions in the world: the lowlands of Central Africa. Forests in the Congo Basin
are renowned for their immense biodiversity, but are increasingly threatened by
deforestation, climate change and chytrid fungus infections in multiple genera
of frogs. Chytrid infections are linked to global amphibian declines. DNA
analyses of samples collected during surveys will be used to identify and
describe new species, and to reconstruct their evolutionary history. The
investigators estimate the project may double the approximately 380 species of
amphibians and reptiles currently known from the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will work in teams to
participate in cybertaxonomy and rapid-identification projects by analyzing
photographs of specimens with associated georeference data via dedicated
websites, and in real time as expeditions are occurring. Project leaders will
use solar-powered chargers and computers to blog from the field as expeditions
are in progress as a way to engage students, colleagues and the general public
in the research. It is anticipated that this project will significantly elevate
the global understanding of the importance of the Congo Basin?s biodiversity,
and support ongoing, in-country efforts to expand national parks.