* 1145383
* EAGER: Numerical Accuracy of Randomized Algorithms for Matrix Multiplication and Least Squares
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2014
* Ilse C.F. Ipsen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 11/30/2014
* USD 85,000.00

The PI proposes to investigate the numerical accuracy and robustness of
randomized algorithms for matrix multiplication and overdetermined least squares
problems. Existing analyses of randomized algorithms are mostly concerned with
asymptotic time and space complexity in exact arithmetic, and very little is
known about their numerical behavior in floating point arithmetic. The PI
proposes to develop a numerical perturbation and stability theory for randomized
algorithms for matrix multiplication and least squares problems. This entails
the invention of new approaches and concepts to capture the numerical behavior
of randomized algorithms. It is not at all clear what ``numerical stability''
means in this context, let alone how it should be defined. How does one
distinguish variability caused by randomization from variability caused by
finite precision? Where should parameters like failure probability, choice of
probabilities, and amount of sampling be accounted for? Proposed approaches for
answering these questions will include matrix perturbation analysis, probability
theory, and methods on matrix manifolds. Extensive numerical experiments will be
performed to corroborate the analyses.

The motivation for randomized algorithms is the need for streaming massive data
sets that are too large for traditional deterministic algorithms. Randomized
algorithms have been implemented successfully for applications such as pattern
recognition, social network analysis, population genetics, circuit testing, and
text classification. The proposed research will help to determine for which
application domains a randomized algorithm is suitable, and it will also result
in practical bounds and recommendations for parameter choices to achieve a user-
specified accuracy. The proposed research is highly relevant because randomized
algorithms will be indispensable for exascale computing, in applications like
high energy physics and astronomy, where peta bytes of data are expected to
stream in daily and tasks like rare event detection make it imperative to have a
good understanding of numerical accuracy and robustness.