* 1145064
* The Role of Chloroplast Gene Expression in Plant Growth and Development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* David Meinke, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* philip becraft
* 05/31/2017
* USD 370,000.00

Chloroplasts play a central role in plant metabolism and in supporting the
growth and differentiation of plant cells. Although most chloroplast proteins
are encoded in the nucleus, produced in the cytosol, and imported into the
chloroplast, few are encoded by the chloroplast genome. Typically, interfering
with chloroplast gene function causes defects in photosynthesis, but in some
species the effects of such disruptions are more severe and result in early
lethality. For example, disrupting chloroplast translation in Arabidopsis often
causes embryo lethality, but in other species results in seedlings that are
albino, but viable. Recent work suggests that a single chloroplast gene (accD),
encoding one subunit of a heteromeric acetyl-CoA carboxylase required for fatty
acid biosynthesis, may be responsible for the strikingly different consequences
- lethality vs. viable albino - of blocking chloroplast translation in different
plant species. This project will evaluate this model, explore its implications
for plant biology, and provide valuable insights into basic cellular and
metabolic processes that underlie plant development. Several different
strategies will be pursued: (1) Determine whether embryo lethality in
Arabidopsis mutants defective in chloroplast translation can be rescued by a
nuclear transgene encoding a chloroplast-localized version of the normally
cytosolic, homomeric carboxylase; (2) Compare the consequences of disrupting
chloroplast translation in different accessions of Arabidopsis; and (3) Evaluate
plant lineages where accD has been lost from the chloroplast genome. This work
will help to illustrate how disrupting genes encoding the same metabolic
function in different plant species can have divergent developmental impacts.
Results will be published in scientific journals and biological materials
distributed to Arabidopsis stock centers. A summer lab course based on this
research will be developed to incorporate principles of plant genetics,
biochemistry, and evolution, offering biology majors an alternative way to meet
lab requirements by focusing on enhanced research, analytical, and writing
skills.