* 1145274
* Evaluating the mechanisms that result in a relationship between phylogenetic distance and population dynamics in biological invasions.
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Tiffany Knight, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2015
* USD 502,500.00

Although humans have transported thousands of species of plants and animals
across the globe, the ability of those species to establish, spread, and cause
significant economic and ecological costs in the areas to which they have been
introduced varies greatly. Many hypotheses have been proposed to understand why
some introduced species harm the ecosystems to which they are introduced while
others are apparently innocuous. Most famously, Darwin hypothesized that
introduced species that are less closely related to the native species in a
habitat are more likely to cause harm, that is, to become invasive. This
research will focus on three prominent mechanisms that might explain how
evolutionary novelty in plants could lead to invasion following introduction:
competition, natural enemies, and pollination. Novelty could allow introduced
plants to escape both competition from other plants and attack by predators and
pathogens. However, novelty could deprive introduced plants of pollinators.
Researchers will test the effects of competition, herbivory, and access to
pollinators on the performance and predicted population growth of each of 20
introduced plant species that vary in invasiveness and novelty at a field site
near Saint Louis, Missouri. Results will help show the costs and benefits of
evolutionary novelty in introduced species.

In addition to providing a more thorough understanding of the important
environmental problem of invasive species, this study will provide useful
information for cost-effective ways to limit the introductions of potentially
invasive species and to manage species that have already been introduced. The
research will also train graduate and undergraduate students and reach out to
the public through an informal science education program with high school
interns and through presentations to public audiences.