* 1145549
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Structure and Mechanics of the Bat Wing Membrane
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Sharon Swartz, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 404,323.00

The wings of all flying animals are composed in part of an outer surface -- the
skin, feathers, and/or cuticle -- but this key component of wing structure is
much less well studied than the internal skeletal, muscular, and nervous
systems. Because skin can make up the majority of the wing surface,
understanding the mechanical nature of skin in flying animals is critically
important to understanding both how animals fly, and the evolutionary origins
and diversification of animal flight. One way in which bats differ from all
other flying animals and from the flying vehicles that humans build is that
their wings deform and stretch tremendously during flight. This research project
will focus on the unique structure and function of bat skin, and how it
contributes to the flight capacity of bats. &lt;br/&gt; This project proposes to
understand how the skin of the wing helps to control the dynamic changes in 3D
wing shape that are integral to bat flight performance. To achieve this goal,
this collaborative project will integrate biology and engineering research to
gain an in-depth understanding of the nature of bat wing skin, a remarkable and
complex biological material. First, high-speed videography of natural flight in
bats will be used to document how wing skin stretches and deforms during normal
wing movements. Second, a comparative analysis of the diversity of structure of
connective tissues and muscles underlying wing skin will be undertaken in a
group of 87 of the more than 1200 living bat species, selected to represent bat
diversity and evolutionary relationships. Third, unique mechanical tests of wing
skin will be made by applying forces in a manner that mimics, for the first
time, what skin experiences during flight. Using a special technique that
employs polarized light, it will be possible to quantify microscopic
deformations over entire skin samples for the first time. This new method will
make it possible to gain fundamental insights into wing skin as a material and
into wings as airfoils. Finally, data from all of these studies will be
incorporated into engineering models of structure-property relationships for bat
skin. These models will not only provide deeper insights into the mechanics of
the skin, but will also make predictions about skin function and dynamics that
go beyond what can be observed under laboratory test
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Engineering sciences increasingly look to the biological
world for design ideas and studies of bat wing architecture and materials can
uncover a menu of distinctive traits that can inspire novel aerospace materials,
airfoil designs, and other cutting-edge technologies. In addition, theory and
modeling tools developed here for highly deforming wing skin will be applicable
to tissue mechanics in a variety of biological and biomedical applications.
Public fascination with bats and the beauty of bat form and motion provide
natural starting points for communication; the principal investigators and their
students will conduct outreach at local public schools and museums, create web-
based content for many audiences, and participate in film and television
programming.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will make special efforts to identify,
recruit, and retain undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented
groups, and to involve them as team members at every level. A biology component
will be added to the NSF-GEMS (Girls in Engineering, Math &amp; Science) program
in Kingston, Jamaica, which will incorporate animal flight and natural history
of Jamaica. This enhancement will broaden the range of science in the program,
offer outreach training to graduate students, and give girls hands-on experience
of science in their own environment.