* 1145511
* Lichen biodiversity in the threatened Middle Atlantic Coastal Plain of North America: Improving classification, conservation, and communication
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Richard Harris, New York Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2016
* USD 727,597.00

Lichens are fungi with a unique lifestyle involving a semi-parasitic
relationship with an alga and/or cyanobacterium. Although lichens are critical
to maintaining healthy ecosystems on land, they remain chronically understudied.
This project centers on a survey of lichen diversity in the environmentally
threatened Middle Atlantic Coastal Plain of the United States and represents an
efficient, comprehensive means of addressing a critical information gap for one
of the least known and most environmentally sensitive organismal groups. The
survey data will be used to resolve numerous problems related to conservation
and ecology through a unique system that integrates newly written computer
scripts and programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will set conservation
priorities in the region and will result in two book-length works on lichens.
While preparing these treatments, the authors will depart from traditional
approaches by using dynamic online resources to incorporate the insights of
professionals and amateurs alike. The investigators will teach a series of
courses, mentor a diverse cohort of high school and undergraduate students, and
train a PhD student. Extensive interactions and collaborations with regional
land managers and naturalists, including a three-day workshop led by the
investigators, will ensure that this project has the maximum impact on
conservation efforts.