* 1145853
* Workshop on Modeling Sustainable, Resilient, and Robust Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Ximing Cai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2012
* USD 49,995.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;In support of NSF/ENG's Emerging Frontiers in Research
Innovation (EFRI) Resilient and Sustainable Infrastructures (RESIN) portfolio of
projects, all eight RESIN project teams as well as other invitees from across
the nation will convene at Champaign, Illinois on November 17-18, 2011 in order
to (i) finalize overarching metrics for sustainability, resilience, and
robustness (SRR) of critical infrastructure systems, and (ii) promote
implementation of these synthesized metrics in infrastructure system modeling
across various application contexts. Another principal objective is to
strategize on means to overcome critical conceptual and computational barriers
that are common across RESIN projects. Secondary objectives are to coordinate
RESIN educational and outreach activities, and to discuss future opportunities
and a path forward for the RESIN community. At the workshop, each RESIN team
will make presentations summarizing their modeling efforts to date. New concepts
and broader definitions will be provided by invited experts to provide
additional breadth and depth to the discussion. Breakout sessions will be held
on specific topics (i.e., metrics, modeling, and engineering implications of
SRR, and education, outreach and future research opportunities). This workshop,
via the advancement of new engineering standards and guidelines for achieving
sustainability, resilience and robustness in infrastructure systems, is targeted
to have a significant impact on infrastructure system modeling across multiple
engineering disciplines. The workshop materials will be documented (e.g., via
videotaping, voice recording) and will be available for downloading permanently
at the conference website. The deliverables include (i) a workshop report to NSF
including a summary of breakout sessions, (ii) a finalized summary paper of
interdisciplinary definitions of SRR, and (iii) a technical report and/or
compiled book chapters that summarize the quantitative applications of SRR
concepts/definitions in various infrastructure contexts.