* 1145238
* Three-Dimensional Characterization of a Pseudotachylyte-Bearing Fault
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Phillip Resor, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2016
* USD 146,728.00

Fault slip is the dominant mode of deformation in the earth's upper crust.
Faults within the crust, however, exhibit a range of behavior, from earthquake-
generating stick-slip to aseismic creep. Laboratory-derived friction laws can
explain this spectrum of fault behavior; however, the scaling of these laws to
the conditions of natural earthquakes and the interpretation of the laws'
physical meanings have proven to be formidable challenges. This research will
bridge laboratory and earthquake scales by imaging the three dimensional
geometry of pseudotachylyte-bearing faults. Pseudotachylytes, fault rocks formed
from frictional melts, are generally considered the only unequivocal evidence
ofearthquake slip velocities preserved in fault zones. The solidification of
frictional melt "freezes in" earthquake source geometries; however, it also
precludes the development of extensive fault surface exposures that have enabled
previous studies of fault zone geometry. We have overcome this difficulty by
imaging the intact 3D geometry of the fault using high-resolution X-ray computed
tomography (CT). In this study we will use CT imagery of natural and
experimental fault surfaces to quantify surface roughness, frictional contact
area, and pseudotachylyte thickness and will thus determine the evolution of
fault roughness with slip and estimate key frictional parameters at earthquake
nucleation and propagation scales. The proposed project will improve the
understanding of earthquakes and their effects, one of the primary goals of the
National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program. Furthermore, the project will
establish a new collaboration between Wesleyan University, a primarily
undergraduate institution in the US, and scientists from the Istituto Nazionale
di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV), a world-renowned research institute in
Italy. Undergraduate students will play an integral role in the project,
planting the seeds for future international and interdisciplinary research into
the processes of brittle deformation in the earth's crust. These students will
experience the full scope of the scientific process, from hypothesis generation,
to study design, to presentation of results at professional meetings and in a
written thesis. The project is being supported by the EAR Tectonics Program and
the Office of International Science and Engineering's Global Venture Fund.