* 1145038
* Investigating the Slip Rate of the Main Frontal Thrust in the Eastern Himalaya, NE India
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Edward Rhodes, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 248,824.00

The 2500-kilometer-long Himalayan Main Frontal Thrust is the longest active
thrust fault in the world. It links the oceanic subduction zones via active
left-slip and right-slip transpressional systems on the east and west sides of
the Indian subcontinent. Together, these active faults accommodate on-going
northward indentation of the Indian plate into the Eurasian plate and this
deformation contributes to the current growth of the Himalayan mountain belt.
Although the Main Frontal Thrust may have absorbed more than 50% of the total
current India-Asian convergence in the central Himalaya, how its slip rate
varies along strike remains poorly known. For example, it is not clearly if the
Main Frontal Thrust slip rate increases from west to east corresponding to the
eastward increase in the rate of India-Asia convergence. Resolving this problem
is a key to establishing the dynamic cause of the Himalayan formation. A major
difficulty in determining the slip-rate distribution of the Main Frontal Thrust
is the lack of geologic information on the Main Frontal Thrust in the eastern
Himalaya. This NSF-funded project is addressing this issue by conducting
detailed structural, morphologic, and geochronologic investigations. The final
products of the project include (1) a robust estimate of the Quaternary slip
rate on the Main Frontal Thrust in the eastern Himalaya, and (2) a first
detailed active-fault map of the eastern Himalaya. This research project will
benefit seismic-hazard evaluation of NE India that hosted the devastating 1897 M
= 8.6 Assam earthquake along the northern edge of the Shillong Plateau and 1950
M = 8.5 Metog earthquake at the eastern end of the Himalaya. The final report of
our findings on the distribution of active structures and the rates of active
faults in the eastern Himalaya will be submitted to the local and central Indian
governments. In addition to the scientific objectives of this study, the project
is supporting the training and research efforts of a U.S. graduate student at
UCLA, as well as collaboration with Indian researchers and graduate students.
The project is supported by the EAR Tectonics Program and the OISE Global
Venture Fund.