* 1145925
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Evolution of an Extreme Makeover in Ferns
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Eric Schuettpelz, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* David Mindell
* 01/31/2014
* USD 208,919.00

The "maidenhair ferns" (belonging to the genus Adiantum) are quintessential
ferns -- beautifully dissected, terrestrial, and shade-loving. The "shoe-string
ferns" (belonging to a group known as vittarioids) are extremely different:
highly simplified, canopy-dwelling epiphytes, with duplicated genomes that
exhibit accelerated rates of molecular evolution. Surprisingly, Adiantum and the
vittarioids are closely related, comprising a single branch of the tree of life
-- a lineage that evidently witnessed an extreme morphological, ecological, and
genomic makeover. The proposed research aims to first establish a robust
phylogeny for these ferns through analyses of DNA sequence data. Subsequent
analyses can then reveal the evolutionary history of the "maidenhair" to
"shoestring" fern transformation.

By better characterizing the evolutionary history of this extreme makeover in
ferns, this study will better elucidate the evolutionary processes of
morphological simplification, ecological transition, genome duplication, and
molecular evolutionary rate acceleration. Because all of these processes are
frequently encountered across the tree of life, but poorly understood, efforts
here to uncover and characterize links among them are broadly relevant. This
project encompasses a multidisciplinary training program to promote learning,
teaching, and discovery, and is squarely aimed at undergraduate and graduate
students interested in the areas of plant systematics, molecular evolution, and
phylogenetics. The project will also pursue significant science education and
outreach goals.