* 1145829
* Collaborative research:   Quantifying the ecosystem-wide impacts of a strong interactor in African watersheds
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Kelly Caylor, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 123,336.00

This award will initiate a collaborative research effort by ecologists,
biogeochemists, and ecohyrdologists at the University of California at Berkeley
and Princeton University to study how the common hippopotamus affects ecosystems
- and how change to these ecosystems in turn affects the hippopotamus.
Remarkably little is known about the importance of the common hippopotamus to
the ecosystems that they inhabit, despite the fact that they are recognized to
be a vulnerable and declining species. Hippopotamus rest in rivers and shallow
lakes during the day and then emerge at night to feed on land. By virtue of
these movements these large herbivores transfer vast quantities of nutrients and
energy across the boundary between aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. These
connections are likely to have a major influence on ecological properties and
processes in each type of ecosystem. To identify these effects, the movement
ecology of hippopotamus, the rates at which they vector nutrients across
ecosystems, the impacts that these transfers have upon the ecology of recipient
ecosystems, and how environmental physics (i.e. river flow, rainfall) influence
all of the above factors will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this
work will help us to understand how hippopotamus shape the ecology of adjacent
ecosystems and how climate change and alterations in water use may disrupt these
interactions. More broadly and importantly, this work will extend our general
understanding of how transfers of material and energy influence the ecology of
entire landscapes, how closely neighboring ecosystems are linked to one another,
and how physical forcing determines the nature and importance of these
connections. In addition to these important scientific contributions this
project will provide training for national and international postdoctoral
researchers, involve undergraduates in research, generate creative science media
for the general public, and support science outreach programs in educationally
underserved rural settings.