* 1145505
* EAGER: Using Social Media and Crowdsourcing to Create a New Affect Dictionary
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Julia Hirschberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 6,162.00

Research on sentiment and emotion in textual and spoken language relies heavily
on human annotation of corpora and human judgments of words in context to
provide gold standard data and useful features for prediction. Current resources
such as Whissell's Dictionary of Affect in Language (DAL) are of limited
utility, due to their limited coverage. To provide richer gold standards, in
recent years computational linguists have been making use se of crowd-sourcing
websites such as Amazon Mechanical Turk to accomplish annotation tasks that
previously would have been done by trained annotators or human subjects in
laboratory experiments. Recently there has been some research on using social
media websites for similar purposes (mining existing social exchanges for
information and creating games to elicit new information). In this project the
PI will explore the use of all three of these approaches to augment existing
data on human judgments of the emotional content of lexical items to support her
ongoing investigation into the classification of emotional text and speech (a
major objective of which is to move beyond simple valence judgments relying upon
acoustic and prosodic features by taking into account more nuanced aspects of
affective text). She will examine the value of crowd-sourcing, social media
mining and games implemented in social websites to ascertain what lessons can be
learned about acquiring reliable annotations and judgments of emotional
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This exploratory research has the
potential to open up new sources of information about the affective connotations
of lexical items that will be invaluable to researchers working in text and in
speech affect. Advances in the automatic identification of affect in text and in
speech would have major applications in fields such as business and medicine,
inter alia. Business interests in assessing consumer opinion is rapidly moving
from focus groups to analyses of product reviews, while medical informatics
researchers similarly try to learn patient attitudes to diagnoses, drugs, and
treatments by mining online forums. A major component of such endeavors is the
use of affect dictionaries. New and better sources of affective connotations of
lexical items should prove enormously helpful in these efforts, increasing our
ability to learn useful, practical information from the data individuals provide
freely online. The lessons learned through these experiments and results of
subsequent data collection will be made available to the larger research
community in the form of new affect lexicons.