* 1145469
* Vertically Meandering Mountain Streams
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Anne Chin, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 09/30/2013
* USD 102,646.00

Mountain streams are major sources of the world's water and sediment supply,
serving as the primary reservoirs feeding into lowland rivers and larger water
bodies. These mountain streams, which are characterized by a preponderance of
steps and pools, exhibit a striking, staircase-like longitudinal profile that
has intrigued scientists for many years. Recently, the application of spectral
analysis has identified periodicities in the occurrence of steps and pools,
thereby suggesting a mutual adjustment between flow and channel morphology, and
an analogy to meandering in the vertical dimension. Although this finding
extends the fundamentally important concept of vertical meandering from pools
and riffles in downstream channels to step-pools in headwater areas of river
basins, the oscillations in the step-pool streambed have not been subjected to
the same level of analysis as those in pools and riffles and the meandering
river. Using a combination of field, laboratory, and statistical methods, this
research will develop a quantitative model to describe, predict, and explain the
rhythmic step-pool morphology, and to fully establish its significance as an
expression of vertical meandering in mountain streams. Time-series analytic
techniques will be applied to a large database of step-pool streams from around
the world to develop a model that can describe and predict the rhythmic
sequences. Step-pool channels in the Santa Monica Mountains of California will
also be surveyed and compared to profiles constructed in 1991 to assess change
in the periodic character over decadal timescales. Flume experiments will
further provide specific tests for the hypothesis that periodic step-pool
sequences minimize stream power in the mountain river system, thus linking the
rhythmic form to principles of energy expenditure. Collectively, these outcomes
are expected to demonstrate that predictable, periodic step-pool mountain
streambeds develop and are preserved in a wide range of environments to maintain
equilibrium channel geometries under high energy conditions.

The comprehensive treatment undertaken in this study is expected to elevate our
understanding of the vertical oscillations in mountain streams toward that of
riffle-pools and horizontal meandering well known for decades. Developing a
general predictive model for rhythmic step-pool sequences will give insight into
the underlying processes operating in mountain streams. Linking the repetitive
step-pool form to principles of energy expenditure will enhance our
understanding of river behavior in general. Enhanced understanding of the
vertical patterns in step-pool streams will assist stable channel design and
stream restoration using step-pools, a practice that is increasing in mountain
and urban settings. Effective design and management of steep mountain streams
will mitigate flood hazards and protect property and livelihood in downstream
communities. Because mountain streams are important habitats for many sensitive
aquatic species, results of this study will have further important implications
for ecological management.