* 1145120
* Collaborative Research: Hawaiian and Subplinian Basaltic Volcanism: Constraints on Eruption Dynamics from Kilauea
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Erik Hauri, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2014
* USD 99,352.00

Understanding the forces controlling basaltic explosive eruptions is of
fundamental importance in order to improve understanding of the range of
behaviors of our most frequently active volcanoes and to assess hazards of
future explosive events. The summit of Kîlauea is the site of large and growing
volcano-tourism (e.g., 5000 visitors/day at the overlook at Jaggar Museum), and
there is a public need both for better knowledge of the volcanoes' behavior and
improved forecasting of the likely course of future eruptions. Although not its
usual style, explosive eruptions have punctuated Kîlauea's history, with five
moderately large events since 1500 CE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
quantifies and models the dominant factors that determine explosive eruptive
behavior at Kilauea volcano, through a study of the eruptive products from three
plume-forming and fountaining eruptions. The events are episode 1 of the highest
historical fountaining eruption at Kîlauea, the 1959 Kîlauea Iki eruption, a
much earlier powerful fountaining eruption in 1480 CE and a powerful; plume-
forming eruption in 1635 CE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of the approach
lies in using new 'rate-meters' to estimate likely durations of magma ascent
beneath the volcano to arrive at the influence of this residence time on the
ultimate 'fate' of the magma. The investigators will study microtextures
(vesicles and microlites), volatiles in melt inclusions, and embayments in
eruptive products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to direct support for 3
graduate students and undergraduate students, results will contribute to
educational outreach efforts anchored on development of volcanology classes at
University of Hawaii, Columbia University and Rice University. The proposal
involves exchange of material and ideas between five institutions to the benefit
of young researchers, and undergraduate and graduate classes. Our results will
be widely disseminated via the Internet using linked web sites hosted by
Hawaiian Volcano Observatory and NSF-funded institutions.