* 1145866
* Genetic and neural contributions to the evolution of schooling behavior in sticklebacks
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Catherine Peichel, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* emilia martins
* 05/31/2016
* USD 610,000.00

A longstanding challenge in behavioral research has been to identify the
internal factors that bring about differences in behavior between individuals or
species. Despite the importance of this goal, there is a paucity of information
about the genetic and neural mechanisms that underlie the dramatic differences
in behavior observed within and among species in the wild. This project seeks to
identify the mechanisms that underlie divergence in social behaviors, using
schooling behavior in stickleback fish as a model system. Sticklebacks are an
emerging genetic model system with numerous populations that differ in behavior,
making them ideally suited to this work. Sticklebacks from marine and freshwater
environments exhibit striking differences in schooling behavior. A combination
of modern genetic and neurobiological approaches will be used to dissect the
genes and neural circuits that underlie differences in schooling behavior
between stickleback populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has the
potential to yield one of only a few known "behavior genes" in any system and
one of the first genes that shape behavioral differences between divergent
populations of animals in the wild. In addition, this work seeks to link genetic
variation to variation in the nervous system, thereby providing important
insight into the process of behavioral divergence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide opportunities for undergraduate students to gain experience
in cutting- edge genetic analysis. In addition, a collaboration has been
established with a Seattle-area high school serving a diverse community of
students. These students will participate in the analysis of the behavioral and
genetic data from this project, providing them with a unique opportunity for
engagement in the scientific process.