* 1145152
* EAGER: Combining Knowledge with Data for Generalizable and Robust Visual Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Qiang Ji, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 226,421.00

Computer vision has made tremendous progress in the past decades, partially
enabled by the advanced machine learning techniques. But compared with human
perception, computer vision remains primitive. One contributing factor for this
is the data-driven nature of the current learning algorithms and their inability
to incorporate any related knowledge. The data-driven methods tend to be
database-specific and cannot generalize well to unseen data. This project
addresses this issue through the introduction of a knowledge-augmented
statistical learning framework. Within this framework, knowledge and data can be
systematically exploited, captured, and are principally integrated to jointly
train a vision algorithm. Developing such a framework, however, is challenging
since the domain knowledge often exists in different and diverse formats,
typically inaccessible to the data-driven statistical machine learning methods.
To overcome this challenge, the research team systematically converts domain
knowledge into either the constraints on the model or into pseudo-data, whereby
they can be incorporated into the statistical learning methods. The project
includes systematic identification of knowledge from different sources and
concrete mechanisms to capture the knowledge and to convert them into formats
easily accessible to the automatic machine learning methods. The project also
involves demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed framework for certain
computer vision problems.

The project provides the training for graduate and undergraduate students, and
the research results are disseminated through publications and organization of
the related workshops.