* 1145625
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   The role of glucocorticoids in mediating life history tradeoffs
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Frances Bonier, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2018
* USD 736,180.00

All organisms must allocate limited resources towards competing functions. These
functions can be grouped into two broad categories: reproduction and self-
maintenance. Reproduction can increase fitness through production of offspring,
whereas self-maintenance can increase fitness by improving survival to a time in
the future when the individual can reproduce. One central factor influencing
strategies of investment in reproduction or self-maintenance is "reproductive
value", or the relative fitness benefit of current versus future reproduction.
We currently do not understand the mechanisms allowing animals to adaptively
allocate resources to reproduction and self-maintenance in the face of changing
environmental conditions, resource availability, and reproductive value.
Glucocorticoids, or stress hormones, are crucial for maintaining energetic
balance, and might play an important role in mediating allocation to
reproduction and self-maintenance. This project will test three hypotheses about
the role of glucocorticoids in mediating resource allocation through
experimental manipulations of glucocorticoids, reproductive effort, and blood
parasites in free-ranging Tree Swallows. Results of this work will improve our
understanding of the mechanisms underlying variation in reproduction and
survival and the evolution of strategies of resource allocation. This
information is valuable because it will improve our understanding of evolution
and physiology, and will also have implications for management of species of
conservation concern. Glucocorticoid levels increase in response to habitat
disturbance, and so, an understanding of how these hormones affect reproduction
and survival can inform our understanding of dynamics of populations in
disturbed habitat. Finally, because glucocorticoids are found in all
vertebrates, including humans, the findings from this study might have important
implications for human health.