* 1145263
* Discrete Element Simulations of Cohesive Contractional Wedges: Kinematics and Mechanics of Fold and Thrust Belts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Julia Morgan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2015
* USD 149,977.00

The research will conduct numerical simulations of fold and thrust belts using
the discrete element method in order to develop a refined understanding of the
controls and mechanisms responsible for their structural geometries and
evolution under a range of conditions. Forward modeling of this sort is an
important tool for testing and refining interpretations of fold and thrust belts
observed in the field, which often have limited exposure, are highly eroded, and
are preserved under conditions far from those in which they were formed.
Specific questions to be addressed include: (1) What physical and mechanical
parameters control fault vergence in fold and thrust belts, with particular
attention to the origin and evolution of the most frontal structures which are
common traps for hyrocarbons? (2) What is the role of decollement and basement
heterogeneity in the mechanical state and structural evolution of fold and
thrust belts? And (3) What are the structural consequences of specific basement
configurations and stratigraphy on fold and thrust belts? The simulations will
be carried out using RICEBAL, a code developed at Rice University; 2D and 3D
simulations will be carried out to examine the effects of mechanical
stratigraphy, heterogeneous decollement properties and structure, and
indentation. Results will be compared with natural examples, in particular, the
classic Canadian cordillera and the northern Appalachians in
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fold and thrust belt development represents a
fundamental mountain building process and is also responsible for the formation
of rich oil and gas reservoirs. Understanding the conditions responsible for
distinctive frontal structures that favor hydrocarbon accumulations allow first-
order predictions of locations of future prospects. The simulations carried out
in this project will provide a unique, and yet safe, way to explore the
associated geodynamic processes, with broad applications to many other problems.
In addition, this project will enable further refinement of the discrete element
method code RICEBAL, developed at Rice University, which will be made available
for broader distribution for education and research through the Computational
Infrastructure for Geodynamics.