* 1146316
* Evolution of social cognition and the neurocognitive bases of transitive inference in monkeys
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Robert Hampton, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2017
* USD 857,650.00

Cognitive evolution in humans has likely been influenced by selection for adept
social behavior. Determining the ways in which social and nonsocial cognition
share common representational and brain systems is therefore critical for
understanding cognition. Transitive inference (TI) is the ability to infer the
relation between two items based on relations with a third (e.g. Dave is taller
than Sue, Sue is taller than Jake, therefore Dave is taller than Jake).
Transitive inference, while useful in many domains, may have been selected
specifically for learning social dominance relationships. The researchers have
created infrastructure for remote computerized cognitive testing of monkeys in
large social groups as well as in laboratory housed subjects. This
infrastructure allows them to study naturally acquired social knowledge and
compare it with social and non-social knowledge acquired in the laboratory. They
anticipate that this research will determine the ways in which social and
nonsocial transitive inference depend on the same cognitive systems, will
document mechanisms of logical inference in TI, and will identify the
contribution of a part of the primate brain, the hippocampus, to TI. This
research is important because it will advance our understanding of the brain
mechanisms critical for social behavior and those critical for more abstract
reasoning. The researchers? unique remotely accessible cognitive testing system
is being used to provide Emory University undergraduate students with hands on
experience designing and conducting primate cognition experiments. In the future
it may allow members of groups underrepresented in science, such as physically
disabled persons and students at institutions with few scientific resources, to
participate in the scientific process, thus promoting diversity in the
professional scientific community. The investigators also share findings with
the public through their active website and activities a Zoo Atlanta.