* 1146284
* Symbiotic microbial communities on amphibian skin and their role in disease resistance
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Rob Knight, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

All species of plants and animals harbor microbes (bacteria and fungi) that live
symbiotically in and on them. How those microbes are related to the health of
their host organisms is largely undetermined and, in particular, there is a
limited understanding of how symbiotic microbes influence a host's ability to
cope with disease-causing pathogens. The proposed research will use amphibians
as a model system and a fungal skin pathogen that is linked to the decline of
amphibian populations around the world. Different amphibian species are either
highly susceptible or tolerant to disease caused by the fungal pathogen, and
there is reasonable evidence to suggest that naturally occurring skin microbes
may play an important role. This research will use both field observations from
wild amphibian populations and a series of specific experiments that will be
conducted in the laboratory. In the field, amphibians will be sampled for
microbes to compare differences among species in pond habitats. In the lab,
controlled experiments will examine how microbes on the skin respond to the
pathogen over time and also how they respond to probiotic treatments (beneficial
bacteria) in an effort to understand the ecology of the microorganisms that live
on the skin. Novel high-throughput DNA sequencing techniques and innovative
computer-based analysis tools will be used to examine the identity and
composition of different bacterial and fungal groups in each
sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research aims to advance our
knowledge about the role of symbiotic skin microbes and how probiotic treatments
can be developed for use in conservation of amphibians as well as a broad range
of human and wildlife disease systems. The project will advance the research
program of an early career scientist (PI) and support the training of a graduate
student, a postdoctoral researcher, and undergraduates from under-represented
backgrounds. All DNA sequence data and analytic tools produced during this
project will be made available for use by other researchers. Boreal toads, an
endangered amphibian species in Colorado, will serve as a focal species in this
project and the PIs will build collaborations with the Boreal Toad Recovery
Program in Colorado.