* 1146793
* Effector Recognition and Molecular Activation of an Arabidopsis NLR Immune Receptor Specifying Disease Resistance to Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Brian Staskawicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2016
* USD 700,000.00

Plants face continuous attacks by pathogenic microbes and rely on a
sophisticated immune system to ward them off. Central to this immune system are
intracellular resistance proteins that recognize microbe-derived effector
proteins and induce physiological changes in the plant cell that ultimately lead
to localized cell death and containment of the invading pathogen. This project
aims at investigating in more detail one such resistance protein/effector pair
RPP1/ATR1 in the model system Arabidopsis/downy mildew and to gain a better
understanding of the molecular events involved in effector recognition and
resistance protein activation. The investigators will use genetic and
biochemical approaches to obtain definitive evidence for direct interaction
between RPP1 and ATR1. Isolation of pure protein extracts of resistance proteins
has been challenging, thus the investigators will employ in planta expression
systems to obtain enough RPP1 protein to perform direct interaction studies with
ATR1 through co-crystallization and protein pull-down experiments. Random
mutagenesis of both resistance and effector proteins will provide an exhaustive
map of amino acid residues that are crucial for the interaction of these
proteins. Precise timing and localization of resistance proteins is imperative
during an immune response. RPP1 contains signal sequences that target the
protein to the nucleus and/or membrane. In this project the investigators will
determine the effect of mutating these signal sequences on RPP1-mediated
resistance. Finally, resistance protein activation will be studied using
biochemical approaches to identify proteins associating with RPP1 prior to and
upon effector recognition. Taken together, results from this project will
enhance our basic understanding of plant disease resistance signaling, which may
ultimately be translated into agricultural research and result in more
sustainable approaches of crop protection. The project will provide training for
pre- and post-doctoral fellows as well as undergraduate students.