* 1146295
* Rapid radiation and sporophyte evolution in the Funariaceae: inferences from phylogenomics and cross generational cuticle development studies
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Bernard Goffinet, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2017
* USD 531,550.00

A major trend during the evolution of plants since the conquest of land some 500
million years ago is one of increasing complexity. However complex innovations
are sometimes abandoned by species in favor of simpler and hence less costly
traits. Extreme architectural simplification obscures the record of evolutionary
history, making it difficult to identify traits that foster diversification and
ecological success. The moss family Funariaceae underwent an explosive radiation
about 20 million years ago, resulting in species spanning a broad range of
morphological complexities. The evolutionary history of this family, inferred
from extensive genomic data, will provide the framework to test the hypothesis
that species with dramatically simplified morphologies can give rise to
descendants with complex architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses
on the evolution of traits that helped plants adapt to land, and that are
fundamental to their current ability to adapt to changing environmental
conditions. Mosses fulfill important ecological roles in many ecosystems today,
and understanding how their reproductive traits evolved over short periods of
geological time provides insights into their potential to respond to future
rapid global change. The concept of species with simplified morphologies being
evolutionary dead ends is widely accepted but rarely tested, and unambiguous
exampled from the plant kingdom are currently lacking.