* 1146664
* Workshop: SoCS Doctoral Consortium and PI Meeting
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Paul Resnick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 10/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This is funding to support a doctoral symposium and meeting of the Principle
Investigators (PIs) for the NSF Social-Computational Systems (SoCS) program that
will be held in July 2012. All PIs and co-PIs funded through the 2010, 2011, and
2012 SoCS programs will be invited to attend, as well as a few other
distinguished researchers. The PIs will share ideas and insights with each other
about research in the emerging new area of social computational systems, with
the specific goal of helping to strengthen the nascent research community. A
doctoral symposium will be held prior to the beginning of the PIs meeting.
Participating students will experience a full day of presentations and
discussions of doctoral research, mentored by a diverse set of experienced
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Systems in which people and
computers work together in a socially intelligent manner represent a new form of
computing that brings together the challenges of traditional computing (e.g.,
algorithms, information representation, information acquisition, data quality)
with those of human interaction (e.g., cognition, social interaction, culture,
learning) and indeed a whole host of new challenges related to the combination
of humans and computers (e.g., computer reasoning about human knowledge and
abilities, socially-intelligent human-computer interaction, social computing).
Individuals and groups have been working on particular problems in this space
for decades, but this work has often been carried out in research pockets
connected to existing fields, and unfortunately isolated from each other. As the
introduction of the NSF SoCS program illustrates, there is good reason to
believe that the widespread work in social-computational systems would benefit
from cross-fertilization and from bringing together diverse researchers into a
meaningful community. The SoCS doctorial symposium and PI meeting is one step in
that process. Doctoral students pursing SoCS research face numerous challenges,
including defining research that spans computing and human elements, but also
identifying meaningful evaluation for their research (often in the absence of
close precedents) and positioning their research to fulfill the requirements of
disciplinary dissertation committees. The doctoral symposium will help students
hone their dissertation projects so that they can make better contributions to
the solution of these intellectual challenges, and also help them build a social
network of fellow doctoral students and more senior researchers to support their
careers. The PI meeting will feature tutorials that build common ground among
researchers from various disciplinary backgrounds. A series of small poster
sessions will allow PIs to engage with the emerging results of other SoCS-funded
projects and get feedback on their own work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: Many of the biggest challenges in successfully deploying computer
systems in organizations come down to the difficulty of adapting technology to
human organizations and vice versa. The development of the SoCS field will
directly create new knowledge and understanding in how to more successfully
manage the relationship between social (human) organizations and the computer
tools they use to work together more effectively. This new understanding has the
potential to directly benefit a wide variety of users of information technology.
The development of doctoral students is itself a key broader impact. As a result
of the PI Meeting, participants will be in a stronger position to do SoCS
research. New collaborations and new grant proposals are two anticipated
concrete outcomes.