* 1146916
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Natural Selection on Growth and Locomotor Development in Eastern Cottontail Rabbits (Sylvilagus floridanus)
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Jesse Young, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 03/31/2016
* USD 284,213.00

The juvenile stage of life can be particularly perilous. Immature animals must
survive in the same environments as adults despite smaller body size, weaker
muscles and other growth-related limitations on physical ability. Because, by
definition, juveniles have yet to reproduce, one should expect strong selection
for mechanisms that could potentially offset these age-related limits on
physical performance, allowing individuals to reach adulthood, reproduce, and
thus maintain evolutionary fitness. The proposed research will combine measures
of musculoskeletal growth, physical performance, and survivorship in eastern
cottontail rabbits (Sylvilagus floridanus) to explicitly test broad-scale
hypotheses about the adaptive nature of mammalian growth and development.
Eastern cottontails are independent of their mothers by three weeks of age and
experience high predation pressure during the first year of life, making them an
ideal species in which to address these issues. The fundamental data collected
in this study will provide a greater understanding of how natural selection
operates on musculoskeletal growth and development in response to predation,
providing novel insight into the process of evolution itself. &lt;br/&gt;This
research is organized into three specific aims. First, researchers will collect
detailed measures of musculoskeletal growth in eastern cottontails, including
detailed data on muscle and bone strength. Second, the investigators will
generate quantitative measures of physical performance ability (i.e.,
acceleration and sprinting capacities) in juvenile and adult rabbits. Finally,
radio-tracking data will be combined with ecological data on home range size,
habitat quality and predation risk to empirically document survivorship in
juvenile rabbits. These data will allow the researchers to holistically examine
associations among musculoskeletal anatomy, physical performance and
evolutionary fitness, as required to formally test the adaptive significance of
the traits thought to promote juvenile survival.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create interdisciplinary collaborations among the three institutions involved,
helping to foster a network of research and training in northeastern Ohio.
Funding will also provide opportunities for undergraduates to learn in vivo
biomechanical and field ecology methods. Such opportunities are rare and
constitute a major educational resource for students. Skeletal materials
gathered during this project will be donated to local museums and schools,
providing valuable public educational and research tools. Finally, the
survivorship estimates generated during this research can be used to inform the
policy decisions of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources in order to
establish acceptable numbers for hunting and trapping throughout Ohio.