* 1146891
* ABR: Socially Monogamous Pairing: Mechanisms and Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Elizabeth Adkins-Regan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2018
* USD 285,941.00

Exclusive male-female pairbonds (socially monogamous mating systems) are seen in
only a few kinds of mammals and in some humans, but are a very common
reproductive arrangement in birds. Yet almost nothing is known about the
internal mechanisms (neurohormones, brain systems) for pairing in birds. Using a
common laboratory species, the zebra finch, that forms long-lasting pair
relationships, the project aims to discover these mechanisms as they operate at
three different life stages to promote socially monogamous pairing: (1) early in
life in nestlings when the strong tendency to form close affiliations with
family members begins, (2) during juvenile life when the birds first become more
interested in the opposite sex than in the parents, and (3) following adult loss
of the mate (through death) when a new pair relationship with a new partner can
occur. The project is aimed at determining the physiological mechanisms that
promote these pair bonding behaviors. Experiments are designed to specifically
test the potential involvement of neuropeptides, such as oxytocin, and the
adrenal "stress" hormone, corticosterone, in facilitating pair bonding. The
project will also investigate the role of corticosterone in the ability of the
birds to remember and prefer their first partner even after a long period of
separation. Overall, the project will solve a long-standing mystery "what makes
birds like zebra finches form strong pair bonds?" It will suggest mechanisms
that might apply to the thousands of other socially monogamous birds and more
generally to other vertebrates. It will provide new information on mechanisms
acting in birds that can be compared with mechanisms operating in socially
monogamous mammals, and thus, has the potential to increase understanding of how
brains and hormones produce close relationships in all animals, including
humans. The project will provide training of students at all levels and will
include specific activities to recruit and train women and underrepresented
minorities for scientific research careers. The work will be disseminated to the
public through general audience publications, a web site, and through outreach
programs to middle school girls and local K-12 biology teachers.