* 1146589
* Interception of the fungal haustorium by the plant broad-spectrum resistance protein RPW8 (II)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Shunyuan Xiao, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 06/30/2016
* USD 606,000.00

Many fungal and oomycete pathogens invade plants with a specialized infection
structure named the haustorium, which derives nutrients from the host cell and
is a mechanism by which pathogens can cause serious plant diseases. In response,
plants have evolved elaborate defense mechanisms to fight against such
infection. Mechanisms of host-pathogen recognition and defense signaling have
been extensively studied; however, very little is known about the mechanisms of
molecular warfare at the host-pathogen structural interface known as the extra-
haustorial membrane (EHM). The investigators discovered that RPW8, a protein
conferring broad-spectrum resistance against powdery mildew in the plant
Arabidopsis , is specifically targeted to the EHM, which encases the haustorium
of powdery mildew ; in this location, RPW8 activates defenses to constrain the
haustorium. Using a combination of mutational, cell biological, genetic and
biochemical approaches, the investigators aim in this project to understand how
RPW8.2 activates this resistance. Specifically, the investigators will define
functionally important motifs and individual amino acids in RPW8.2, identify the
trafficking cues for targeting RPW8.2 to the EHM, and characterize the role of a
protein phosphatase type 2C in regulation of RPW8.2-mediated defense. Results
from this project will not only elucidate the molecular basis of RPW8.2-mediated
broad-spectrum mildew resistance but also provide fresh mechanistic insight into
targeted protein trafficking as a critical component of plant innate immunity.
Haustorium-forming fungal and oomycete pathogens pose constant threats to the
world's food security. Discoveries from this project will help engineer novel
resistance strategies against these pathogens , with the potential for improved
crop production and environmental protection. This project will provide science
training and research opportunities for high school and undergraduate students,
especially those from under-representative groups; it will also provide
extensive research training for one graduate student and one postdoctoral
associate to prepare them for careers in science.