* 1146725
* S-locus receptor kinase signaling in self-incompatibility and pistil development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Mikhail Nasrallah, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

The S-locus receptor kinase SRK was initially identified as the stigma epidermal
cell receptor that is activated by its cognate pollen coat-localized SCR ligand
and is responsible for perception of 'self' pollen in the self-incompatibility
(SI) response. Recently, mutagenesis of the SI response in a transgenic
Arabidopsis thaliana self-incompatible model developed in the investigators'
laboratory demonstrated that SRK also functions as a signaling molecule in
pistil development, where its SCR-independent activity promotes cell
proliferation in style and ovary, thus enhancing pistil elongation and causing
stigma exsertion. The project will use molecular and genetic methods to
investigate the tight integration of the cell-to-cell interactions that underlie
rejection of 'self' pollen in SI with the overall pistil developmental program.
The study is expected to identify genes required for a cell's competence for SRK
signaling, genes responsible for cross-talk between pollen-stigma interactions
and pistil elongation, and possibly genes encoding components of the SRK
signaling cascade. The project has the potential to alter current views of SRK-
mediated signaling, the evolution of SI, and the poorly-understood association
between SI and morphological adaptations that promote out-breeding, such as
stigma exsertion. More generally, the study will contribute to answering the key
question of how organisms modify their developmental programs to generate novel
designs in structure and function.

The project will train post-doctoral researchers and provide them with
opportunities to integrate teaching and research, within the highly-interactive
and intellectually stimulating Cornell environment. The PIs are committed to
providing undergraduate students with research experience and training in basic
methods of plant molecular genetics, both within the framework of NSF-funded
projects and in formal coursework. Their participation in 'Lab Experience for
Teachers', a course designed for Masters students training to become science
teachers should also contribute to the transfer of scientific knowledge into
elementary and high schools.