* 1146465
* Molecular basis of developmental variation in Arabidopsis arenosa
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Kirsten Bomblies, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2016
* USD 570,000.00

Proper regulation of development in plants, such as the timing of reproduction,
branching and growth rate, is critical for survival in diverse habitats.
Flowering at inappropriate times, or improperly tuning growth rate to local
environment can spell disaster. Arabidopsis arenosa, a close relative of the
laboratory model, A. thaliana, is found in moist and heavily shaded forest rock
outcrop sites, but some populations have successfully colonized railway sites.
Here, they face many environmental challenges such as higher temperatures,
herbicides, high light and drought risk. Plants from forest outcrops are late-
flowering perennials, while plants from railways are annual, consistently flower
earlier and branch more extensively. This project will contribute to
understanding how wild plants like A. arenosa evolve new developmental
strategies that enable them to make such habitat transitions. This is useful
information not only for our understanding plant diversity, but also for
agriculture, as the crops we depend on face ever more volatile and challenging
environmental conditions. This project will use a combination of genetic
mapping, genomics and molecular biology to identify and characterize genes that
control differences in flowering time, growth rate and plant architecture
associated with colonization of challenging habitats. The project will provide
training for a postdoctoral scientist, a PhD student, and several
undergraduates. Students will be recruited from a diverse pool at Harvard and
Boston-area community colleges. Training for undergraduates will include
mentored laboratory research, ethical conduct of research, as well as
presentation and writing skills. The data generated from this project will be
made publicly available through publications and websites. All sequence data
will be deposited in the sequence archives of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information. Core genetic resources generated in this project will
be made available through the Arabidopsis Biological Resources Center.