* 1146987
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms and Functions of Nociceptive Sensitization in Dissimilar Molluscs
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Edgar Walters, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

All animals, including humans, experience injury, and every species examined
shows adaptive responses to help avoid injury or re-injury. Injury to humans
causes pain, which can be long lasting (even permanent) and sometimes
untreatable. Although much has been learned about other aspects of human biology
through comparative studies of simpler animals, including selected
invertebrates, systematic comparative studies of behavioral and neural responses
to injury in invertebrates have been lacking. This project will compare
behavioral and neural responses to peripheral injury in two invertebrates that,
because of their giant neurons, have been sources of pioneering discoveries in
neuroscience: the common Atlantic squid, Loligo, and a large marine snail,
Aplysia. Both are molluscs, but they have very different life styles and
cognitive capabilities. Hypotheses to be tested include: (1) In the peripheral
sensory neurons of both species, injury-induced, long-lasting behavioral
sensitization involves a similar long-term enhancement of responsiveness that
resembles the effects reported in mammals, (2) these changes are induced by
common chemical signals that also drive inflammatory pain in mammals, (3) the
large-brained squid, but not small-brained snail display ongoing awareness of an
injury, and (4) sensitization of defensive responses in the squid increases the
chances of survival in a wounded state by decreasing the vulnerability to
predatory attacks. The broader impacts of this research project will be the
encouragement of the use of molluscs to explore the evolution of fundamental
behavioral patterns involving core mechanisms that are widely conserved and may
be important for human pain, and the education of future scientists (including
undergraduates) interested in comparative and evolutionary approaches to
behavioral neurobiology. The resulting scientific information will be published
in scientific journals and disseminated to foster rational and humane treatment
of molluscs and other invertebrates in research.