* 1146792
* Collaborative Research:  RUI: Neural mechanisms for a cooperative behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Melissa Coleman, Claremont McKenna College
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 03/31/2017
* USD 162,000.00

How do animals, including humans, cooperate? Cooperative behaviors often involve
extraordinary precision for success. Consider, for example, the level of
coordination and control that is necessary for an Olympic couples' figure
skating. The goal of the project is to understand how the brains of two or more
individual animals integrate sensory cues to modulate an animal's motor systems
to achieve these sorts of remarkable performances. The investigators will study
a well-suited animal model system, the plain-tailed wren, which produces a
cooperative duet song that is unusually amenable to behavioral and
neurophysiological experiments. The investigators will travel to the natural
habitats of these birds in the Andes Mountains and work with undergraduates and
under-represented students from the United States and Ecuador. These students
will be trained to conduct the technically complex experiments, which involve
the analysis of brain activity of single neurons. The project will also develop
research infrastructure in Ecuador, which will be used in teaching efforts for
students from the United States and other countries, and in monitoring of animal
activity in unique Andean habitats. These experiments will elucidate the
specific neural mechanisms and computations that are used in the coordination of
vocal behavior between individual wrens. Because birds and other vertebrate
animals (including humans) use nearly identical neural structures and
mechanisms, these data will have implications that are relevant across animal
species. The work will also include the construction of mathematical models that
capture the findings, which will facilitate the translation of insights from the
brains of these unique animals to the study of other species and into
engineering principles and applications.