* 1146480
* Cellular and Molecular Processes that Regulate the Neural Crest EMT
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Carol Erickson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 05/31/2016
* USD 463,116.00

How various cell types migrate to the appropriate sites during embryonic
development is a critical question for the field of developmental biology. The
neural crest is a population of cells that is generated from the dorsal neural
tube by an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The goal of this project is
to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that control cell behavior during the EMT.
The PI has developed novel technology that will allow visualization of cell
behavior in the living embryo. As a result of live-cell imaging, it is now
possible to analyze the cellular behavior that occurs during the EMT and more
importantly to perturb the process molecularly using electroporation of
expression plasmids. This approach will enable an understanding of the cell
signaling events that control cellular events in the EMT. The EMT is a
remarkable example of an organized process whereby one tissue type, the
epithelium, is transformed into a new tissue type, the mesenchyme. This process
is a necessary step in the development of the vertebrate body plan, providing an
unprecedented opportunity to study not only organ development, but also re-
programming of cell types to allow them to take on novel roles in a highly
coordinated fashion. This EMT occurs throughout development in many species and
is crucial for numerous processes. These studies are expected to elucidate the
molecular basis for these cell behaviors, because for the first time they can be
observed in real time. Undergraduate students and graduate students from
underserved minority populations will be primarily involved in doing this
research.