* 1146525
* The Influence of Effective Population Size on the Strength of Selection Imposed by Mate Choice
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Matthew Dean, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2016
* USD 325,000.00

One of the most intriguing discoveries of the past 20 years of evolutionary
genetics is the rapid evolution of some reproductive genes. That genes with such
critical roles should functionally diverge over time seems paradoxical.
Selection imposed by mate choice may drive some of this functional divergence as
individuals continually grapple for reproductive success. This research project
focuses on ~10 mouse species that differ in mating system and population size,
offering a unique opportunity to predict and test the strength and direction of
reproductive selection. The evolution of ~1000 reproductive genes gathered from
~150 individuals across these species will be studied via high throughput
sequencing and rigorous computational approaches. This work will significantly
advance our understanding of the forces that moderate genetic variation within
and between species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To broaden the impacts of our
research, we have engaged students of West Adams, a downtown Los Angeles high
school with a typical inner city story. Nearly 30% of students drop out before
graduating and more than 50% failed first year biology. However, the teachers
are eager to bring alternative strategies into the classroom. Several of their
students have already taken "ownership" in specific aspects of this research
project and will be co-authors on resulting publications. Immersing high school
in all aspects of our research will demystify the scientific process and expose
them to new ideas about potential career paths.