* 1146910
* Collaborative Research: Geobiology of high pH springs in the Philippines ? probing the deep biosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Dawn Cardace, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 01/31/2015
* USD 63,357.00

Part A. Technical description &lt;br/&gt;Microbial communities inhabiting the
Earth?s subsurface occupy a scientifically uncharted realm. The habitable
subsurface may penetrate the Earth?s crust to depths of 5?10 km, depending on
geothermal gradients. It has been estimated recently that the deep subsurface
habitat could accommodate more biomass and biodiversity than on Earth?s surface.
Yet, we know little about carbon cycling, nitrogen cycling, or any other
biogeochemical cycling that takes place in this subsurface biosphere or how
these may impact surface processes. This project will investigate these
processes in high pH fluids found in ophiolite regions of the Philippines, where
active sepentinization brings H2 and CH4 in contact with formation fluids,
energizing the subsurface biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research
will deliver baseline biogeochemical data for a suite of high pH serpentinizing
springs in two Philippines ophiolite localities (Zambales and Palawan). In a
focused two-year research plan, we will elucidate biogeochemical cycling in high
pH, deeply sourced fluids in our Philippines field locations, and tie the role
of microorganisms directly to biogeochemical processes. Our three parallel
research strands involve whether (1) deeply sourced, ophiolite-derived fluids
afford habitable niches for chemolithotrophic microbial communities that can be
predicted by the geochemistry of the system, (2) nucleic acid based analyses and
culturing approaches reflect functional genetic competence that confirms the
predicted metabolic strategies, and (3) chemoheterotrophic metabolisms and/or
methanotrophs dominate over alternative chemoautotrophic metabolisms in these
subsurface fluids, due to low CO2 and bicarbonate in the Philippine high pH
fluids. This project also comprises intentional mentorship of graduate and
undergraduate students in field, laboratory, and analytical methods, and the
development of a blended specimen- and web-based learning module tying together
field findings with science education initiatives at the collegiate and high
school levels, particularly with the Earth Science Literacy Initiative goals in
mind (http://www.earthscienceliteracy.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific and
societal broader impacts include support for life on the Early Earth and other
planetary bodies, as it has been proposed that serpentinization (the aqueous
alteration of ultramafic rocks, yielding diatomic hydrogen, and possibly complex
organic molecules) can provide critical energy, and carbon to primitive
ecosystems. These processes likely continue to support life in ?extreme?
subsurface settings on the modern Earth. Ophiolite regions are also of great
interest to researchers investigating the possibilities of long term carbon
storage in serpentinites, as geological repositories of CO2. Because secondary
mineralogy resembles concrete, ophiolites are also gaining attention as
potential radioactive waste depositories. With these diverse impacts in mind, a
better concept of biogeochemical cycling in ophiolite-hosted fluids is necessary
to understand potential impacts for these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part B. Non-technical explanation
of the project?s broader significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;Microbial
communities inhabiting the Earth?s subsurface occupy a scientifically uncharted
realm, and may penetrate the Earth?s crust to depths of 5 to 10 km--until it is
too hot to survive. It has been estimated recently that the deep subsurface
habitat could accommodate more biomass and biodiversity than on Earth?s surface,
and the impact of this vast reservoir of biomass on biogeochemical cycling on
Earth is a gaping hole in our current knowledge of Earth systems. This project
will investigate how life transforms water and rock in high pH springs at two
localities in the Philippines, at Zambales and Palawan, and allow us to learn
more about critical chemical and biological connections in ways that may serve
both science (particularly in defining the unknown edge of the biosphere in
these exciting settings?including how microbes survive in low oxygen, low
nutrient settings) and society (with strong links to ongoing experiments in
carbon sequestration, toxic waste storage, bioremediation of mining wastes, and
micro-scale medical applications). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Meyer-Dombard?s
research focus has been the geobiology of terrestrial and shallow submarine
hydrothermal systems, and Dr. Cardace has studied the geobiology of tectonic
margins, with field localities in the seabed and coastal settings. Together in
this collaborative research project, they intend to learn how Earth is evolving
in concert with life in ways that impact reservoirs of carbon and other
elements. They bring a commitment to mentorship and training in research to the
table also, and the funds granted here will allow more students to gain skills
including quantitative reasoning, analytical research, and science writing, and
materials and findings will be rapidly shared with in service teachers and their
students through school visits and interactive, data-rich on-line modules.