* 1146133
* Collaborative Research: Tropical Waves and Intertropical Convergence Zones in Simulations with Explicit Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Stefan Tulich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 01/31/2015
* USD 179,964.00

This collaborative project will employ models with explicit convection to study
Intertropical Convergence Zones (ITCZ) over the oceans, their interactions with
tropical waves, and the dependence of both on convective and mesoscale
processes. The primary modeling tool will be the Weather Research and Forecast
(WRF) system, which has been augmented to run either as a high-resolution nested
tropical channel or as a lower-resolution model with a cloud-resolving model
used as a "superparameterization" for convection. This unique model framework
allows side-by-side comparisons of simulated ITCZs and convectively coupled
waves using standard convection parameterizations, superparameterization, or
cloud-resolving horizontal resolution. A suite of idealized cloud-resolving
experiments will be performed to test the hypothesis that horizontal mixing by
eddies tends to make the ITCZ broader and weaker than it would be in their
absence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convection-related tropical biases are a major
source of error and uncertainty in global atmosphere models, so advances in
understanding in this area should lead to improvements in a wide array of
weather and climate applications. The project will support the education and
training of an atmospheric sciences graduate student. The superparameterized
version of the WRF model will eventually be made available to researchers in the
broader atmospheric science community. Thus the broader impacts are substantial.