* 1146090
* Molecular genetic analysis of LORELEI function in inducing the arrest of pollen tube growth in the Arabidopsis female gametophyte
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Ravishankar Palanivelu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2017
* USD 576,000.00

The seeds we depend on for our food are products of double fertilization. This
essential process in plant reproduction requires delivery of sperm cells by the
pollen tube to the egg and central cells of the embryo sac (female gametophyte).
Although double fertilization was discovered more than a century ago, the
controlling molecular mechanisms and genes remain poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;We identified the Arabidopsis LORELEI (LRE) gene as critically
important for an early step in reproduction. In lre mutants, pollen tubes do not
arrest growth in the female gametophyte prior to releasing the sperm cells and
consequently fail to complete double fertilization. We found that LRE encodes a
putative membrane-anchored glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein
and is, therefore, an excellent candidate for mediating some aspects of
signaling between the pollen tube and the female gametophyte. In this current
project, molecular, genetic, and cell biological experiments will be conducted
to elucidate the role of LORELEI protein in inducing pollen tube growth arrest
in Arabidopsis female gametophytes. Specifically, we will determine the
subcellular localization of LORELEI protein in the synergid cell and whether the
LORELEI GPI anchor in is essential for its function in the synergid cell. The
mechanism of LORELEI function in inducing the arrest of pollen tube growth will
also be examined, and additional genes that function with LORELEI in this
important signaling event will be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
comprehensive molecular understanding of seed formation may help generate tools
to manipulate plant reproduction and increase seed yield. Consequently, this
project could have a major impact since seeds are a source of staple food,
fiber, nutrition, industrial products and biofuels. Additionally, this project
will also have a major human resource impact. Undergraduate students will carry
out some experiments and two post doctoral fellows and a research technician
will be trained in experimental procedures, data analysis, and scientific data
presentation.