* 1146506
* EAGER: Antagonistic Pleiotropy in JNK signaling:  mechanisms and implications for aging
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Michael Shapira, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 190,140.00

What causes aging is far from clear, but the theory of "antagonistic pleiotropy"
postulates that aging is a consequence of the inverse correlation between age
and selection pressure. Such a correlation allows positive selection of
mechanisms with early-life beneficial effects, in spite of potential late-life
detrimental effects. Understanding when and how such mechanisms become
detrimental is crucial for understanding both the principles and constraints
directing the evolution of aging, as well as the aging process itself. We
recently identified a novel example of antagonistic pleiotropy. The current
project will characterize this mechanism at the molecular level. &lt;br/&gt;In
the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans the conserved protein KGB-1 provides
protection during development against heavy metals and protein folding stress,
but becomes detrimental during early adulthood by sensitizing animals to
environmental stress and shortening their lifespan. Although little is known
about KGB-1's targets and interactions, our recent work suggests that some of
the age-dependent changes occurring following KGB-1 activation are mediated by
age-dependent regulation of the longevity-associated transcription factor
DAF-16. This project will: 1) characterize genetically age-dependent
interactions between KGB-1 and DAF-16, as well as interactions between KGB-1 and
proteins of the insulin signaling pathway, which regulates DAF-16; 2) identify,
through genomic analysis, yet unknown targets of KGB-1 in developing larvae and
in young adults, focusing on transcriptional targets and their regulators. Use
of the genetically tractable C. elegans model organism allows pursuing the
project's goals in the context of a whole animal, and provides an opportunity to
flesh out a fundamental feature of the evolution of aging. Understanding aging
is of increasing importance as biomedical advances increase human lifespan. The
project will provide opportunities for training undergraduate and graduate
students in scientific research, among them individuals from typically
underrepresented groups, encouraging students to participate in scientific
meetings and earning them, when appropriate, authorship on publications.