* 1146488
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Phylogeny of the New World oaks: Diversification of an ecologically important clade across the tropical-temperate divide
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Andrew Hipp, Morton Arboretum
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/29/2016
* USD 164,203.00

Oaks (the flowering plant genus Quercus) include some of America's most
ecologically and economically important trees. The approximately 255 oaks of the
New World oak lineage dominate North American and Mexican woody plant biomass,
biodiversity, ecology, and nutrient cycling. Despite the significant ecosystem
services provided by oaks, the biodiversity of this genus is poorly understood.
In this project, collaborators from The Morton Arboretum (IL), the University of
Notre Dame (IN), Duke University (NC), University of Minnesota, and Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México will undertake a comprehensive systematic study of
the oaks of the New World. The project will integrate next-generation genomic
(DNA) sequencing, plant physiology, and direct study of plants in the field and
museum collections to gain insights into the oak tree of life and the basic
question of how oak traits, distributions, and diversity evolve in response to
changes in habitat and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of how oaks
respond to shifts in climate and habitat is essential to conserving forest
biodiversity and healthy forest ecosystems for future generations. The project
will broadly disseminate findings and increase biodiversity awareness and
understanding across diverse audiences in several ways: strengthening of an
international oak collaboration among U.S., Mexican, and European researchers;
training of undergraduate through postdoctoral biodiversity researchers;
training K-12 teachers and their students in biodiversity science; and public
outreach through museums, botanical gardens, and online venues.