* 1146768
* Collaborative Research: Epigenetic, transcriptomic, and behavioral impacts of a maternal signal during wasp caste development
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Robert Jeanne, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 03/31/2016
* USD 39,014.00

Many studies on humans and rodents have aimed at understanding how maternal care
influences the behavior and health of offspring. Because it is hard to separate
the effects of maternal behavior itself from effects of the environment, many
fundamental questions remain unanswered: To what extent can maternal care itself
directly affect the long-term behavior and physiology of offspring? Can maternal
care completely or partially overcome environmental stressors? Does maternal
care trigger genetic changes in offspring that mediate long-term effects?

Toth and Jeanne will use a new behavioral system to address these questions.
Mother paper wasps (Polistes) feed and care for larvae throughout their
development. In the process, maternal wasps physically vibrate their larvae by
striking their antennae on nest cells. This behavior, which can be simulated
using a piezoelectric device, has profound effects on offspring. Vibrated larvae
become workers, whereas un-vibrated wasps become queens. This unique system can
be used to experimentally dissect how maternal behavior affects offspring.

The researchers will use state-of-the art DNA sequencing methods to characterize
what types of genetic changes (e.g. gene activation or chemical DNA
modifications) are induced in offspring in response to the interactions of an
environmental factor (nutritional stress) and a maternal behavior (vibrations).

This work will provide new information on the extent to which maternal behavior
can affect the fate of offspring, how these effects may be modulated by
stressors in the environment, and the genetic mechanisms underlying this
process. The project will involve the training of a postdoctoral researcher,
several undergraduates, and a high school teacher. The results will be
disseminated to the scientific community and new insights shared at school and
community outreach events.