* 1146908
* Exploring the interaction between light- and food- entrainable oscillators in the mammalian circadian system
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Shin Yamazaki, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2014
* USD 370,000.00

Our internal biological clocks are synchronized with our external surroundings
and regulate our daily (circadian) rhythms of behavior and physiology. The
mammalian circadian system is composed of multiple clocks located in the brain
and throughout the body. Most studies have investigated the central clock in the
brain, which synchronizes to the environmental cycle of light and dark. In
contrast, other clocks, such as those that respond to feeding time, are "black
box" mysteries because their locations in the body are unknown. In this project,
behavioral, molecular, and mathematical approaches will be combined to
investigate the timekeeping mechanisms of these elusive clocks and how they
functionally interact with the circadian system to control behavior. These
studies will identify genes that are important for timekeeping in these clocks
and future studies evaluating the expression patterns of these genes could lead
to the identification of the location(s) of these oscillators, which could
transform our understanding of the function of the circadian system.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research is a unique opportunity for undergraduate and post-
doctoral trainees to participate in a project that will address long-standing
speculation about biological timekeeping. The studies will teach trainees about
the value of experimental observation, creativity, and using multiple technical
approaches when developing and testing hypotheses. Trainees from all academic
levels, including a postdoctoral fellow, undergraduate students and high school
students, and from diverse demographic backgrounds, including women and
underrepresented minorities, will be immersed in an environment rich in the
study of circadian biology. Finally, this project will provide opportunities for
community outreach, because lab members organize and operate the biological
clocks booth at free events for children of all economic and racial backgrounds.