* 1146809
* Collaborative Research:   Neurofilament Transport Kinetics and Axonal Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Anthony Brown, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 11/30/2016
* USD 629,245.00

Nerve cells communicate by sending electrical impulses along thin protrusions
called axons. One mechanism by which animals increase velocity of electrical
impulses is to expand axons' cross-sectional area. This expansion is caused by
an accumulation of microscopic space-filling protein polymers called
neurofilaments, which are transported into axons where they form a dynamic
scaffold. This collaborative project will use microscopic imaging in conjunction
with computational modeling to test the hypothesis that neurofilament
accumulation in axons is caused by a slowing of neurofilament transport, much as
cars pile up on highways when the traffic slows. This project will provide a
rigorous and quantitative framework that relates the size and shape of axons,
which is a key influence on their electrical properties, to the motile behavior
of their internal constituents. This work will also shed light on the mechanism
by which neurofilaments accumulate abnormally and excessively within axons in
many neurodegenerative diseases.

This project will provide a unique training opportunity at the interface of
computational and experimental biology for students with diverse backgrounds in
the physical and life sciences. An emphasis will be placed on mentoring
undergraduates lacking prior research experience, including women and
minorities, through annual Research Experiences for Undergraduates fellowships.
The investigators will also reach out to undergraduates by participating
together in the Research for Undergraduates: Adventures in Mathematical Biology
and its Applications curriculum at Ohio State University, which is an NSF-funded
Undergraduate Biology and Mathematics program, and by serving as joint mentors
in the Undergraduate Summer Research Program of the NSF-funded Mathematical
Biosciences Institute at Ohio State University. Lastly, a neurofilament wiki
page will be developed featuring information and resources on mathematical
modeling of axonal transport to support these outreach activities and to
facilitate the exchange of data between the two laboratories.