* 1146256
* COLLABORATIVE: ABI Development: Methodology for Pattern Creation, Imprint Validation, and Discovery from  the Annotated Biological Web
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Padmini Srinivasan, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 344,919.00

Collaborative grants have been awarded to the University of Maryland, the
University of Iowa and St. Bonaventure University to develop a methodology that
exploits the wealth of annotation knowledge, notably Gene Ontology (GO) and
Plant Ontology (PO) annotations of Arabidopsis genes. Motivated by the
availability of rich and as yet insufficiently tapped collections of gene
annotations, the project aims to facilitate the discovery of hidden knowledge
that could be the basis of further scientific research. The methodology will
extract patterns of interest from annotation graphs (pattern discovery).
Literature-based methods will extract sentences that validate the biological
meaning underlying these patterns (pattern validation). To demonstrate the
methodology, the PattArAn tool (Patterns in Arabidopsis Annotations) will be
customized for Arabidopsis. PattArAn will provide the user with a graphical
presentation of patterns of Arabidopsis genes and associated GO and PO CV terms.
Graph data mining techniques and efficient algorithmic solutions to identify
dense subgraphs (DSG) and to perform graph summarization (GS) will be developed.
Algorithms to mine the literature for relevant sentences for an extracted
pattern (referred to as the imprint) will be developed. PattArAn will enable
iterative exploration and will incorporate allied steps such as consulting gene
function prediction. The project will involve collaboration with biologists for
building and refining annotation graphs, and validating patterns to ensure
relevance to their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes broad
contributions to the Arabidopsis thaliana community. PattArAn may assist
Arabidopsis curators to manage GO-PO annotations and complement existing tools
such as Textpresso and AraNet. It can also be used to bootstrap an annotation
database for other plant species given that their genome sequence information is
available. The project offers significant research and educational experiences
for graduate students (University of Maryland and Iowa) and undergraduate
students (St. Bonaventure University). Team members will continue to mentor
women and students from under-represented communities, participate in outreach
activities, lead a Journal Club, etc. The outcomes from this research project
will be disseminated via biology and bioinformatics venues. More information may
be obtained at the project website: https://wiki.umiacs.umd.edu/clip/pattaran/.