* 1146370
* Elucidating the roles of natural selection and mate discrimination in the evolution of reproductive isolation in a polymorphic amphibian
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Corinne Richards-Zawacki, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 459,616.00

This project addresses two key questions in the field of evolutionary biology
for the highly polymorphic strawberry dart frog (Dendrobates pumilio): (1) what
are the barriers to gene exchange between new diverging species and (2) what are
the relative contributions of natural selection and mate discrimination in the
formation of those barriers? The diversity of color-patterns exhibited by these
frogs appears to have evolved recently and rapidly in response to natural
selection. Experiments will be conducted to test for differences in survival and
mating success among differently colored frogs that result from differences in
predation and female mating preferences. By integrating insights from ecological
and behavioral experiments, this work will systematically assess the relative
contributions of a suite of potential barriers to reproduction, providing
empirical support for theory regarding the mechanisms of
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes that lead to the formation of new
species are central to the maintenance of biodiversity. This project aims to
improve our understanding of how new species arise in nature, and will permit an
exciting comparison to well-studied groups of animals, like Heliconius
butterflies and African Rift Lake Cichlids. The project will also provide
international educational and research opportunities for a postdoctoral
researcher, graduate students, and undergraduates. The development of outreach
programs to engage students and community members in Panama and Louisiana in
learning about evolution is also an important component of this work.