* 1146733
* Mechanisms of shoot apical function in gametophyte dominant and sporophyte dominant model plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Michael Scanlon, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 06/30/2013
* USD 30,800.00

Unlike animals, all land plants have a haploid gametophyte stage of their life
cycle. Gametophytes are multicellular plants that contain one half the
chromosome complement of the diploid phase, the sporophyte. In bryophytes like
mosses, the gametophyte is dominant, while in familiar angiosperms like maize
the diploid sporophyte dominates. In all cases, development of above ground
structures depends upon the activity of apical meristems, pools of self-
propagating stem cells located at the growing plant tips. Widespread variation
in meristem structure has evolved across these wide groups; despite this
structural variation, meristem function during organogenesis and stem cell
renewal is conserved. Major evolutionary innovations in shoot development
include the dominance of the sporophyte generation over the gametophyte, and the
emergence of multicellular shoot apical meristems that produce photosynthetic
leaves. In this project, analyses of gene expression networks in plant shoot
apices will identify shared and unique mechanisms for apical meristematic
development among the ancient gametophyte-dominant model bryophytes Marchantia
polymorpha and Physcomitrella patens, and the recently evolved sporophyte-
dominant angiosperms Zea mays and Arabidopsis thaliana. Laser-microdissection
coupled with RNA-sequencing will compare shoot apical transcriptomic signatures
from these diverse model plants. Three categories of candidate gene will be
identified: (1) functionally shared transcripts among the gametophyte meristems
or lateral organs of the bryophytes and the sporophyte meristem or lateral organ
of maize and Arabidopsis; (2) sporophyte-specific transcripts among the four
model organisms, and; (3) transcripts unique to each lineage and domain. All
data generated during this project will be released to public databases,
including the TRANSCRIPTOME link at the CosMoss database for Physcomitrella
patens, and the Marchantia polymorpha database at the DOE Joint Genome
Institute. This project also will provide training in genomic analyses and
mechanisms of plant development for a Cornell University Plant Biology graduate
student.