* 1146249
* What Works for Whom in What Context: A Practical Guide to Conducting Evaluations With Diverse Populations?.
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Patricia Campbell, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2014
* USD 349,792.00

There is a need at NSF and in the field for a set of guidelines that would
direct the evaluation process for projects whose purpose is to develop a more
diverse STEM workforce. The purpose of this project is to create guidelines that
would be used by PIs and proposal developers to write effective evaluation plans
in their proposals; by evaluators to plan, implement and conduct rigorous
project evaluations; and by Program Officers and reviewers to judge the merits
of evaluation sections of proposals or to provide guidance for prospective or
current projects. comprehensive guide, population-focused tip sheets,
interactive internet materials and a wiki about conducting evaluations with
diverse populations including considerations centering on gender,
race/ethnicity, and disabilities. Consideration is also given to the setting of
the evaluation (e.g., institutional type, program type). The materials will
include information about designing, implementing and assess the quality of
projects and activities that focus on broaden participation in STEM education,
especially those targeting post-high school participants. The final products
will be unique because they will specifically address evaluation issues related
to diverse populations such as under represented minoritis, females, individuals
with disabilities, and individuals in multiple categories. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on previous NSF-funded work by the PIs
individually and together. In addition, several specific NSF-funded or developed
documents have led the way in formulating the idea and design for this project.
Examples are the Framework for Evaluating Impacts of Broadening Participation
Projects: A Report from a National Science Foundation Workshop, co edited by
Beatriz Chu Clewell and Norman Fortenberry under Contract Number GS-10F-0482P by
the Division of Research on Learning, the Indigenous Evaluation Framework Report
by LaFrance and Nichols (Grant 0438720), and the Mixed Methods User-Friendly
Handbook which was updated in 2010 (Contract REC 99-12175). The specific
objectives of the project delineate the plan for the project, including a needs
assessment with stakeholder groups, a literature review, the development and
beta testing of materials, revision and field testing, and dissemination. The
project includes an Advisory Board that has the expertise to provide important
input to the process. The project also includes an external, independent
evaluator and an evaluation plan that considers the progress and outcomes of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a unique contribution to the
fields of evaluation, broadening participation, and STEM education.