* 1146407
* Collaborative research:   Remote sensing of foliar chemistry to reconstruct the genealogy of canopy trees in a Neotropical rain forest.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,10/31/2013
* James Kellner, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 10/31/2013
* USD 134,954.00

This project will investigate whether variation in leaf chemistry between trees
in different locations in a tropical forest is determined by who their parent
trees were or by differences in local environmental conditions. Individual trees
of the same species in the tropical rain forest on Barro Colorado Island (BCI),
Panama, differ in the chemical composition of their leaves as well as in their
DNA. This project aims to develop new techniques that use this variation to map
the genealogy of the trees in a forest from the air. Researchers will first
directly determine which trees in each of three canopy species are descended
from which others for a number of trees by collecting information on the DNA of
each species. Next, differences in DNA will be related to seven chemical
properties of the leaves that can be detected from high-resolution observations
by an imaging spectrometer (the Carnegie AToMS system) designed to acquire
measurements of biological diversity and foliar chemistry in species-rich,
tropical rain forests. Finally, aerial images of these chemical properties of
individual trees of the species over a wider area will be used to detect genetic
lineages of trees without having to collect samples directly. In addition to
addressing the ?nature vs. nurture? question, the project will seek to provide a
new tool for using remote sensing to identify the genetic lineages of the trees
in a forest, a large-scale level of genetic detail rarely achieved to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to the development of
infrastructure for research and education by improving capacity for
understanding biological diversity throughout large landscapes using advanced
airborne remote sensing. Exposure to these technologies will help to prepare
future generations of scholars for careers in science and natural resource
management.