* 1146247
* Collaborative research:   Quantifying the ecosystem-wide impacts of a strong interactor in African watersheds
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Mary Power, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 427,909.00

This award will initiate a collaborative research effort by ecologists,
biogeochemists, and ecohydrologists at the University of California at Berkeley
and Princeton University to study how the common hippopotamus affects ecosystems
- and how change to these ecosystems in turn affects the hippopotamus.
Remarkably little is known about the importance of the common hippopotamus to
the ecosystems that they inhabit, despite the fact that they are recognized to
be a vulnerable and declining species. Hippopotamus rest in rivers and shallow
lakes during the day and then emerge at night to feed on land. By virtue of
these movements these large herbivores transfer vast quantities of nutrients and
energy across the boundary between aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. These
connections are likely to have a major influence on ecological properties and
processes in each type of ecosystem. The project will quantify the movement
ecology of hippopotamus, the rates at which they vector nutrients across
ecosystems, the impacts that these transfers have upon the ecology of recipient
ecosystems, and how river flow and rainfall influence these ecological
phenomena.

This work will extend our general understanding of how transfers of material and
energy influence the ecology of entire landscapes, how closely neighboring
ecosystems are linked to one another, and how physical forcing determines the
nature and importance of these connections. In addition to these important
scientific contributions, this project will provide training for national and
international postdoctoral researchers, involve undergraduates in research,
generate creative science media for the general public, and support science
outreach programs in educationally underserved rural settings.