* 1146128
* NDR1:    A Point of Convergence in Stress and Pathogen Signaling in Arabidopsis Thaliana.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Robert Day, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2016
* USD 707,908.00

Plants are constantly exposed to stress, yet they have evolved numerous
mechanisms to respond, adapt, and thrive under some of the most hostile
conditions. In most cases, the ability to adapt to stress, whether from the
environment (abiotic) or predators (biotic), simply requires a "reallocation of
resources". For example, under conditions of drought, plants down-regulate
growth and development, both being energy-expensive processes, in favor of
minimizing water loss. Similarly, when plants are infected by pathogens, the
primary goal is to restrict pathogen access to nutrients. This project seeks to
understand how plants utilize basic physiological processes to respond to
stress. To do this, the project will investigate how biotic stress signaling is
activated and regulated, and moreover, how this signaling process is interlinked
with general host physiology and plant health. The principal investigator
hypothesizes that in a manner similar to humans, plants utilize mechanisms to
integrate environmental and pathogen-related stress signaling responses. The
goal of this project is to understand how abiotic and biotic stress signaling is
co-regulated, and to develop a model of how plants sense the world around them,
process these perceived stimuli, and ultimately, survive under a variety of
stress conditions. The impact of this work links basic plant health to
environment, threats from pathogens, and in total, food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes an extensive outreach
component. In short, a teaching module will be conducted by graduate and post-
doctoral researchers in principal investigator's lab and carried out in
collaboration with the Michigan State University Children's Garden and 4H
Outreach Program. The major focus will be to educate elementary school children
on the relationship(s) between environment, plant health, food, and
sustainability. The goal of this outreach is to increase the awareness and
understanding of young people of how food, and ultimately human health, is
impacted by the environment, and moreover, to illustrate how humans impact the
environment.