* 1146960
* ABI Innovation:   Analysis of Operon Evolution Using an Even Driven Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Iddo Friedberg, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 10/31/2015
* USD 682,386.00

A grant is awarded to the university of Miami, Oxford Ohio for research into the
evolution of bacterial operons. Many bacterial proteins work together in the
same metabolic pathway, and/or as a complex. In many cases, the genes coding for
these proteins are clustered together on the chromosome are under a common
controlling mechanism, and are transcribed into a single RNA molecule from which
the proteins are translated. It is estimated that, depending on the individual
genome, between 5 and 25% of bacterial genes reside in operons. Work will
explore whether the construction and/or destruction of clusters of co-
transcribed genes takes place as a sequential series of events that can be
identified. This research will identify the events that happen in operon
evolution through comparative genome analyses of a large number of bacterial
genomes. These events include gene gain, gene loss, lateral gene transfer, and
different types of changes in the genomic structure. The questions which will be
answered are: which are the determining events of operon evolution? Are there
events that are more and less dominant in defining a change over time in
operons? Are these events universal, or vary between operons and different
bacterial genera? If the latter, which are the varying dominant events and what
can we learn about operon evolution from studying them?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to simultaneously control the transcription of related genes is a strong
genetic mechanism that influences bacterial life and functionality on many
levels. Understanding how operons evolve will provide insight into one of the
most basic and prevalent bacterial genetic structures. This, in turn, will help
us better understand the evolution bacteria, which constitute the most diverse
and influential of life's domains. This study enables the introduction of new
hypotheses to understanding how operons evolve, and proposes that different
operons may have evolved using different mechanisms that can be identified. This
project, at the interface of computational science and biology, will train
undergraduate and graduate students, including programs that support minority
education and research. The result of this project will be disseminated through
a freely-accessible database describing operons and their evolutionary
trajectories.