* 1146207
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Interacting influences of climate, land use, and other disturbances on regime shifts in forest ecosystems: Holocene dynamics in the northeastern US
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 06/30/2016
* USD 574,731.00

The manner in which climate change, human land-use and natural disturbances
interact to disrupt natural systems remains a critical concern for science and
society. With increasing rates of climate and land-use change the rate and
magnitude of ecosystem changes will likely increase with major effects on
critical services to humankind including the availability of natural resources
and the ability of nature to buffer climate impacts. This research project will
advance the understanding of how climate change interacts with human and natural
disturbances to generate abrupt ecological changes by developing and analyzing a
rich array of paleoecological, paleoclimatic, and archaeological data over the
past 13,000 years. The study will focus on periods characterized by sharp
declines in oak and hemlock due to rapid climate change, major droughts, insect
outbreaks, changing human-population and land-use regimes (e.g., deforestation,
fire) at ca. 6000, 5500, and 4000 yr BP and the time of European settlement. New
methodologies will be applied to analyze ecosystem change and to explore the
consequences for the earth's future. The research will concentrate on southern
New England and three important, contrasting landscapes: the coast (Cape Cod and
islands), near-coastal wetland area (Taunton River), and the inland-riverine
area of the Connecticut and Deerfield Rivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborators will apply their strengths in ecological, biophysical and social
science to advance: (i) interdisciplinary training at undergraduate, graduate,
postdoctoral and mid-career levels; (ii) communication and engagement with broad
audiences of scientists, decision makers, and policy makers; and (iii)
environmental and conservation policy. These efforts will capitalize on existing
institutional strengths: Harvard Forest Programs in Science and Policy
Integration, Program on Conservation Innovation, Summer Research in Ecology (NSF
REU), Bullard Fellowship Program, Archaeology/ Paleoecology Field School and
LTER program; the new LTER Network collaboration with the MBL Logan Journalist
Program; the Emerson College undergraduate program in Science Communication and
graduate programs in Geology and Geophysics at the University of Wyoming and
Anthropology and Archaeology at the University of Massachusetts.