* 1146545
* Design, Make, Play: World Maker Faire Workshop, Phase Two
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* David Kanter, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia James
* 08/31/2012
* USD 49,870.00

The New York Hall of Science (NYSCI), in collaboration with O'Reilly Media will
host a two-day workshop to explore the potential for the kinds of making,
designing, and engineering practices celebrated at Maker Faire to enrich science
and math learning. The purpose of this workshop is to identify and aggregate
successful programming strategies that increase student engagement and
proficiency in STEM, with a focus on students underrepresented in STEM careers.
The meeting will be organized around three main ideas: catalyzing a national
Maker movement; dissemination and scaling of design principles; and assessment
of impacts on STEM learning and attitudes. The convening highlights the capacity
of making activities to impact student motivation, attitudes, and conceptual
understanding in STEM in both informal and formal learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in conjunction with
the World Maker Faire at NYSCI on September 18-19, 2011. The World Maker Faire
is a two-day, family-friendly event that celebrates the Do-it-Yourself or DIY
movement and brings together a broad community of professionals and laypersons
with a common interest in technology-based creativity, tinkering, and the reuse
of materials and technology. The proposed workshop extends the work of the
previous Maker Faire workshop (DRL 10-46459) by identifying initiatives that
bridge the Maker and STEM communities while building students' foundational STEM
knowledge and engaging audiences underrepresented in STEM careers. This workshop
will accommodate approximately 50 local and national scientists, engineers,
learning science researchers, educators, policymakers, and philanthropists.
Select participants will present detailed case studies of maker programs, design
principles, assessments, and measured outcomes in STEM attitudes and learning.
Key elements of successful programs and assessment strategies will be identified
across the case studies in brainstorming sessions and roundtable discussions.
Following the workshop, a subset of the case studies will be compiled into an
edited volume, indexed by the dimensions of student learning in the National
Research Council publication, "A Framework for K-12 STEM Education: Practices,
Crosscutting Concepts and Core Ideas."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
the momentum of the popular Maker Faire movement, based in design, engineering
and technology concepts, to connect to STEM education while capitalizing on the
strengths of informal learning environments. The workshop provides researchers,
practitioners, and policymakers with an aggregated collection of program design
principles and reliable metrics for documenting changes in preK-20 STEM
attitudes and learning. The edited volume has the potential to advance the
understanding of how to bridge formal and informal learning environments, while
also fostering research on the affective dimensions of making in diverse
audiences.