* 1146221
* cGMP signalling in Plasmodium intracellular development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Purnima Bhanot, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 06/30/2017
* USD 960,000.00

Malaria kills nearly a million people a year, mostly young children. There is no
vaccine against malaria and currently used anti-malarial drugs face several
challenges. Malaria is caused by parasites called Plasmodium, which are
transmitted to humans via mosquito bites. Inside the human body, Plasmodium's
first act is to infect the liver. Inside the liver cells, each parasite divides
to form tens of thousands of more parasites in just 2-3 weeks, which are
eventually released into the blood. How does the parasite control this
remarkable process? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has previously
discovered an enzyme that is essential for Plasmodium's development in the
liver. Without it, parasites are "arrested" within the liver cell. In this
project, the investigator will use molecular biology, genetics and advanced
microscopy to reveal the exact function of the enzyme. The investigator will
determine the genes that are turned on or off in response to the enzyme, and
identify the proteins that partner with this enzyme to enable the parasite's
development in the liver. This knowledge gained by this project will, in the
future, help scientists design new ways to block the parasite's infection of the
liver and treat malaria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carrying out this work at the New
Jersey Medical School will introduce underrepresented undergraduate, graduate
and medical students from the Newark area to biomedical research. The project
will include local undergraduate and high schools students recruited through
summer internship programs, with a view towards developing a life-long interest
in the scientific enterprise.