* 1146470
* The genetic and developmental basis of hybrid male sterility during the early stages of speciation in house mice
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Jeffrey Good, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2015
* USD 0.00

Understanding the processes that lead to the formation of new species is
important for understanding the origin of biological diversity. Sterility of
hybrid males is one of the most common causes of reproductive isolation between
animal species, yet it is unclear if the disruption of sperm development often
has a common basis. The proposed research will use several genetic experiments
in mice to bridge significant gaps in our understanding of the developmental
causes of hybrid male sterility. Genomic experiments will be used to study gene
regulation across sperm development in two species of mice and in sterile hybrid
males. Comparisons between sterile and fertile males will be used to identify
differences in gene regulation that contribute to infertility. These studies
will be complemented with genetic mapping experiments focused on identifying
specific genes that underlie hybrid male sterility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will advance understanding of the causes of reproductive isolation
between species and provide much needed insight into the underpinnings of male
sterility. This research will also advance the study of reproductive diseases by
providing insights into the developmental basis of male infertility. The
proposed activities will provide training and support for postdoctoral,
graduate, and undergraduate researchers and incorporate several outreach
activities aimed at high school and undergraduate students with little or no
previous exposure to research-based science. These efforts will advance public
understanding of biology and increase diversity in science through the inclusion
of students from underrepresented groups.