* 1146444
* Diversity, distribution and significance of aerobic thermophilic CO-oxidizing bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Gary King, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 412,850.00

Carbon monoxide (CO) is considered a highly poisonous gas often associated with
tragic loss of life. Nonetheless, CO occurs naturally at relatively low
concentrations in the atmosphere and in geothermal environments. Remarkably,
certain bacteria, the CO oxidizers, thrive on CO using it as an important source
of energy for their metabolism. Some CO-oxidizing bacteria can be found in
soils, where their metabolism helps regulate CO concentrations in the
atmosphere. Other CO-oxidizing bacteria occur in geothermal systems, such as hot
springs and volcanic environments. These bacteria survive under harsh
conditions, including high temperatures and low (acidic) pH. Little is known
about these extremophiles, but they likely include many novel species, some of
which might represent relatively ancient life
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted in the unique geothermal
environments of Kilauea volcano (Hawai'i) and hot springs in Yellowstone and
Lassen Volcano National Parks will establish the biodiversity of thermophilic
oxygen-dependent CO oxidizers, discover new thermophilic CO-oxidizing species,
and establish the factors that determine the geographic distribution of these
organisms. Results of this study will create a new understanding of the
evolutionary history of all oxygen-dependent CO-oxidizing bacteria and provide
new insights that will aid research on CO oxidizers in soils and in the oceans.