* 1146312
* Understanding the Geographical and Community Context of Mutualism Dynamics:   Fig-Pollinator-Parasite Interactions in the Sonoran Desert
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* John Nason, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 425,000.00

Mutualisms - associations between different species in which both benefit - are
profoundly important in nature. To date, however, our understanding of
mutualisms has suffered from a lack of appropriate geographical and ecological
context, a context that must be considered to fully understand how and why
mutualisms exist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a mutualism
that underlies much of our food production and that is fundamental to life on
earth: the interaction between flowering plants and their insect pollinators. It
focuses on the Sonoran Desert rock fig and its pollinator, a species of fig
wasp. This pollination mutualism will be studied in many different places, some
of which have parasites of the wasps and some that do not. Theory predicts that
where fig population size is small, as is typically the case with rock figs,
reliance on a single species of short-lived pollinator leads to a high risk of
pollinator extinction and eventual collapse of the mutualism. This project will
test whether figs flowering at different times reduce this risk. Further, it
will explore whether any such changes in the timing of flowering carry
unexpected costs to the fig plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this study go beyond the fig-fig wasp system to include insights into how
environmental factors influence where and when mutualisms occur. Further, the
results will aid in understanding how climate change may affect pollination in
small populations of plants that have specialized pollinators. Educational
impacts include undergraduate education and training via the development of two
International Biology courses to engage undergraduates in field research and
cultural experiences, and via opportunities for hands-on research experiences in
a collaborative, laboratory environment.