* 1146168
* ARTS: Collaborative Research:  A model systematic treatment of a hyper-diverse lineage descended from early land plants (Frullania, Frullaniaceae, Marchantiophyta).
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Blanka Aguero, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2017
* USD 317,378.00

Researchers will conduct a modern and novel taxonomic treatment of a hyper-
diverse group of early land plants the liverwort genus Frullania. Liverworts
(Marchantiophyta) are pivotal in our understanding of early land plant evolution
and exist as important components of the vegetation in many regions of the
world. The project represents an unprecedented investigation of this scale on a
leafy liverwort genus, so-called because of the leafy plant structure. Taxonomic
conclusions will be drawn from a multi-faceted data set, including morphology,
fieldwork, experimental growth studies, as well as DNA sequence data, and
population studies using DNA microsatellite
markers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, the project will extensively utilize
computer and web-based tools to help furnish biodiversity data to biologists,
ecologists, conservationists, and the public. The project continues strong
partnerships with international databasing activities such as the Encyclopedia
of Life. The project provides critical training to young scientists in museum
collections-based research. Unique to the project is the development of a strong
network of institutions, participating in Service to Science and Service
Learning programs bridging science and training. The project has a strong
outreach strategy including pod and video casts, contributing to Plants of the
World Educator Guide, and participation in the Educator Open House, including
over 300 Chicago-area educators. The scientists involves in this research will
also provide a liverwort identification field course.