* 1146695
* Impacts of CO2 on acid-base balance, rectal base excretion and intestinal carbonate formation in marine fish
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Martin Grosell, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2018
* USD 802,014.00

Combustion of fossil fuels continues to increase oceanic carbon dioxide (CO2)
resulting in ocean acidification. In addition, periodic upwelling of CO2-rich
water in certain zones results in significant acidification of surface waters,
making examination of elevated CO2 levels relevant today. Although marine fish
readily compensate for CO2 levels observed in upwelling regions and levels
predicted for the next 200 years, relatively little is known about how these
abundant vertebrates maintain acid-base balance (constant blood pH). Preliminary
findings by Grosell and his team demonstrate that elevated external CO2 levels
as low as 750 ppm CO2 induce an acid-base balance disturbance and at least
partial compensation in marine fish. Grosell and his team are examining the
mechanism by which marine fish maintain acid-base balance in the presence of
elevated external CO2. A consequence of exposure to elevated CO2 in the
surrounding water is an increase in blood CO2 that is balanced by a rapid
increase in blood bicarbonate (HCO3-), buffering the acidosis and defending
normal pH levels. Early experiments demonstrate that the increase in blood HCO3-
is achieved by increased uptake of HCO3- from the water, presumably across the
gills. Grosell and his team aim to identify the molecular nature of the
transport proteins involved in this process. Blood CO2 and HCO3- form substrate
for excretion of HCO3- by the intestine also, a process that is necessary for
fish to maintain salt and water balance. Earlier studies by the PI and co-
workers have demonstrated a relationship between HCO3- levels on the blood side
of the intestinal tissue and the HCO3- excretion rates by the tissue. Thus,
elevation of blood HCO3- during CO2 exposure will likely result in increased
HCO3- excretion by the intestinal tissue and loss of blood HCO3-. The most
recent findings by Grosell and his team confirmed this expectation and planned
studies will examine if intestinal HCO3- transport systems adjust during CO2
exposure to facilitate retention of blood HCO3- levels. The HCO3- in the
intestine of marine fish combines with the calcium (Ca2+) from ingested seawater
to form calcium carbonate (CaCO3) in the intestinal lumen, which is subsequently
excreted to the environment. The realization that marine fish, in this way,
contribute substantially to the formation of CaCO3 in oceans is relatively novel
and has lead Grosell and his team to test if elevated oceanic CO2 will result in
increased CaCO3 production by marine fish. For the first time, the solubility of
fish-produced CaCO3 will be determined as part of this project. These research
activities will involve training of undergraduate students, PhD students, and a
postdoctoral researcher, as well as a number of outreach activities in a
community with highly diverse demography.