* 1146085
* The Role of Endoreduplication in Mitigating the Detrimental Effects of Herbivory
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Ken Paige, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 01/31/2018
* USD 471,245.00

Endoreduplication is the replication of the genome without mitosis, which leads
to endopolyploidy, an increase in cellular chromosome number. The process of
endoreduplication occurs in nearly all herbaceous flowering plants, yet its
primary function is unknown. Here Dr. Paige proposes to test a novel idea - that
chromosome amplification can mitigate the detrimental effects of herbivory and
lead to enhanced growth and reproduction. Previous studies by the Paige lab have
shown a correlation between chromosome amplification, plant reproduction and
herbivory, however, no direct causal links have been established. To establish a
causal relationship he will use a suite of greenhouse and field studies to
generalize the phenomenon within two species of plants, Arabidopsis thaliana and
Ipomopsis aggregata, assess whether ILP1, a gene that regulates chromosome
amplification, correlates with reproductive success following herbivory in A.
thaliana and use knockout and overexpression mutants of ILP1 to establish a
causal relationship between chromosome amplification, herbivory and reproductive
success.

If chromosome amplification leads to enhanced reproduction, such changes may be
of an adaptive nature and widespread among plants in mitigating the detrimental
effects of herbivory. Furthermore, gaining an understanding of the genetic basis
of increased seed yield following herbivore damage should be of great interest
to agriculturists who, through recent advents in genetic technology, might
incorporate traits (such as ILP1 overexpression promoters) into crop plants such
as oilseed rape (Brassica napus), a close relative of Arabidopsis that also
amplifies chromosome number. He also suspects that these studies reach far
beyond the interactions between plants and herbivores and may in fact represent
a generalized response to all kinds of environmental stressors.