* 1146747
* ABI Innovation:  Interactive Learning Tools For Individual Identification in Large Biological Image Databases
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Srinivas Ravela, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 05/31/2016
* USD 432,477.00

The goal of this research is to develop scalable methods for individual
identification in large biological databases with application to multiple
species in ongoing conservation efforts around the world. This work couples
crowd-sourcing with computational learning. In an identification system that
learns from user inputs, multiple inputs can accelerate the quality and rate of
identification, which in turn dramatically reduces subsequent work-cycles any
human performs. The hypothesis is that Computational learning will improve the
quality of human-machine coupled system's solutions to help solve large and
diverse identification problems. Several interactive learning algorithms are
proposed in all stages of indexing and search in Biological Image Databases. The
algorithms are based on non-parametric Bayesian inference and deliver
incremental online learning methods. To test the interactive learning
hypothesis, the MIT Sloop system will be extended to include the proposed
interactive learning tools. Sloop is a robust toolkit for vision tools that has
been tested on multiple species and supports an operational deployment. As part
of this research a distributed Sloop system indexing multiple species will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is difficult to accurately estimate the
effectiveness of conservation efforts for many rare and endangered species
without an ability to quantify the spatial scales and other statistics of animal
migration and movement. Tagging, an established method, is of limited
effectiveness because it is often invasive and cannot be conducted in large
numbers. This research looks at whether a large number of animals in multiple
species can be identified individually using photographs stored in a database.
The "Animal biometrics" proposed here will examine how citizen scientists can
crowd-source relevance judgments and other inputs, how judgments can improve the
computer's identification performance, and how improved performance reduces the
citizen or expert scientist's workload. The mechanics of the symbiotic human-
computer interaction mediated by machine learning, and the methods by which
patterns are indexed and searched also have impacts in other fields. For
example, some of the tools developed here have been applied in Geosciences and
Weather Prediction.