* 1146489
* How Does Gene Flow Affect Local Adaptation and Population Dynamics?:   Experimental Tests in Wild Populations and Mesocosms
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Lisa Angeloni, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2016
* USD 419,775.00

This project tests the effects of gene flow, the movement of genes from one
population to another by immigrants, on local adaptation and population dynamics
in Trinidadian guppies. On the one hand, gene flow may break down local
adaptation and reduce fitness by introducing maladapted genes. On the other
hand, gene flow may increase fitness by adding genetic variation to small,
inbred populations. Moreover, gene flow may have important effects on population
growth and dynamics. The researchers will test the effects of gene flow using
experiments in wild populations and in controlled mesocosms (experimental
pools). First, they will determine how immigration of fish adapted to a
different environment affects traits and fitness in wild populations. Next, they
will test how these changes in traits and fitness affect population dynamics.
Lastly, they will experimentally test how the effects of gene flow vary with the
degree of adaptive differentiation between populations and the level of
inbreeding.

This study takes advantage of a rare opportunity to examine populations before
and after the onset of gene flow in the wild and in mesocosms. Results of this
project will inform conservation programs since a commonly used, but rarely
tested, conservation strategy is to artificially increase gene flow. Alongside
the research, the investigators will expand their innovative "guppy kit" program
to expose elementary and middle school students to experimental evolutionary
biology using guppies in the classroom in both the US and in Trinidad. The
research will also provide training in field, experimental, and molecular
research for underrepresented minorities and Trinidadian undergraduate students.
Co-funding for the international component of the research has been provided by
OISE.