* 1146290
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: THE PHYLOGENY AND EVOLUTION OF WORLD TACHINIDAE (DIPTERA)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* John Moulton, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 189,968.00

The family Tachinidae contains nearly 10,000 described species of beneficial
parasitic flies. As enemies of other insects, particularly herbivores, tachinids
are important regulators of host populations in natural and agricultural
ecosystems. They help in the natural control of numerous pest insects and have
been effectively used in biological control of invasive pests. Despite their
diversity and ecological importance, we know little about their interactions
with hosts and how these have developed over time. The taxonomic difficulty and
lack of a robust classification of tachinids has hindered both basic and applied
research. The goals of this project are to reconstruct relationships among
groups of tachinid flies using molecular and traditional methods and then use
these results to produce a stable classification and to understand patterns of
host-use and other life history traits. Another key goal is to broadly
distribute taxonomic and biological information on tachinids to researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Tachinidae are the most important group of
insect parasitoids outside of the wasps. A sound grasp of their history and a
reliable taxonomic infrastructure are necessary to understand their roles as
enemies, the evolution of their diverse attack strategies, and the causes of
their rapid and rampant diversification. Such an understanding can guide the
selection of the most effective tachinid biological control agents in
agricultural and forest systems and limit the potential negative impacts upon
non-targets. It will also inform broad issues in biology such as biogeography,
ecological specialization, and the causes of adaptive diversification.