* 1146875
* RUI:  Exploring Unknown Diversity of Short Peptide Neurotoxins and Prey Targets of Provisioning Spider Wasps (Pompilidae) of New Mexico
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Manda Jost, Western New Mexico University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 272,777.00

Biologists and chemists from the Department of Natural Sciences at Western New
Mexico University will collaborate on an investigation of the molecular
interactions between predatory spider wasps (family Pompilidae) and the spiders
they sting and paralyze to use as living food provisions for their own parasitic
larvae. Beyond gathering data that will describe the biology and evolutionary
history of this particular system, the project also addresses key questions
about molecular adaptation, the molecular physiology of predator/prey and
parasite/host interactions, and the mechanisms that help generate biodiversity -
such as antagonistic coevolution. About 200 species of spider wasps are known to
occur in the United States. The venoms of these solitary insects are known to be
relatively simple, consisting mainly of short peptides such as pompilidotoxins
(PMTXs). PMTXs are neurotoxins that bind to a known site on voltage-gated sodium
channel proteins, inhibiting their inactivation and disrupting the functions of
the nervous system. This project will characterize venom peptides from a diverse
sample of spider wasps using mass spectrometry and venom gland transcriptome
sequencing; and examine the DNA sequence diversity of targeted spider sodium
channels, particularly at sites critical for PMTX binding. Since survival and
reproduction of spider wasps depends on the potency of their venoms, while
survival and reproduction of targeted spiders depends on their genetic
sensitivity (or possible resistance) to the toxins, this project will also use
phylogenetic trees of species relationships to describe the evolutionary
histories of these molecules and their interactions, which are likely to evolve
via natural selection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal neurotoxins are of broad
interest due to their potential medical value in treating human health
conditions including pain, epilepsy, stroke, and some cardiovascular disorders.
Additionally, seminal discoveries in neuroscience emerged from
structure/function studies of nervous system proteins such as sodium channels,
and how they are affected by natural neurotoxins. For the grantee institution,
this project will enhance research infrastructure via partial funding for
shared-use molecular biology instrumentation and provide new opportunities for
undergraduate participants to gain experience and training in research
techniques used in molecular biology and analytical chemistry. Data generated by
the project will be deposited into public databases including NCBI/GenBank,
UniProt, and PRIDE (EMBL-EBI). Voucher specimens used in the characterizations
of wasp venoms and spider sodium channels will be deposited into the permanent
collections of the Gila Center for Natural History at Western New Mexico
University in Silver City, NM.