* 1146372
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Maya Projectile Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Prudence Rice, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 19,872.00

Under the direction of Dr. Prudence Rice, Mr. Nathan Meissner will analyze small
chipped-stone projectile points manufactured by Postclassic Mayan peoples to
gain insight into their economic and trade practices. This regional study will
examine similarities and differences in the manufacturing technology of
projectile (arrow) points from multiple sites throughout the Maya lowlands,
including Guatemala, Belize, and Mexico. The selection of sites will also allow
comparisons among various cultural sub-groupings of Mayan-speaking peoples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data generated from this seven-month study will be used to
address two general anthropological questions that are yet to be fully answered
in Mesoamerica: (1) How does large-scale trading and heightened social
interaction impact technological systems at traditional levels of social
organization? (2) To what degree might cultural boundaries impact aspects of
tool production during periods of intensified social interaction? Point
technologies in the form of arrow tips provide an excellent source of data to
address these questions, as raw material procurement strategies, the design
process, and the use life of artifacts encode important information about past
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will generate new data on small
points produced by Maya through a combination of macroscopic technological
analysis, X-Ray Florescence (XRF), site-based spatial analysis, and protein
residue analysis using cross-over immuno-electrophoresis (CIEP). Macroscopic
analysis will be the basis for creating a taxonomic classification of
technological styles. XRF will be used to chemically source the origins of
obsidian traded into the Maya lowlands from volcanic regions in highland
Guatemala and Mexico, and reconstruct trade patterns. Spatial analysis and
protein residue identification will provide important clues concerning contexts
of bow-and-arrow use that relate to hunting, warfare, and ritual activities. A
technological systems framework will be used to interpret variability of these
data at a local level and a regional level, and will contribute to an
anthropological understanding of past economies and the political geography of
the Postclassic lowland Maya.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
graduate student training. It will also help to create partnerships between
academic and governmental institutions in Guatemala, Belize, and Mexico. This
study will also create the first taxonomic classification of its kind, providing
future researchers a system for more refined site-to-site comparisons of small
point technology. The results of this study will be disseminated in various
forms including a dissertation, papers presented at academic conferences, and
peer-reviewed journal articles in both English and Spanish. All data resulting
from the project will be shared online in the form of an interactive website,
and will also be uploaded to the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR) for
electronic sharing.