* 1146014
* How Does the Plant Say-No More?:   A Molecular Genetic Approach to Nodule Number Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Julia Frugoli, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2016
* USD 653,999.00

The colonization of roots of plants in the legume family by nitrogen-fixing
bacteria is regulated by a complex series of interactions between the symbiotic
partners. The endpoint is a specialized organ called a nodule, which is formed
by the plant roots to house the bacteria. In exchange for carbon provided by the
plant, the bacteria provide the plant with nitrogen from the air, allowing
legumes the unique ability to grow in the absence of soil nitrogen. This project
focuses on the plant's control of the symbiosis, with the genetically enabled
model species Medicago truncatula as the plant host and Sinorhizobia as the
bacterial symbiont. The mechanisms by which the plant regulates the number of
nodules it forms will be studied. The PI has shown that regulation of nodule
number occurs by way of signals that travel between roots and shoots. Four
questions about how the root and shoot signal to each other remain unanswered:

What is the nodulation signal to the shoot? What perceives the signal in the
shoot? What is the nature of the signal to the root? What receives the signal in
the root?

A combination of physiological, genetic and biochemical approaches will be
employed to identify the signals and determine how they are perceived. Towards
this end investigators will analyze the genes, nutrients and plant hormones
involved in regulating responses to the signals. Currently-known as well as new
genes and proteins that function in this pathway will be characterized Nitrogen
fertilizer is costly to produce and excessive fertilizer application is a source
of groundwater pollution, making the unique ability of legumes to grow in the
absence of soil nitrogen highly desirable for agriculture. Because the nodule
number regulatory pathway is also involved in root growth, the results of this
project are critical to future manipulation of nodulation in agriculture and for
revealing how all plants coordinate shoot and root growth. The project will
train two doctoral students and four undergraduates, while providing summer
research opportunities to several high school students. The lead investigator
will engage in outreach by teaching best practices in research ethics through
established university programs and disseminating the results of this project at
scientific meetings and university programs targeted to the general public.