* 1146124
* The Sp185/333 system in the sea urchin; gene family structure, gene regulation and protein function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* L Courtney Smith, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 05/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

It is well known that the human immune system generates a large diversity of
antibodies to defend against pathogens; the mechanisms to generate that
diversity are well understood. Although invertebrate animals do not make
antibodies, they also can generate immune diversity in response to infection;
but these mechanisms are still poorly understood. The overarching goal of this
work is to understand the mechanisms that one invertebrate, the California
purple sea urchin, employs to defend itself against the multitudes of microbes
in the ocean by generating a diversity of non-antibody proteins. &lt;br/&gt;The
PI will investigate one family of genes and proteins (the Sp185/333 gene family)
in sea urchins that shows a high level of diversity in response to bacterial
infection. Using a variety of molecular, biochemical and computational
approaches, the PI will address 1) how immune diversity is generated within this
non-antibody gene family 2) how expression of this family of genes is regulated
and 3) how the proteins thus produced actually function to protect the animal
from pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes from the proposed work will be
compared with immune mechanisms in other animals, including mice and humans, to
understand the variety and breadth of how different immune systems protect hosts
from infection. Understanding how the sea urchin immune diversification system
functions may aid in determining whether other animals, such as humans, employ
similar approaches. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use the
opportunity for training all levels of students and to establish and strengthen
international collaborations. Training will include the production of a web-
based, publicly available bioinformatic tool for improved gene sequence assembly
and analysis. Research training will lead to publications and presentations and
research training for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
investigators.