* 1146033
* Collaborative Research: The Unique Skinks of New Guinea: Diversity, Systematics, and Malaria Parasites
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Christopher Austin, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 02/28/2019
* USD 356,250.00

On the island of New Guinea, some extraordinary lizards have green blood, due to
high levels of biliverdin, a bile pigment, which overwhelms the color of their
red blood cells. In humans and other vertebrates, biliverdin (and bilirubin) are
toxic waste products that cause jaundice and are associated with pathology in
newborns and diseases such as Gilbert's and Crigler-Najjar syndromes. As the
concentration of biliverdin in these lizards would cause jaundice and death in
other animals, the adaptive significance of their high bile pigment levels is
unknown. One hypothesis is that it is an anti-parasitic strategy. Lizards are
hosts to malaria parasites but preliminary data collected by the PI's show a
trend towards reduced levels of malaria infection in green-blooded lizards. The
goals of this project are to conduct fieldwork at nine locales in Papua New
Guinea and to use a large number of tissue and blood samples already in hand to
obtain better estimates of the diversity and relationships of skinks and their
malaria parasites, in order to more conclusively test this hypothesis. Thus,
this project will make numerous novel contributions to systematics,
biodiversity, and parasitology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project will include development of middle/high school curriculum
materials, training of undergraduate and graduate students, and various
international partnerships. As no other animals have ever been found that can
survive this level of biliverdin in their blood, the study may ultimately
provide some clues to better understand jaundice and in doing so contribute to
biomedicine and economic development.