* 1146019
* Combinatorial Strategy for the Study of Highly Multidimensional Neuromodulator Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Vladimir Brezina, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Great efforts are being made to map the "connectome" the neuronal wiring diagram
of brain circuits. But mapping the static connectome will not suffice for an
understanding of the computations that these circuits perform, because during
these computations the static connectome is dynamically modified by a complex
network of diffusible modulatory neurochemicals. As yet, no experimental system
has come close to providing a full understanding of this modulatory system and
its functional role. The problem is that there are invariably many modulators
present simultaneously, with mutually interacting effects. To understand the
operation of the entire modulatory system, a global overview of the simultaneous
effects of all possible modulator combinations is required. By brute force, this
would take a vast number of experiments.

This project will test a simple yet powerful solution to this problem. The heart
of the solution lies in a combinatorial algorithm that compacts all of the
modulator combinations to a tractably small number of combinations whose testing
is sufficient. Using mathematical modeling in conjunction with experimental
neurophysiological methods, this approach will be developed and tested in a
neuromuscular system that is simple and experimentally tractable, yet can yield
generally relevant principles. The larger goal of the work is to demonstrate a
coherent, integrated strategy for the study of highly multidimensional
modulatory systems. This strategy will allow the full modulatory complexity of
brain circuits to be studied for the first time and answer broader questions
about the design of neural systems and their modulatory control. This project
will integrate experiments with mathematical modeling and theory, and train
students, including minorities and women, in both areas. Furthermore, cross-
fertilization is anticipated with areas of technology in which a compact
combinatorial test set can simplify work with the complex, dynamic, modulated
systems that are becoming common also in today's technological environment.