* 1146880
* Linking navigation behaviors of coral larvae to microbial cues and microbe-mediated mortality
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Samuel Traina, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 160,000.00

Many aquatic animals produce larvae that use complex swimming behaviors to
locate settlement habitats. Microbes (Bacteria and Archaea) in the water column
and on settlement surfaces may provide navigational information for animal
larvae, however the role of microbes in each stage of the coral settlement
process is not well understood. This project will use larvae from six Caribbean
coral species to test a novel hypothesis about coral behavior, that coral larvae
use waterborne microbial communities as navigational information and that they
avoid adults of the same species. The study will: (1) determine how coral larvae
navigate different reef microbial environments by quantifying their swimming
behaviors using videoanalysis, (2) characterize microbial communities from part
1 using high-throughput DNA sequencing, (3) test for behavior, survivorship, and
settlement effects in larvae exposed to individual bacterial species, and (4)
observe whether patterns of coral settlement in the field are consistent with
laboratory results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Coral reefs create
food, economic revenue, shoreline protection, and cultural pride, yet they are
massively threatened by human activity. Meanwhile, coral recruitment rates
continue to decline on Caribbean reefs. This project will advance knowledge of:
the microbial cues key to successful coral recruitment, the conditions under
which coral larvae can identify lower-mortality habitats, and the best
approaches for helping threatened corals survive their most crucial life history
stage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: At a research site in Curaçao, we
will continue to communicate our findings through the CARMABI Foundation nature
education program and through CARMABI's broader outreach channels (news
coverage, public lectures). We will continue to communicate with local scuba
divers, nature resource managers, and government officials on Curaçao, and
broadly through publications, presentations, photography exhibits, blogging, and
podcasts. The project will support the training of one female postdoctoral
researcher and two students.