* 1146603
* Phylogenomics of polyploidy in the Brassicales
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Joseph Pires, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2016
* USD 468,844.00

Improving crop plants can be accomplished by creating hybrids. Some hybrids,
like mules, are sterile, because the parents have different chromosome numbers.
In plants, some sterile hybrids can become fertile when their chromosome number
is doubled, a process called polyploidy. Many important crop plants, such as
alfalfa, cotton, potato, and wheat are recent polyploids while others, such as
maize, soybean, and cabbage, retain the vestiges of ancient polyploid events.
This project will investigate how polyploidy can give rise to novel traits, such
as the resistance to insects, in the order Brassicales (broccoli, mustards,
capers, papaya, and relatives). The investigators of this project have developed
new phylogenomics methods that allow one to understand the evolutionary history
of how species are related while simultaneously determining whether or not they
are polyploid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a time when rapid global changes are
placing unprecedented pressure on plants in agricultural and natural landscapes,
it is imperative that scientists think beyond a single discipline. Phylogenomics
has emerged as an interdisciplinary approach in the biological sciences;
however, there are few opportunities to learn the genomic and bioinformatics
tools becoming required in biology. To address this gap, this project will
develop modules for undergraduate courses; create an interdisciplinary research
environment that uses computational methods; and engage in outreach to
systematic biologists by annual workshops. All research proposed here involves
recruiting and mentoring students from underrepresented groups.