* 1146081
* Stereotype Endorsement in Achievement Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Scott Eidelman, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 09/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

A large literature documents the pernicious influence of stereotypes in
performance contexts. When stereotypes are made salient, targets of these
stereotypes tend to underachieve, and distance themselves from domains in which
stereotypes are relevant. The aim of the proposal is to investigate a novel
means by which stereotypes become salient and may spread within these settings.
Building on attribution theory, self-handicapping, and stereotype threat
research, Dr. Scott Eidelman (University of Arkansas) proposes that performers
sometimes endorse stereotypes against their group to discount potential failure,
and that doing so may shield the self from performance deficits otherwise
experienced. In other words, by agreeing with aspects of certain stereotypes,
people can (ironically) protect themselves from the sting of failure or feel
particularly good about themselves when they succeed in a domain in which
stereotypes about their group are highly prevalent. These predictions will be
tested by manipulating factors known to instigate both discounting motives and
stereotype threat effects (e.g., test importance), as well as the opportunity to
endorse stereotypes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has theoretical and
practical implications. It weaves several research areas to test the
ecologically valid but provocative claim that performers sometimes endorse
stereotypes against their group to protect their own personal standing. By
delineating a sharp distinction between awareness and endorsement of
stereotypes, this research addresses when the performance of underrepresented
groups may suffer from the pernicious influence of group expectations while also
identifying factors that may offset or even reverse this process. This research
also promises broader impacts: it provides a bridge between the fields of
psychology and education and provides opportunities for under-represented groups
to take part in all aspects of the research process. Results of these studies
will be disseminated widely to scholars and the public, including students and
educators, so that all may be informed of the impact of stereotypes in
achievement setttings.