* 1146878
* Evolutionary origins of female katydid preferences for specific characteristics of male vocalizations
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Sarah Bush, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 671,855.00

This project addresses the fundamental biological question of the evolution of
novel traits, i.e. traits that do not have obvious precursors. The PIs use a
novel behavioral trait, namely the female preference for leading calls, to study
the mechanisms that lead to the evolution of this trait. Using a diverse study
system (Neoconocephalus katydids), the PIs use a broad range of experiments to
test all relevant factors that could potentially contribute to the evolution of
the novel trait. Experimental methods include behavioral tests, breeding
experiments, bioacoustic analyses and neurobiological analyses. All experiments
will be conducted comparatively among up to ten species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will produce arguably the most complete
picture of the evolution of a novel trait to date, allowing critical evaluation
of multiple adaptive and non-adaptive hypotheses. This study will be a major
contribution to the understanding of the origins of biodiversity at both the
physiological and evolutionary levels. Understanding the origins of biodiversity
may in turn contribute to the preservation of biodiversity, by furthering the
understanding of the role that climate and other environmental variables impact
trait expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study include
not only potential contributions to preserving biodiversity, but also educating
future scientists. Four graduate students and multiple undergraduate students
will be trained. The breadth of approaches makes this project ideal for training
students in the integrative study of complex biological problems. The PIs also
reach out to other biology faculty at regional 2- and 4-year colleges through
workshops on integrating current research approaches into the undergraduate
curriculum, and by building a community of biology educators across multiple
institutions.