* 1146751
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: How do seedlings survive? Hydraulics, carbon acquisition and drought tolerance in the earliest phases of tree growth
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Frederick Meinzer, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2017
* USD 385,437.00

Tree species distributions can shrink over time through reduced regeneration and
subsequent adult mortality or they can expand via seedling establishment beyond
current distribution boundaries. Therefore, a critical component of our ability
to predict future species distributions is an understanding of the mechanisms of
seedling establishment, which requires a fundamental knowledge of seedling
physiology. The water pathway from the root to the leaf is critically important
for maintaining leaf water status and allowing stomata to stay open, resulting
in carbon capture through photosynthesis. However, water transport in the plant
is vulnerable to desiccation-induced changes, including vascular tissue embolism
(i.e. air bubble formation). The overall objective of this research is to
understand the mechanisms responsible for prevention of hydraulic failure (i.e.
catastrophic embolism) in tree seedlings, thereby ensuring adequate
photosynthesis for their survival and establishment. Survival, growth,
physiology and anatomy of growing seedlings will be measured to assess
desiccation tolerance and the impacts of drying on photosynthesis, and to
determine when structures that regulate seedling water loss develop. Results
from this research can be directly used in modeled predictions of vegetation
responses to climate change because seedling survival is likely a primary
determinant of species distributions. These findings will also be of interest to
policy makers and land managers who are interested in potential drought impacts
on productivity and distributions of certain species. They will also be of
interest to tree and woody crop breeders concerned with identifying traits
associated with survival and adequate productivity in given environments. In
addition, the ideas and methodology of measuring young seedling hydraulic
parameters will be of interest to the plant science community and could provide
a springboard for a new area of research activity. The project includes training
of two graduate students, several undergraduate students and high school
students.