* 1146819
* Collaborative Research:   ABI Innovation:  PlantSimLab: A Simulation Laboratory for Plant Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Reinhard Laubenbacher, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 05/31/2016
* USD 881,510.00

It is increasingly recognized that at the molecular level nonlinear networks of
heterogeneous molecules control many plant processes, so that systems biology
provides a valuable approach in this field, building on the integration of
experimental biology with mathematical modeling. One of the biggest challenges
to making this integration a reality is that most plant biologists do not
possess the mathematical background needed to build and manipulate mathematical
models well enough to use them as tools for hypothesis generation. The goal of
the project is to develop a network modeling tool, PlantSimLab, that enables
plant biologists to build, validate, and use intuitive computer models, with a
user interface that does not require mathematical or modeling expertise. No such
tool is currently available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PlantSimLab is intended to
play the role of a virtual laboratory, in which plant biologists can interrogate
a computational model in ways similar to how it is done in the laboratory. The
software will be developed in close collaboration with the plant biology
community, through use cases that drive software capabilities and interface
features. Finally, an extensive dissemination effort will be made to introduce
the tool to plant biologists. The project will also leverage an ongoing outreach
project that engages 9-12 year-old children across Virginia. The program, Kids'
Tech University (KTU), brings 450 children to the Virginia Tech campus 4 times
each year, where they interact with scientists, participate in hands-on
laboratories, and, between campus events, explore a virtual space related to
topics discussed on campus. The project will result in hands-on as well as
virtual activities related to plant biology in general and the focus of the
proposed project in particular.