* 1146446
* RCN:  Towards a Unified Ecology of Tropical Montane Cloud Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Kenneth Young, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2017
* USD 499,998.00

Cloud forests are unique and striking ecosystems found at high elevations on
tropical mountains where persistent cloud cover forms almost every day. Here the
forest is in near continual mist and luxuriant growth of epiphytic orchids,
bromeliads and mosses carpet the trees. These ecosystems are not only beautiful,
but play a critical role in biodiversity protection, water resources, and human
livelihoods. Yet they are among the least known ecosystems in the world and are
likely to be exceptionally vulnerable to global change. This project builds on
an international research coordination network to dramatically increase our
understanding of these ecosystems. Currently that understanding is limited by
nonstandard approaches and research methods across sites, cultural differences
among the scientific disciplines and countries where these ecosystems occur, and
a lack of synthesis of current research. In this study, a central theme will be
based on a set of characteristics that is common across all tropical montane
cloud forests, including small, stunted and very slow growing trees that will
serve to organize and standardize research. In so doing, it will also lead to
standardized scientific techniques, new technologies and interdisciplinary
approaches, and synthesis of datasets across large scales. Indeed, this cannot
be accomplished without an integrated network, since the key drivers, such as
climate, physiography, and ecological isolation, vary tremendously over large
distances from islands to mainlands, equatorial to subtropical regions, and from
coasts to inland mountain ranges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this network are numerous. Its focus on knowledge sharing and promoting teaching
and learning will be accomplished through web based information modules serving
a general audience. These will include a primer on the unique role of tropical
montane cloud forests in ecosystem functioning, focusing especially on water
resources. Standardized scientific methods will be developed as written
protocols and video tutorials produced to promote additional adoption. This
project will inherently enhance the capacity for research and education by
bringing together an international network of researchers, initiating multisite
studies and experiments, and hosting international meetings at key research
sites. A key impact will be the training and mentoring of students in tropical
countries, vital for the future, but where student opportunities are usually
limited. Finally, the network will develop a forest management protocol and a
web based forum for forest managers to discuss the latest findings and problem
solving.