* 1146132
* Role of the cytokine macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) as a neurotrophin in Zebrafish neurogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Kate Barald, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2016
* USD 525,000.00

Studying how sensory cells responsible for "hearing" and cells that detect
gravity, balance and linear acceleration in the vestibular system form is a
compelling cellular and engineering problem. By studying how the ear forms,
scientists can learn how to repair a deaf or dysfunctional inner ear. Humans and
other mammals cannot restore lost hearing because sensory cells and neurons do
not have the capability to regenerate, unlike birds, frogs and fish. Zebrafish
inner ear formation is easier to study than mammals because development takes
place outside the mother and is extremely rapid (hrs-days rather than weeks-
months), can be followed and imaged in the living animal in real time. Its
nervous system and the immune system share common evolutionary mechanisms and
molecules important for both development and repair. These experiments use
innovative bioengineering technology, including molecules injected and moved by
current into specific cells of the zebrafish embryonic inner ear, and
microfluidic zebrafish bioreactors that can support the growth and development
of the living embryo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students
in biology and engineering will have a unique training opportunity both in the
laboratory and in engineering design courses to devise (and possibly patent) new
zebrafish bioreactor designs, to use advanced imaging techniques and molecular
electroporation techniques in moving molecules into the zebrafish inner ear. New
technologies and approaches will be disseminated to the bioengineering,
developmental biology, neuroscience, immunology and zebrafish research
communities. These studies provide an excellent opportunity for cross-
disciplinary collaboration, teaching, mentoring and learning. Engineers will
learn biology and biologists will learn engineering principles from the level of
undergraduates to postdocs.