* 1146491
* Montane Biogeography Revealed by Quirks of the Evolutionary Process: Integrative Respiratory Phenotypes for Andean Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Blair Wolf, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2017
* USD 673,000.00

Animals at high altitudes use a variety of mechanisms to acquire sufficient
oxygen despite low atmospheric pressure. Individual animals can shift their
respiratory strategies in real time, just as humans increase the concentration
and size of red blood cells during high-altitude training. Alternatively, high-
altitude populations can genetically adapt by natural selection over
generations, effectively optimizing their respiratory systems for low ambient
oxygen pressure. This project will characterize the high-altitude respiratory
strategies of dozens of wild bird species. Study taxa comprise pairs of related
high-altitude and low-altitude populations at different levels of evolutionary
divergence. International teams will sample birds along elevational gradients in
the Andes to evaluate the structure and performance of critical respiratory
system components, including heart, lungs, blood, hemoglobin, and the hypoxia-
induced gene-expression cascade. With these data, this project will (1) develop
a model of the time-course of high-altitude adaptation and (2) describe the
diversity of solutions to this common physiological challenge. This new model
and comparative data will facilitate inference of biogeographic history through
integration of physiological and phylogenetic information. The results will
reveal the contribution of respiratory specialization to the uniqueness and
diversity of the Andean avifauna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;American and Peruvian
students will develop international partnerships during the project's research
expeditions. Specimens and linked data will be archived in museum collections
and online databases. Andean bird lineages provide analogues to high-altitude
human populations and their hypoxia defense mechanisms are of broad interest due
to the profound role of hypoxia in human pathology.