* 1146832
* Collaborative Research: Modeling movement and survival of intercontinental songbird migrants crossing the Gulf of Mexico
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Jill Deppe, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 04/30/2017
* USD 217,330.00

Approximately two-thirds of all songbird species that breed in eastern North
America migrate to tropical areas for the winter, requiring most species to
cross the Gulf of Mexico. Flights across the gulf are considered hazardous and
may result in mass mortality. Atmospheric conditions over water, as well as
characteristics of the birds themselves (e.g., age, physical condition), are
likely important predictors of birds' migratory routes and survival. However,
most knowledge about when, where and how small birds cross large water bodies
and their survival remains speculative, because until now researchers have been
unable to track individuals between the start and end points of over water
flights. Anticipated changes in atmospheric structure and dynamics caused by
climate change urgently require an understanding of how migrating birds interact
with the atmosphere. This knowledge will provide insight to potential
consequences of climate change on migratory songbirds, many of which are
experiencing population declines. Knowledge of animal-atmosphere relationships
is timely as wind energy development accelerates and coastal habitat alteration
along migratory flyways continues. The interdisciplinary research team will
combine modern radio telemetry and favorable geography to document migratory
flights of songbirds across the gulf. By integrating field data, atmospheric
data and computational simulations and analyses, the team will provide the first
estimate of songbird survival during migration across open water. They also will
study factors shaping birds' migratory routes and timing. The team will promote
learning, excitement and appreciation for science, and animal migration in
particular, to non-scientists through educational materials (e.g., animated
migration trajectories in Google EarthÂ©). The team will disseminate findings to
scientists, reserve managers and the general public via presentations,
publications, a bilingual project website, and popular media. American and
Latino undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral researchers will
participate in each phase of research to acquire learning and skill-building
opportunities.