* 1146500
* Investigating phloem structure function relations in vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Michael Knoblauch, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 03/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The phloem of higher plants is a long distance translocation system that
distributes assimilates generated by photosynthesis to tissues such as fruits
and underground organs. The majority of the nutrients consumed by humans have
been translocated through the phloem. In addition, the phloem serves as a long
distance signaling system. It can roughly be compared to a combination of the
human circulatory and nervous system. Due to its high concentration of sugars
and other nutrients, it represents the primary target for pests such as aphids,
mealybugs, and leafhoppers. Furthermore, plant viruses use the phloem to spread
throughout the plant. This causes substantial economic damage and leads to the
use of high amounts of protective chemicals. Despite the central role the phloem
plays in plant pest interactions, the current knowledge of the underlying
processes is poor. By employing newly-developed molecular and cell biological
tools, this project aims to elucidate cellular and subcellular processes in
phloem transport, signaling, and plant-pest interactions. One long-term outcome
will be the provision of a scientific basis for new strategies to protect plants
from pest infestation. These new strategies carry the potential to dramatically
reduce the amount of insecticides currently required in modern agriculture. In
addition, broader impacts include education through teaching and textbook
information on the mechanism of phloem transport and phloem insect interactions
and through training of undergraduate and graduate students.