* 1146986
* Understanding Behavioral Predator-Prey Interactions from a Visual Sensory Perspective
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Esteban Fernandez-Juricic, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 385,000.00

Predation is a powerful factor driving the evolution of prey behavior. One gap
in our understanding of predator-prey relationships is how prey detect predators
and whether predator detection is enhanced by different sensory adaptations
depending on habitat type. Tackling this question is challenging because
vertebrate prey usually have sensory systems that differ from that of humans,
making it necessary to study the sensory physiology of the study organisms to
understand how they perceive their environment. The goal of this project is to
establish how the configuration of the visual system shapes anti-predator
behavior in bird species living in different habitats. Birds are excellent study
species because they have complex visual systems that vary extensively between
species and occupy diverse habitats. In open habitats (e.g. grasslands), it is
critical for prey to quickly detect predators approaching from afar; hence, prey
are expected to have sensory adaptations that enhance visual acuity, which
influences the distance at which they can detect approaching predators. In
closed habitats (e.g. forests), predators may approach from many directions
since the habitat is complex; hence, prey are expected to have sensory
adaptations that enhance visual coverage around their heads. This study will
address from a visual physiology and behavioral ecology perspectives the
question of what makes prey effective at avoiding predation in different
environments, and thus will provide a novel framework for understanding the
diversity of anti-predator strategies. Novel eye-tracking technology will be
developed to record targets of visual attention in small birds, which can be
used in the future to study visual attention and lateralization in other
vertebrates with laterally placed eyes. Additionally, the PI will disseminate
the results of this project to the general public through media publications,
seminars, and a public outreach program developed for K-12 schools on how birds
see their world.