* 1146198
* RCN:  Using metamodels to enable transdisciplinary  research for the study of dynamic biological systems under global change
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Robert Lacy, Chicago Zoological Society
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 490,907.00

This project will develop a new network that will bring together developers of
simulation models used most widely in population ecology with the leaders of
long-term studies on wildlife populations being impacted by habitat
modification, landscape change, disease, climate change, and human intervention.
The global environment is changing rapidly, and these changes have cascading
impacts through local ecosystems, causing unprecedented loss of biodiversity and
disruption of ecological processes on which natural and human systems depend.
Understanding, predicting, and managing these impacts will require methods of
analysis that integrate across traditionally separate fields of study.
Simulation modeling has become a powerful means to study complex systems with
interacting components that cannot be described by simple equations or tested
with laboratory experiments, and simulation models have been embraced by
population, community and landscape ecology, epidemiology, and evolutionary
genetics, as well as resource management and climate research. Using a flexible
approach called metamodels, simulation models can be linked so that they each
represent specific processes impacting the system, while together they represent
the interactions among processes acting at diverse spatial, temporal, and
organizational scales. The network collaborators will make use of existing data
on well-studied systems to develop methods and software tools to link models of
different subsystems (such as dispersal, sociality, population dynamics, and
landscape change), and test if these metamodel linkages better identify
fundamental drivers of ecological systems, reveal important relationships not
observed in single models, and ultimately result in more accurate predictions
about complex systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research coordination network
will create new collaborations not only across fields of study, but also across
academia, government, non-governmental research and conservation organizations,
and business. The new tools developed in this project will enable
interdisciplinary research far beyond participants in this project, provide
methods and cases for educating students in interdisciplinary methods, and give
decision-makers a powerful framework for integrating diverse information to
solve complex problems.