* 1146065
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Genomic consequences of recent and ancient allopolyploidy:  a continuum of ages in Tragopogon (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Pamela Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 361,890.00

Much of what is known about the evolutionary fate of genes following genome
doubling (polyploidy) is based on several crops that are thousands of years old
and synthetic polyploids that are only several generations old. This project
will investigate the very surprising finding that homeologous genes are lost
rapidly after polyploidization, rather than being silenced or other regulatory
changes. They want to know if there are general rules about which genes or
larger pieces of genomes are preferentially lost. This is important because
previous findings were from synthetic polyploids and recent natural polyploids
(&lt;100 years). The plant genus Tragopogon (goatsbeard, in the sunflower
family) provides a unique opportunity to investigate changes that occur
following polyploidy in nature across a range of ages. Tragopogon contains
diploids, natural polyploids that are only 60-80 years old, synthetic
polyploids, and older Eurasian polyploids. This study will investigate an older
(0.8 -2.8 million years ago, mya) natural polyploid for comparison with the
recently formed polyploids; it also extends to an ancient polyploidy event
(&gt;30 mya) early in the history of the sunflower family.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome doubling (polyploidy) has generated much
of the diversity of life. All vertebrates and flowering plants experienced at
least one episode of ancient polyploidy, and many crops are polyploids. Hence,
elucidating the consequences of polyploidy will enhance our understanding of the
diversification of life and provide fundamental knowledge about crop genomes.
Results will provide important insights into the processes that generated much
of life and most crops. In addition, the project will train undergraduate and
graduate students, and a post-doctoral scholar, as well as including outreach
activities to the general public.