* 1146490
* Collaborative Research: Eye evolution in Sarsielloidea (Crustacea: Ostracoda): an integrative approach based on phylogenetics, developmental genetics, behavior and optics.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Ajna Rivera, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 218,952.00

Within a single species males and females can differ dramatically. This is known
as sexual dimorphism. This project aims at uncovering the evolution,
development, and ecological purpose of a radical sexual dimorphism in a group of
crustaceans known as "seed shrimp" or ostracods. While males do not contain
additional genetic information compared to females (they have no Y chromosome),
they are able to generate large image-forming eyes whereas females have only
rudimentary eyes that cannot form an image. This project will combine
developmental biology, bioinformatics, phylogenetics and next-generation
sequencing to uncover the genetic differences in males and females in various
species showing different levels of sexual dimorphism. Using these data and data
collected from ostracods worldwide, the researchers will also be able to
elucidate the evolutionary history of this dimorphism. In addition, the
researchers will examine the behavioral aspects underlying this dimorphism by
testing whether males require image-forming eyes to have a high mating success
rate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are multifold:
First, this project will contribute new understanding regarding the genetics and
evolution of sexual dimorphism in an ecological context. Second, this project
provides research opportunities for researchers at many levels including pre-
health and pre-grad undergraduates, masters students, post-doctoral researchers,
and junior and senior faculty. The researchers have strong records of service in
broadening participation of under-represented groups in science and preliminary
work has already provided research opportunities for several individuals from
underrepresented groups including the project director. Third, this research
will strengthen international collaboration with a Swedish research group.
Finally, this research will provide key additional data regarding the evolution
of eyes, a subject which has long fascinated the public, allowing the
researchers to contribute to public education via outreach.