* 1146182
* Biochemical Basis of S-RNase-Based Self-Incompatibility
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Teh-hui Kao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2017
* USD 616,000.00

Most flowering plants produce complete flowers, with anthers and pistil located
in close proximity. This arrangement is conducive to self-pollination, which
leads to inbreeding and consequent reduced fitness in progeny. Many flowering
plants have adopted self-incompatibility (SI) to circumvent the tendency for
inbreeding. This genetic trait allows the pistil to reject self-pollen but
accept non-self pollen for fertilization. The PI is using Petunia inflata as a
model to study SI, with the ultimate goal of understanding how the pistil can
distinguish self and non-self pollen, and how this recognition leads to specific
rejection of self-pollen. His group previously identified the S-RNase gene as
responsible for the pistil's ability to recognize and reject self-pollen. The
PI's group, along with Dr. Seiji Takayama's group in Japan, found that pollen
employs multiple S-locus F-box (SLF) genes in its SI function. In this project,
the PI will use molecular approaches to test the collaborative non-self-
recognition model that explains how multiple SLF proteins interact with a single
S-RNase to allow non-self pollen tubes, but not self pollen tubes, to escape its
toxic effect. The results obtained will lead to a better understanding of the
interactions between these proteins that underlie this important inbreeding-
preventing mechanism. This proposed research has wider implications for the
self/non-self recognition process, a fundamental process in biology, as well as
for studying protein degradation, a key regulatory mechanism in many biological
processes. The SLF and S-RNase genes could be used to facilitate hybrid-seed
production, and if accomplished, this will have tremendous agronomic benefits.
The PI will engage four graduate and five to six undergraduate students in this
project to prepare them for future careers in research, and will continue to
participate in an annual biology fair at Penn State to educate the public,
particularly K-12, about plant reproductive biology and SI.