* 1146774
* Functional Roles of a Novel Crustacean Hormone in Differentiation and Development of Secondary Traits
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2021
* J Sook Chung, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 635,507.00

Hormones produced by gonochronic gonads control differentiation and secondary
gender characteristics in most vertebrates including humans. The current
paradigm in dimorphic crustaceans is that the presence and absence of androgenic
gland and androgenic gland hormone determine differentiation and development of
males and females, respectively. This investigator has found that a novel
crustacean female protein hormone from the eyestalk ganglia of female blue crab
Callinectes sapidus is required for female-specific secondary traits. This team
of investigators aim to test whether this novel female hormone plays an integral
role in differentiation by determining the fate of androgenic gland anlage at
early development and maintaining the gonochronic gonads that exhibit plasticity
in crustaceans. This research will 1) establish the female hormone expression
and concentration during the development of C. sapidus from embryogenesis to
adults (both females and males); 2) determine the critical timing of appearance
of functional androgenic gland by examining the expression of insulin-like
androgenic gland factor; 3) identify specific target tissue sites of female
hormones in females and males; and, 4) examine the function of female hormone in
differentiation and development of secondary traits using RNA interference
techniques, biochemical gain-of-function, and androgenic gland implant
experiments. The strength and a novel aspect of this project is the usage of an
experimental model animal, C. sapidus in which the history and precise life
stages are known, as they are raised in the Institute of Marine and
Environmental Technology?s blue crab hatchery (Baltimore, MD). &lt;br/&gt;This
study will contribute and advance in the fundamental understanding of the
hormonal mechanism of differentiation and development of secondary traits in
crustaceans, which continue to be of importance because of abundance and
biodiversity of Phylum Arthropoda. A post-doctoral researcher, minority
undergraduates and K-12 teachers will participate in this project. Ten high
school students from the Baltimore Polytechnic Institute (Baltimore City) will
partake in a five-day Summer Marine Science Camp (2013 and 2015) and study the
effect of environmental factors on the health and growth of living animals (the
blue crab as a model animal) in the Chesapeake Bay. The data will be
disseminated through scientific and public media.