* 1146194
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Tradeoffs within Food-, Fear-, and Thermal-Scapes to Explain Habitat Use by Mammalian Herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Jennifer Forbey, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 316,086.00

Because natural landscapes are changing rapidly, understanding the factors that
determine how organisms select both habitats and resources remains a central
question in ecology. Theory predicts that animals can balance the costs posed by
food quantity or quality, predation risk, and the physical environment, but few
studies have adequately assessed how multiple variables interact at spatial and
temporal scales that are functionally relevant to a foraging animal. This
research offers a new and synthetic approach to understand functional links
between habitat features and habitat use. It combines behavioral, nutritional,
chemical, spatial, and physiological ecology to evaluate comprehensively the
factors that influence habitat use by both a generalist and specialist
herbivore. Tradeoffs among four habitat features (nutrients in food, toxins in
food, security cover, and thermal cover) will be measured in the laboratory and
under natural field conditions to model and compare the functional importance of
these features to both specialist and generalist species. The investigators will
integrate results to predict resource selection and infer habitat quality when
organisms are faced with complex decisions in natural environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a new method for quantifying
habitat value in a relatively simple system that will enhance predictions of the
consequences of environmental change in more complex systems. It includes a
novel educational model that trains graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students who will conduct research collaboratively across three universities,
participate in a tiered mentoring program, and engage with the community and
regional biologists. This research and educational program is designed to
broaden the scientific experience of students, to foster collaborations between
academia, land management agencies and the public, and to contribute to society
by providing models that predict how animals will alter their use of habitats in
rapidly changing ecosystems.