* 1146206
* Amazon forest response to droughts, fire, and land use:  a multi-scale approach to forest dieback
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Gregory Asner, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,024,283.00

Amazon forests make up a large fraction of all tropical forests on Earth. These
forests influence the global carbon and water cycles and, therefore, the global
climate system. In past decades, Amazonian forests have been severely altered or
degraded by droughts, logging activities, forest fires, and deforestation. In
the near future, forest fires may increase in frequency as the climate changes
in tropical regions. However, there is very limited capacity to predict the
potential trajectories of tropical forests given current and projected trends in
land use and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, airborne and
satellite remote sensing will be combined with statistical models to predict
Amazon tree mortality, an important ecological process that influences total
forest carbon accumulation and storage, species diversity, microclimate
characteristics, and water flow. The study will account for disturbances
including fires, logging and droughts, as well as soil fertility and plant
characteristics in the high diversity region of Madre de Dios, Peru. While
previous studies have attempted to develop tree mortality models for tropical
forests, most of them either have been limited by small field-based sample
sizes, or they lack geographic coverage and spatial detail. The novelty of this
study, therefore, is to map mortality of individual trees across the landscape
using airborne measurements, then to scale up to the larger regional level using
a combination of satellite and modeling approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will contribute to the US Sustainable Landscape program of the U.S. Agency
for International Development that is supporting programs in tropical nations
designed to reduce emissions of carbon from deforestation and forest
degradation. The project will also train two American doctoral students, three
Latin American graduate students, and six undergraduates.