* 1146722
* Collaborative Research:   Novel Methodologies for Genome-Scale Evolutionary Analysis of Multi-Locus Data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Noah Rosenberg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 467,429.00

Stanford University is awarded collaborative grant to develop and implement
algorithms and software tools for the analysis of gene genealogies and inference
of species phylogenies from them. A gene genealogy, also known as gene tree,
models how genes replicate and get transmitted from one generation to the next
during evolution. A species phylogeny models how species arise and diverge. A
species phylogeny is traditionally inferred by a three-step process: (1) a
genomic region from the set of species under study is sequenced; (2) a "gene
tree" is inferred for the genomic region; and, (3) the gene tree is declared to
be the species tree. However, recent evolutionary genomic analyses of various
groups of organisms have demonstrated that different genomic regions may have
evolutionary histories that disagree with each other as well as with that of the
species. Further, evolutionary processes such as horizontal gene transfer,
result in network-like, rather than tree-like, species phylogenies. This joint
project will develop accurate computational methods for determining the causes
of gene tree discordance, and inferring species phylogenies (trees as well as
networks) from gene trees despite their discordance. Special emphasis will be
put on the efficiency of the methods so that they allow for analysis of genome-
scale data sets. All methods will be implemented and extensively tested for
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All methods developed will be made publicly
available in software packages that we have been developing in the respective
groups. The material will be integrated into courses that the PIs regularly
teach at their respective institutions. Last but not least, the project will
culminate with a two-day workshop, open to students and post-doctoral fellows
from around the country, with presentations by the investigators on the
methodologies developed, as well as hands-on tutorials on using the tools in
analyzing data.