* 1146334
* Cognitive Functions of the Postrhinal Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Rebecca Burwell, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2017
* USD 584,000.00

Memory for the context in which daily life events occur is a hallmark of
episodic memory, but how and where context is represented in the brain is an
open question. Evidence in multiple species suggests that postrhinal cortex
(POR) is critically involved. The PI will study the role of neural circuits in
the rodent POR in processing information about contexts. The guiding hypothesis
is that POR is necessary for forming representations of specific contexts and
for updating such representations when changes occur. What part of the brain
notices, for example, when an object has been moved for one place to another in
a familiar room? The PI has compelling new data showing that neurons in the POR
do, indeed, represent object-place associations, and thus have all the
information to signal changes in object location. The proposed studies will
employ state of the art techniques in behaving rats to address questions about
how context changes are represented in the brain. This work will impact memory
research and neuroscience at large in several ways. For example, these studies
will advance our understanding of the neural basis of context and visual
information processing. In addition to the scientific impact, the proposal will
contribute to increasing diversity in neuroscience by recruiting summer research
rotation students from historically black colleges including Tougaloo College in
Jackson, MS, Spelman College in Atlanta, GA, and Dillard University in New
Orleans, LA.