* 1146345
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Systematics of a pantropical diversification: the suboscine passerine birds
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Robert Moyle, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2017
* USD 150,849.00

Darwin's finches of the Gal√°pagos Islands stand as one of the most impressive
examples of evolution. After colonizing the islands, a single ancestral finch
species eventually diversified into 13 species of different sizes, bill shapes,
and ecologies. The suboscine passerine birds exhibit a similar history, but
their diversification was not limited to a small set of islands; instead they
are found throughout South America, Central America, North America, and parts of
the Old World. There are now 1,300 species that differ dramatically in body
shape and size, feeding behavior, and nest architecture. The primary goal of
this project is to use DNA sequences to reconstruct the evolutionary history of
these species, and to use this model system to investigate why the tropics are
so biologically diverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vital component of this
collaborative project between U.S. and Brazilian scientists is the research
training it will provide. With fieldwork planned in Argentina, Chile, Costa
Rica, Malaysia, Venezuela, and Viet Nam, young scientists from a diversity of
countries will be exposed not only to a diversity of natural environments but
will also interact and forge relationships with their international peers. By
working together to reconstruct perhaps the most spectacular evolutionary
radiations of birds in the world, the researchers will learn how evolution works
on a continental scale while training a new generation of scientists.