* 1146799
* EAGER: Preliminary Studies on Novel Four-Terminal Spin Transfer Torque Devices to Enable All-Magnetic Logic Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Lawrence Pileggi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Logic circuits, hence the computational electronic systems that they enable,
have to date been implemented primarily with CMOS (complementary metal oxide
semiconductor) transistors. The improvement in CMOS technology for the past
several decades has led to remarkable progress in electronic system capabilities
and complexity. As we reach the physical limits of this progress, there is a
need to explore radical new technologies and corresponding circuits that will
enable similar progress in the future. This project explores the use of magnetic
state of electrons, rather than the typical measure of total electron charge, to
define the logic states that represent the signal information. Since magnetic
state has previously been used only to construct memory or storage devices, its
use for logic circuits requires this project to explore and co-optimize novel
magnetic devices and new circuit technologies that incorporate
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through direct collaboration with
industry, the aforementioned novel devices and circuits could enable new
electronic products and markets in the semiconductor industry. Furthermore,
collaboration is planned with Entrepreneuring Youth (www.eyouthamerica.org), a
nonprofit organization in Pittsburgh that designs middle school and high school
programs that use entrepreneurial learning and business creation to engage young
people in learning. The technical aspects of this work will be used as a
platform to expand the coverage of magnetics in the middle schools, high schools
and undergraduate college curriculums.