* 1146142
* Analysis of the Regulatory Roles of Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation in phot1 Endocytosis and Receptor Desensitization
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Emmanuel Liscum, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 04/30/2016
* USD 543,688.00

The long-term goal of this research is to understand how plants perceive changes
in their light environment, transduce that information, and ultimately alter
growth and development to elicit appropriate adaptive responses. In this
project, the phototropic response, or directional growth of a plant toward or
away from light, is being used as a model response to understand the molecular
components underlying plant light responses. In particular, physiological,
genetic, biochemical, and molecular approaches will be utilized to study the
mechanism(s) by which a specific light receptor, phototropin 1, is capable of
converting a directional light signal into a physiological response in the
plant. Results from these studies will provide important insights not only into
the mechanisms of phototropic signaling but receptor-mediated signaling in
general. Because surface and intracellular receptors are utilized by all cells
(bacterial, fungal, plant, and animal) to sense environmental cues, results from
this work has a potential impact on a variety of human endeavors, from
agriculture to medicine. Though such impacts are likely long-term, direct and
tangible impact of this project on our nation will be realized through training
of young scientists (one technician, at least two PhD students, and three
undergraduate students). Moreover, the proposed outreach to local K-12 schools
will have a clear and immediate impact on science education.