* 1146074
* Demographic History Inference from Genomic Linkage and Allele Frequency Spectra
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Ryan Gutenkunst, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 551,964.00

When did human populations separate from each other? Did they go through
bottlenecks? How much migration has there been between them? Answers to these
questions about demographic history are encoded in the distribution of mutations
within and between human populations. Sequences of entire genomes from hundreds
of humans from around the world are now available, but reading the history
recorded in these genomes requires new tools. This research will develop a
computational method for learning demographic history from genomes that takes a
novel approach to simulating not only the frequencies of mutations, but also the
correlations between them. This research will also leverage existing genomic
data to infer a detailed model for the demographic history of human populations
within Africa, with a focus on Pygmy hunter-gatherers and neighboring
agriculturalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding African demographic history
is key to understanding our species, because humans originated in Africa, and
because Africa harbors more human diversity than any other region of the world.
The demographic models developed in this research will unveil history and
provide a framework for investigating human genetic adaptation to diverse
environments. The computational method developed in this research will be
applicable not only to humans, but also to other species. The method will be
freely shared over the Internet, providing a powerful new tool for the
population genomics community. In addition, the research will support and
provide interdisciplinary training for a postdoctoral scientist, a graduate
student, and two undergraduate students.