* 1146139
* The evolution of honest communication: the physiological consequences of social costs
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Elizabeth Tibbetts, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 02/29/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The honesty of animal communication systems is a central issue in behavioral
biology. What prevents weak, low quality individuals from "cheating" by
signaling that they are strong? The general answer is that quality signals are
costly and signaling a high level of quality is relatively more costly for low
quality than high quality individuals. This project will take a new perspective
on the factors that maintain signal honesty by testing the interplay between two
well-known costs: aggressive social costs and physiological costs. The short and
long term consequences of signal inaccuracy will be tested via behavioral
observation and measurement of endocrine titers in Polistes dominulus paper
wasps. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Although much progress has
been made toward understanding the honesty of animal communication systems, many
well-known ornaments lack clear costs. Further, there are theoretical and
empirical challenges associated with understanding how aggressive social costs
maintain signal honesty over evolutionary time. Our proposal will extend and re-
define current hypotheses by testing the physiological consequences of social
punishment. As such, it will address many of the challenges associated with
understanding social costs and broaden the applicability of this hypothesis to
diverse systems. Overall, understanding the dynamic feedbacks between physiology
and social costs should increase understanding of the reliability of animal
communication systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Training of
undergraduate students will be a major component of the project, as this
research is effective at capturing student interest and the techniques are
accessible to aspiring researchers. Additional educational activities will
include participation in public science education programs and visits to local
schools.