* 1146383
* The genetic basis and adaptive significance of pleiotropy: FLC-regulated germination and flowering
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Kathleen Donohue, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,095,238.00

"Phenology", the timing of biological events such as germination and flowering,
is one of the most important responses of plants to climate change, and it has
been shown to influence performance and local extinctions. Different life stages
must respond appropriately to seasonal environmental cues to match their
development with the corresponding season. This project seeks to understand how
the timing of two crucial phenological events, "germination and flowering" can
adapt to seasonal variation even though they share a common genetic basis and
must respond differently to similar seasonal environmental cues.&lt;br/&gt;
Pleiotropy occurs when one gene controls more than one trait. Understanding how
multiple traits can adapt when they are controlled by the same genes is a major
challenge. Genes in a well known flowering pathway in Arabidopsis thaliana have
recently been found to also regulate germination, thereby providing a powerful
research system for investigating the genetic basis and adaptive significance of
pleiotropy. The major regulator of flowering, FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), operates
in a pathway that is one of the best characterized molecular pathways of an
adaptively significant trait in plants, and it has become a classic system in
ecological genetics. It was recently found that the immediate downstream
elements in the FLC-flowering pathway also control the germination behavior of
seeds, and that natural variation in FLC is associated with natural variation in
temperature-dependent germination. This project aims to characterize pleiotropic
effects of FLC and other elements in its pathway on both germination and
flowering phenology, identify sources of natural variation in FLC-mediated
pathways, and measure the fitness consequences of FLC (and FLC-pathway)
variation operating through germination and flowering.&lt;br/&gt; This research
explores the genetic basis of phenology and environmental cuing. As such, the
project will provide basic information on how plants respond to environmental
change. The project will also generate genomic data and genetic material that
will be made available to the research community through The Arabidopsis
Information Resource. This project will provide career opportunities and
training in molecular genetics and ecological genetics to a postdoc, a graduate
student, a research assistant, several undergraduates, and high school students.
An educational module will be designed also so that students can explore how
genetic pathways influence organismal responses to environmental change.