* 1146933
* A butterfly for all seasons: physiological mechanisms underlying environmentally induced morphologies and behaviors in Bicyclus anynana
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Jeffrey Townsend, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 07/31/2015
* USD 606,964.00

Sexual behavior and ornaments used to attract the opposite sex are varied across
the animal kingdom. Early exposure to certain environments can switch the
developmental program and alter the outcome of these adult sexual ornaments and
behaviors within a species. A remaining scientific mystery is how these cues
from the outside environment are translated to the inside of the animal.
Hormones, especially those produced by the gonads, play a crucial function in
changing the development of brains, sexual ornaments and behaviors. However,
hormones are only half the story. Hormones reach every cell in the body, but the
developmental systems are only sensitive to hormones if they express hormone
receptors to bind with the hormones into active complexes. Thus, the dynamics
between hormones and hormone receptors can regulate when and how developmental
trajectories change. This proposal aims to discover how these hormone signaling
systems produce different sexual behaviors and ornaments in response to changes
in the environment. The work will be carried out in the emerging model system,
the squinting bush brown butterfly, Bicyclus anynana. This species displays a
sex role reversal in courtship, mate preference and sexual ornaments depending
on the external temperature the young insect
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this work will influence the
many researchers interested in linking developmental dynamics to behavior and
morphology thereby pushing forward our understanding of organisms as integrated
systems. The project will involve training a post-doctoral researcher, a
graduate student, and undergraduates in integrating cross-disciplinary
techniques (biology, chemistry, and physics) into an evolutionary framework for
understanding organisms as complex systems across their development. Current
collaborators include members of the Yale Physics Department and the Medical
School. To reach beyond the academy, the project will include development of an
interactive educational module using a digital photo database to demonstrate the
role of sexual selection and butterfly wing pattern evolution and to crowd
source new discoveries in the evolution of sexual signals and butterfly wing
patterns. This approach will be developed with the assistance of Yale computer
science undergraduates and beta tested with the Peabody Museum's "Evolutions"
science outreach program to minority high school students before being released
more widely to high school educators and their students.