* 1146119
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Phylogenetic and phytochemical cascades in the evolution of tropical diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* James Whitfield, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2016
* USD 220,933.00

A central goal of modern biology is to understand the origin and maintenance of
biodiversity. In particular, understanding the enormous diversity of tropical
communities has been a serious challenge. The research group addresses this
challenge by using a well-studied tropical system composed of plants, specialist
caterpillars feeding exclusively on this group of plants, and a group of
specialist wasps that attack the caterpillars. The diversity within each of
these groups is enormous (&gt;2,000 species), and the goal for this project is
to better understand the evolution of biodiversity by testing specific
hypotheses addressing patterns of plant chemical evolution and the role of plant
chemistry in biodiversity. To address these hypotheses, the collaborative group
consists of two synthetic chemists to elucidate the plant chemistry, one
molecular ecologist to reconstruct the evolutionary history of each group, three
taxonomists to describe and identify organisms, and two chemical ecologists to
describe the interaction between each group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hypothesis that the evolution of one organismal group (i.e. plants) can affect
the evolution of another interacting group (i.e. caterpillars) is not a new
idea; however, the approach to address this hypothesis is novel, as they focus
on multiple feeding groups (plants, caterpillars, wasps), which has rarely been
undertaken. In addition, the diverse collaborative team allows the team to
thoroughly explore all aspects of this system to yield high explanatory power
for the question addressed. Finally, understanding the evolution of biodiversity
will help with conservation efforts to maintain species rich ecosystems so that
the interactions that give structure to ecosystems remain intact.