* 1146758
* Ontogeny of Endothermy's Cellular Furnace
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Edward Dzialowski, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 787,915.00

This project investigates the development of endothermy - the ability to
maintain a high, internally regulated, and constant body temperature ? in birds
that span a range of functional maturity at hatching. All vertebrate embryos are
ectothermic, for which metabolic rate and body temperature decrease as ambient
temperature decreases. The "thermostat" and cellular "furnace" of ectothermic
stages are unable to maintain a high constant body temperature without an
external heat source. Endothermy develops in birds as they mature from an embryo
to a free-living hatchling. An endothermic phenotype matures rapidly in
precocial birds that hatch with feathers and quickly develop a high basal
metabolic rate. In contrast, the endothermic phenotype develops gradually in
altricial birds that hatch featherless, with little motor control, and limited
metabolic capacity. The metabolic transition from ectothermy to endothermy has
been well documented at the whole animal level, but the biochemical and cellular
basis governing this transition remain unclear. Research proposed here will
elucidate the physiological ontogeny of endothermy in birds by 1) correlating
organism level physiology with cellular level physiology of ATP production and
consumption in tissues serving as the cellular furnace and 2) manipulating
levels of thyroid hormones to examine their role in regulating this metabolic
conversion. The research questions will be addressed using a comparative
approach that focuses on precocial and altricial species that develop endothermy
at different rates post-hatching and compares them with out-group species that
remain ectotherms throughout life. Experimentally, thyroid hormone levels will
be manipulated in precocial and altricial species to determine its regulatory
role in this energetic metamorphosis. Elucidating the developmental trajectories
of whole animal metabolism, mitochondria function, and cellular processes and
the role of thyroid hormones associated with attaining endothermy will provide a
major new interpretation of important developmental events, leading to a better
understanding of the evolution of endothermy. This project features
collaboration of labs at University of North Texas, Kalamazoo College, and North
Dakota State University. The research project will include educational and
research training for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students.