* 1146056
* How does the gastrovascular system in perforate and imperforate corals affect physiological response to environmental stress?
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Mark Patterson, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2014
* USD 552,806.00

Coral reefs are under siege from global environmental stresses including
increased sea surface temperature and ocean acidification. But we still poorly
understand how corals react to these stresses. We need to understand the stress
response if we are to effectively plan conservation efforts to save corals on
our changing planet, including the location and design of marine protected
areas. Corals are colonial organisms, composed of repeating units (polyps) all
connected in a colony. Each polyp has a central, gastrovascular cavity that is
directly involved in many physiological functions, such as digestion and gas
exchange. Scientists have known for a long time that there are two types of
colony ?blueprints? for coral species: one where the gastrovascular cavities of
all of the individual polyps in a colony are connected by a plumbing system that
is open all the time (perforate), and another type (imperforate) in which the
gastrovascular cavities of only adjacent polyps are connected by a tiny plumbing
system that is only open when the polyps are expanded. Thus, perforate coral
species have the potential to share nutrition continuously between all polyps in
the colony because the internal plumbing connections function like a primitive
circulatory system, with cilia driving flow inside these tiny pipes. The spatial
and temporal extent of circulation in imperforate species is more limited. This
research will be the first systematic examination of how perforate and
imperforate corals respond to environmental stress. The initial experiments will
use temperature stress because global warming is causing increasing coral
mortality through more frequent coral bleaching events. The researchers have
formulated a mathematical model patterned after an electrical network (where
each node on the network is a single polyp) that predicts how dissolved oxygen
and pH (a measure of acidity that affects photosynthesis, respiration, and
calcification) will vary inside and around a coral colony. The predictions of
the physiological model will be tested for colonies ranging in size from two
polyps to thousands. Understanding how tiny young colonies react to thermal
stress is important because continued growth of healthy reefs requires that
juvenile colonies prosper and grow, which may not happen above certain threshold
temperatures. The performance of large colonies is important to understand, as
they produce a disproportionate share of coral larvae. The research will use
sophisticated sensors and techniques, some of them borrowed from human medicine.
The researchers will make measurements of a number of variables inside the
gastrovascular system of individual polyps, and over the surface of the colony,
to quantify physiological functions under normal and stressful temperatures.
They will also take tissue samples from the polyps to measure heat shock
proteins, protective compounds made by all life forms on Earth when under
stress. This research will produce a tested general predictive model that should
be usable to predict physiological response to stress in almost every coral
species. This project will involve undergraduate and graduate students, and a
postdoctoral scholar, some of whom are from groups underrepresented in science.
There will also be significant K-12 educational efforts including classroom
visits, public demonstrations, and lesson plans that will be available on the
award-winning VIMS Bridge web site. There is also the possibility that new
technology will be developed during the research that will be useful to
physiologists who work with marine organisms.