* 1146822
* Multistable representations in the hippocampus and related neural systems
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Andre Fenton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Brains represent information in the patterns of electrical discharge that are
distributed across vast networks of brain cells to signal what we are
experiencing, planning and thinking. Traces of this activity are stored and
reactivated during diverse mental phenomena including perception, learning,
recollection, planning and thought. It is unknown how the brain encodes and
reads the information out of this dynamic activity and how different streams of
information are coordinated in the electrical discharge patterns. In the effort
to understand the fundamental neural code, we will record electrical activity
within two networks of brain cells from freely moving rats that are using two
streams of information to locate themselves on a rotating carousel-like arena.
The activity in one network of cells, the hippocampus, alternates between
representing the rat's position in the stable room and the position on the
rotating floor. Electrical activity in a second related network, the medial
entorhinal cortex, may or may not fluctuate between representing the two spatial
frameworks of position information. To identify the rules of how information is
coded and exchanged between brain networks, we will investigate how the activity
in the hippocampus and the medial entorhinal cortex is organized and coordinated
to signal the rat's location. In additional to scientific training, student
members of the laboratory will receive professional training in communicating
science to a lay audience. Across the year, each lab member will pay several
visits to a high school science class to communicate the merits and progress of
their research effort. Thus, this project will train the next generation of
scientists in cutting-edge research and how to be effective communicators and
provide a rare opportunity for high school students to learn about scientific
research as a process of enquiry and creative problem solving.