* 1146449
* Digging deeper: in situ metabolic analysis of soil C cycling processes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 594,508.00

Healthy soils are essential for maintaining productive natural and agricultural
landscapes. Decomposition of dead plant, animal, and microbial materials is a
fundamental process that influences ecosystem productivity, the rate of soil
erosion, regional hydrology, and the exchange of greenhouse gases with the
atmosphere. Because the microbial community plays a key role in decomposition
and mineralization, improving the ability to study the microbial processes in
soils is a major step towards increased understanding of this essential
ecosystem function. The efficiency with which microorganisms process organic
carbon compounds for energy production and biosynthesis, or return carbon back
to the atmosphere as CO2, is an essential but poorly understood aspect of soil
ecology. A change in the carbon use efficiency --- the fraction of substrate
used for the production of new microbial biomass in response to increased
temperatures or litter input --- will have immediate consequences for soil
carbon content, CO2 production, and nutrient cycling. This project will examine
changes in the fundamental processes of microbial metabolism from which carbon
use efficiency, energy production, and biosynthesis can be calculated. The
investigators will use a method that consists of stable isotope labeling of
specific C-atoms in various microbial substrates under different conditions of
temperature, carbon and nitrogen availability. This study will make use of an
existing long-term climate change experiment near Flagstaff, Arizona.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach used in this study can be directly applied to
other microbial communities, for example communities in marine and freshwater
ecosystems and sediments, gastrointestinal communities, communities in
environments such as hot springs, and in waste-water treatment plants. Results
from this study will improve the representation of soil carbon dynamics in
ecosystem models that are used to understand the role of soil processes in the
global carbon cycle under current and future climates. This study will also
provide opportunities for one graduate student and several undergraduate
students to become familiar with state-of-the-art stable isotope techniques,
molecular characterization of microbial communities, and interpretation of
biochemical processes in soil ecosystems. Finally, results will be incorporated
into an undergraduate ecology and ecosystem science curriculum.