* 1146949
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Development: Building A Community Resource for Neuroscientists
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Maryann Martone, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2016
* USD 706,608.00

The University of California-San Diego and Yale University are awarded
collaborative grants to develop a Neuroscience Gateway (NSG) that will
facilitate access and use of high performance computing (HPC) resources by
neuroscientists. Computational modeling of cells and networks has become an
essential part of neuroscience research, and investigators are using models to
address problems of ever increasing complexity, e.g. large scale network models
and optimization or exploration of high dimensional parameter spaces. The NSG
will catalyze such research by lowering or eliminating the administrative and
technical barriers that currently make it difficult for investigators to use HPC
resources. It will offer computer time to neuroscience users through an
administratively and technologically streamlined process with a simple web
portal-based environment for uploading models, specifying HPC job parameters,
querying running job status and receiving job completion notices, and retrieving
and storing output data. The URL of the NSG portal is http://www.nsgportal.org.
It will also provide a community forum for neuroscientists to collaborate and
share data. The NSG architecture will transparently distribute user jobs to
appropriate HPC resources provided by NSF supercomputer centers. The NSG team
will collaborate with developers of neural simulation software to optimally
install, test, and benchmark these applications on HPC machines, and allow
developers to test new versions before release. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have a transformative impact by enabling access by members of the
computational neuroscience community to HPC resources for research and
instruction involving compute-intensive simulations (typically large neural
networks). Many of these investigators and students would otherwise find it very
difficult, if not impossible, to implement and study models that press or exceed
the storage and speed capabilities that are under their direct control.
Computational modeling offers opportunities for students and researchers at
institutions with limited resources for wet lab or experimental infrastructure
to participate in leading edge science. Projects such as this, which facilitate
access to HPC resources, democratize participation in science by mitigating the
financial barriers to research infrastructure. The NSG will enable students and
researchers, who lack access to HPC resources and are thus at a significant
disadvantage compared to very few who have it, by removing the barriers for
progress for many including historically underrepresented groups. The PIs of
this project will target the promotion of the NSG to underrepresented minority
scientists and minority serving institutions through active participation in
summer training academies and a network of previously mentored female and
minority students, some now employed at minority serving institutions.