* 1146520
* A phylogenetic approach to understanding the evolution of hybrid viability loci in Tigriopus californicus
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Suzanne Edmands, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2014
* USD 173,000.00

The copepod Tigriopus californicus is an emerging model system for studies of
speciation and resistance to environmental stress. Such work will be greatly
improved by a better understanding of the evolutionary relationships among T.
californicus populations. The current study will construct an evolutionary tree
(phylogeny) of 20 populations using DNA sequence from 12 genes. A number of
different methods will be used to determine the best evolutionary tree for the
combined dataset, including analyses of the level of agreement among different
genes. Results will be used to test the null hypothesis that genes evolved at
equal rates, with the expectation that nuclear genes (chromosomal genes
inherited from both parents) evolved more slowly than mitochondrial genes (genes
on a separate organelle inherited only from the mother). The completed phylogeny
will provide an evolutionary framework for future planned studies of how gene
conflicts accumulate when isolated populations diverge from each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA sequence data will be deposited in public
databases, thereby increasing genomic resources for copepods, one of the most
abundant groups of multicellular animals on the planet. Beyond its relevance to
copepods, the research will contribute to the broader issue of the rate of
evolutionary change in mitochondrial vs. nuclear genes. The work will directly
fund research by both graduate and undergraduate students. Funds will also be
used to support a new collaboration between the Edmands Lab and the Aquarium of
the Pacific aimed at enhancing public understanding of issues involving
evolution in marine environments.