* 1146797
* Virus-vector interactions mediating the whitefly transmission of foregut-borne viruses
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2020
* Thomas Smith, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2020
* USD 540,000.00

The epidemiological spread of many insect transmitted plant viruses involves
molecular interactions between the virus and a population of cells in the insect
host (vector). For successful interactions and virus transmission to occur,
specific virus encoded proteins are critical determinants. Virus retention sites
are also essential factors and their specific locations within the insect vary
among different insect-plant virus systems. The overall HYPOTHESIS to be
evaluated is that transmission of foregut-borne viruses, such as the whitefly
transmitted viruses in the genus Crinivirus, is mediated by specific virus
capsid component(s) and specific retention sites within the foregut of the
insects. &lt;br/&gt; A novel immunofluorescent localization assay as well as
biochemical and molecular approaches will be used to address the following
SPECIFIC AIMS: 1) determine if a capsid component, the minor coat protein (CPm),
of the crinivirus Lettuce infectious yellows virus (LIYV) can block the specific
retention and transmission of LIYV, 2) determine the specific vector retention
sites of the crinivirus Lettuce chlorosis virus (LCV), 3) determine if LIYV and
LCV co-localize to similar sites in their common whitefly vector, 4) identify,
through the use of engineered mutants, the molecular determinants of crinivirus
retention and transmission, 5) determine the atomic structure of the LIYV CPm to
precisely map the amino acid determinants involved in mediating virus retention
and transmission. &lt;br/&gt;Results emanating from this project will provide
insights into mechanisms underlying the whitefly transmission of criniviruses,
and contribute to a broader understanding of virus-vector interactions. This
will facilitate the design of blocking agents aimed at controlling the spread of
viruses in the future.&lt;br/&gt; BROADER IMPACTS: The training opportunities
made available through this project will enable trainees of different cultural
and socio-economic backgrounds to benefit from the cross-disciplinary and
technological/scientific expertise provided by the participating laboratories,
as well as from NSF-affiliated programs, such as the CAMP Project, established
at and supported by UC Riverside.