* 1146597
* The role of carbonic anhydrase in photosynthesis in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* James Moroney, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

This project will investigate whether carbonic anhydrase (CA), an enzyme that
catalyzes the interconversion of CO2 and HCO3-, facilitates CO2 fixation in
plants that perform C3 photosynthesis. Moroney et al. (2001) Plant, Cell
Environ. 24: 141 reported that Arabidopsis possesses at least 14 CA genes.
Preliminary results showed that a double mutant missing two cytosolic CAs,
&amp;#946;CA2 and &amp;#946;CA3, exhibited reduced growth and a reduced affinity
for CO2 indicating these CAs play an integral role in CO2 fixation. The overall
goal of this project is to determine the roles and importance of different CA
enzymes for photosynthesis in C3 plants. The work will involve a molecular
characterization of leaf CAs in Arabidopsis and a reverse genetics approach to
obtain knockout Arabidopsis plants missing one or more CA isoforms. Using the
knock-out plants, the physiological roles of the specific CA isoforms will be
determined by measuring gas exchange, mesophyll conductance, and isotopic
discrimination in whole plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, Zhu et al.
(2010) Ann Rev. Plant Biol. 61: 235 pointed out that a significant limitation to
CO2 fixation in C3 plants is the resistances to the diffusion of CO2 from
outside mesophyll cells to chloroplasts. This research project will increase our
understanding of the factors that affect CO2 fixation allowing scientists to
better formulate strategies to improve CO2 delivery and crop yield particularly
in the face of increasing atmospheric CO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will be an important component in the education of graduate and undergraduate
students. At LSU, there are many programs to foster participation of a diverse
group of students in hands-on research, providing a framework for these students
to go on to successful careers in industry, medicine and academics.