* 1146457
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Presentational Focus in Heritage and Monolingual Spanish
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Bradley Hoot, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2013
* USD 7,584.00

Focused constituents receive prominence in some overt way, such as main sentence
stress or a change in word order. The complex interplay of prosody, syntax, and
context involved in realizing focus has been the subject of a considerable
amount of research in modern linguistics, because it touches on important issues
concerning the relationship between linguistic subsystems. The role of the
different strategies for focus marking varies from language to language. Some
languages primarily use word order (e.g. Czech, Hungarian, Spanish) while other
languages primarily use stress (e.g. English), though both stress and word order
may play a role in a given language. This opens up two research agendas: (i) how
to model this variation from a universalist perspective, and (ii) what
strategies end up being represented in the grammars of bilingual speakers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this dissertation research is to investigate
presentational focus in the Spanish of monolingual Spanish speakers as compared
to US-born Spanish/English bilinguals, commonly called heritage speakers of
Spanish. Spanish and English realize focus in different ways. English generally
shifts the main sentence stress to the focused constituent in situ, whereas
Spanish employs word order alterations to make the focused constitutent
sentence-final, where it receives main stress. Since the grammars of heritage
speakers are different than those of monolinguals, these Spanish/English
bilinguals may use different strategies to realize focus in Spanish than do
monolingual speakers. Psycholinguistic experiments will be conducted to explore
differences between the bilingual and monolingual groups, with the goal of
developing a model of their grammatical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will not only shed light on the theoretical issues surrounding the
realization of the focus of the sentence but also increase our understanding of
the linguistic systems of bilingual individuals. The results of this research
may eventually have an impact on foreign language and bilingual education. This
project will also support the graduate training of a promising scientist.