* 1146928
* Investigations on the Mechanism of Development of a Novel Form of Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Amit Dhingra, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 441,498.00

Intellectual Merit: Photosynthesis, which harvests solar energy and assimilates
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), represents the "engine" of life. Constraints
on photosynthesis and plant growth can occur in most land plants where access to
CO2 becomes limiting under environmental stress (drought, high temperature,
saline soils). Some plants evolved a metabolic pump (called C4) which actively
accumulates CO2, conferring an advantage, especially under extreme environments.
Prior to the 2001 discovery of species which perform C4 in individual
photosynthetic cells, the paradigm for C4 plants was a requirement for
cooperative function of two cell types. In contrast, the single-cell C4 species,
which have a unique form of carbon acquisition, contain photosynthetic cells
with two types of chloroplasts in separate compartments, one supporting the
capture of atmospheric CO2, the other functioning in its assimilation into
organic matter. Problems to be investigated in this project are identification
and characterization of genes and proteins required for the development and
function of single-cell C4 photosynthesis. This involves identification of
differences in protein composition of the two types of chloroplasts, the
nuclear-encoded photosynthetic genes responsible for their synthesis, and the
genetic control of chloroplast differentiation. The approach will include use of
molecular and microscopic techniques to analyze and identify the products of
gene expression leading to development of this form of C4. This project is
expected to gain insights into an exceptional mechanism of photosynthesis, and
into regulation of biochemical differentiation in cell biology. The research
project will also involve an international collaboration with Dr. S. Offermann
of Hannover University in Germany, which is sponsored by the International
Office of Science and Engineering. This collaboration will provide an
international learning experience for the graduate students and will extend the
expertise of the US lab. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research is expected to
contribute new insights that will impact education, future research on
photosynthesis, and mechanisms of adaptations in plants. There are potential
applications for solving growing global limitations on bio-resources. The
single-cell mechanism is an attractive model for developing crops, e.g. rice,
with improved productivity, especially under environmental stress.