* 1146621
* A Mutant Resource to Transform Reverse Genetics in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2017
* USD 3,094,131.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will generate the first genome-wide collection
of mutants in the single-celled green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. At least
one mutant will be isolated for nearly every nuclear gene. Individual clones, as
well as the complete library, will be distributed to the scientific community
through the Chlamydomonas Resource Center. The mutant library will allow for the
isolation and study of mutants in nearly all genes required for photosynthesis
in green algae and plants. Furthermore, the library will also yield mutants in
many highly conserved plant genes with putative roles in protein maturation and
degradation, signaling, small molecule transport, redox regulation, lipid
metabolism, and trace metal homeostasis. More broadly, half of the most widely
conserved green plant genes remain completely uncharacterized. This resource
will yield mutants in nearly all of these genes, and the study of these mutants
will likely reveal entirely new pathways whose critical functions in plant
biology are still not appreciated. This resource will also enable breakthroughs
in other fundamental processes, including the green algal carbon concentrating
mechanism, phototaxis, and the assembly and function of eukaryotic
flagella.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Photosynthetic organisms provide
energy, oxygen and organic building blocks for nearly all of the life on Earth.
Plants are the origin of most of our food and many of our basic materials, and
have important potential as a source of renewable energy and industrial
chemicals. This mutant resource will lead to advances in our understanding of
the basic mechanisms of plant biology, which will enable future increases in
crop yields, the development of next-generation biofuels, and more informed
policy decisions as human activities increasingly impact our environment. This
resource will dramatically expand our knowledge of green algae, which will
facilitate efforts to engineer these organisms for the large-scale production of
recombinant proteins and renewable fuels, and for bioremediation. Finally, use
of this resource will provide countless opportunities for training early-stage
biologists in genetics and the application of high-throughput, genome-wide
approaches to basic plant biology questions.