* 1147838
* Reconfigurable Antenna-based Enhancement of Dynamic Spectrum Access Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 340,000.00

While there is a tremendous amount of research in the algorithmic and protocol
aspects of cognitive radios, very little attention is given to the antennas used
in cognitive links. This project focuses on the enhancement of cognitive dynamic
spectrum access (DSA) techniques with electrically reconfigurable antennas that
are capable of dynamically adjusting their radiation patterns and operating
frequency in response to the needs of overlying communication link and network.
Based upon the results of field testing, new reconfigurable antennas are being
designed that provide not only flexibility in radiation pattern, but also
frequency agility. The design and performance of the cross?layer control stack
is being evaluated for identification of the optimal control policy for
secondary radios seeking to maximize their throughput. With the additional
support of our collaborators in Finland, the Drexel SDC Testbed is being
extended to provide real-time implementations of the proposed enhanced DSA
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is enabled through the
reconfigurable leaky wave metamaterial antenna technology, developed at Drexel
University. The highly adaptive frequency agility and spatial filtering
capabilities of this antenna will be used to develop new DSA algorithms to
leverage these degrees of freedom. Enhanced performance will be demonstrated in
terms of the user capacity of the cognitive radio network and increased
throughput of secondary cognitive radio users. These antennas and control
algorithms will be field tested and demonstrated using a FGPA-based SDR platform
built to evaluate reconfigurable antenna-enhanced DSA algorithms.