* 1147265
* Polarization of Plant Cell Division by Receptor-Like Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Laurie Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* philip becraft
* 05/31/2016
* USD 632,872.00

Polarized (asymmetric) cell divisions produce cells with different properties
and fates, as well as generate cellular diversity during the development of
plants and other eukaryotes. However, very little is known about molecular
mechanisms underlying polarized cell division in plants. We previously
discovered a pair of receptor-like proteins, PAN1 and PAN2, that work together
to polarize the asymmetric divisions producing subsidiary cells of stomatal
complexes in the maize leaf epidermis, which regulate the exchange of oxygen,
carbon dioxide, and water between the leaf and surrounding air. In this project,
we will build on our earlier findings using tools of genetics, microscopy,
proteomics, and biochemistry to advance our understanding of how PAN receptors
promote the polarization of subsidiary mother cell divisions. Specifically, we
will determine where PAN2 protein acts in the cell, elucidate the connection
between PANs and other known regulators of cell polarity, analyze the role of
PANs in the spatial regulation of secretion and/or endocytosis, and identify
other proteins that PANs interact with to promote division polarity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data generated by this project will be made available to
the public through publications and publicly accessible websites, accessible via
http://www.biology.ucsd.edu/labs/smith/; biological materials will be maintained
by the principal investigator and distributed upon request. In addition to
elucidating processes of fundamental importance for plant development, this
project will also positively impact science education. A postdoctoral fellow,
two graduate students, and multiple undergraduates will receive interdisplinary
training through participation in this project. In addition, a week-long plant
genomics laboratory module addressing California Life Sciences Standards for 7th
grade will be implemented each year of the project period in two central San
Diego public middle schools: Grant and Roosevelt. Participation in the module
will benefit about 350 7th graders per year at these two schools, most of whom
are underrepresented minority students at Roosevelt, where the minority
enrollment is 80%.