* 1147335
* Theory and computation for self-assembly in soft matter
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* George Schatz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2016
* USD 432,318.00

George Schatz of Northwestern University is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Method program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
theory and computational methods for modeling the self-assembly of large
assemblies of molecules into functional nanostructures. The proposed work builds
on an active program that the PI maintains in this field concerning soft
materials that are relevant to mechanical, electrical and optical devices, and
for biomedical applications. The methods span the range from brute force
molecular dynamics methods, to accelerated and coarse-grained methods, to simple
statistical mechanical models, and to multiscale methods that couple molecular
and continuum approaches. These are combined with methods for templating,
seeding and mechanical control of assembly to develop approaches that are either
significantly more efficient than can otherwise be obtained or which provide
better insights into the features that drive assembly. Modeling of on-going
experiments by collaborators will include (1) seeded methods to accelerate
assembly of peptide amphiphiles into micelles and more complex structures that
are of use in wound healing applications; (2) a multiscale method applied to a
liposome (treated by continuum mechanics) coated with a cross-linked polymer
(treated by molecular dynamics) to study coating formation and bursting in drug
delivery applications; (3) templated approaches for investigating the mechanism
for accelerated assembly in nanografting self-assembled monolayers on Au(111)
surfaces as well as accelerated DNA hybridization on gold nanoparticles
surfaces; and (4) mechanically guided self-assembly for DNA linking of
nanoparticles or molecules into aggregated structures, investigating mechanistic
information and enabling studies of the effects on the assembly process of
salts, multiply charged cations, nonaqueous solvents, and possibly ?pioneer?
molecules that facilitate hydrogen bond formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is concerned with computational modeling of the organized assembly of
thousands of molecules into larger structures (fibers, surface coatings, gel-
like materials) that have useful biological and materials functions, including
applications to wound healing, to drug delivery, to therapeutics and
diagnostics. The work involves the development of new computational methods
which can predict what structures will form, how these structures vary with
variations in the preparation conditions, and the biological functions of these
structures. The proposed research projects will be pursued by undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students, and they will receive training in the theory
and methods being used, and in the fabrication and applications of the materials
being developed. Outreach activities include: (1) Software dissemination,
particularly using the www.nanohub.org site where access to functioning versions
of the codes is available for free, and includes documentation and examples; (2)
The development of teaching materials related to self-assembly that are used in
General Chemistry courses, both lectures and laboratories; (3) Use of self-
assembly research materials in outreach at predominantly minority local schools
through a chemistry organization (Phi Lambda Upsilon); (4) Courses and outreach
activities related to publication ethics; (5) Summer REU projects, including
minority students, (6) Activities associated with the Journal of Physical
Chemistry which relate to self-assembly research; (7) Presentations to
audiences, including the general public, at major scientific meetings and in
visits to universities and laboratories; (8) Advising and mentoring graduate
students and postdocs, including minorities and females.