* 1147606
* EAGER: : Best Practices and Models for Sustainability for Robust Cyberinfrastructure Software
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Von Welch, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 296,637.00

The NSF Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation (SI2) program
solicitation states that software is "central to NSF's vision of a
Cyberinfrastructure Framework for 21st Century Science and Engineering (CIF21),"
and goes on to emphasize that in general software is essential to computational
and data-enabled science. Indeed, the SI2 program is one vehicle by which the
NSF hopes to enable sustained and well supported software providing services and
functionality needed by the US science and engineering community. This yearlong
study of cyberinfrastructure projects will identify best practices in the
development, deployment, and support of robust cyberinfrastructure software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a combination of detailed case studies and surveys
of software producers and users, the investigators will identify best practices
for the process of moving software from a "discovery" process to well maintained
and sustainable infrastructure for 21st century science and engineering,
focusing in particular on the following: Given a piece of software that provides
interesting capabilities and a community that wants to use (and possibly
contribute to the further development of) that software, what steps are
necessary to transform that software from "interesting tool" to "robust and
widely used element of national infrastructure, contributing to the NSF vision
for CIF21" - ands then support and maintain that tool sustainably? This research
will lead to greater availability of widely usable software tools and curriculum
materials, increasing the quality of education in computer science,
computational science, and STEM disciplines.