* 1147032
* Delineating the Roles of Dynamin-Related Proteins DRP2A and DRP2B in Regulating Plant Innate Immune Responses against Bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Antje Heese, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2016
* USD 510,001.00

Higher organisms have developed effective mechanisms to protect themselves
against microbial infection. Host defense responses must be tightly regulated:
if hosts are unable to induce defenses, microbes take hold of them. If responses
are continuously activated, host cells divert valuable resources from growth to
defense resulting in host growth penalty. Some eukaryotic cells use ligand-
induced endocytosis as a means for down-regulating receptor concentration from
the cell surface to desensitize cells to stimuli and attenuate signaling
responses. In this project, the investigator uses the FLS2/flagellin system to
delineate roles of endocytosis in regulating immunity against bacteria.
FLAGELLIN SENSITIVE 2 (FLS2) is the plant cell surface receptor that perceives
bacterial flagellin to initiate defense signaling. FLS2 is the only plant immune
receptor known to undergo ligand-induced endocytosis. Roles of FLS2 endocytosis
in regulating responses and immunity, however, remain unknown. The investigator
has identified the vesicular trafficking proteins Dynamin-Related Protein DRP2A
and DRP2B as novel positive regulators of basal resistance against the bacteria
Pseudomonas syringae. In this project, the investigator uses a combination of
biochemical, live-cell imaging, proteomics, pathology and genetics approaches to
address roles of DRP2s in regulating defense signaling, FLS2 endocytosis and
immunity against bacteria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to enhancing the
knowledge of DRP2 functions in cellular processes, this project could lead to
novel strategies for enhancing innate immunity in plants and contributing to
improved food, fiber, and biofuel production. The project also provides training
opportunities for a postdoctoral researcher, graduate and undergraduate
students. Furthermore, the investigator's group participates in outreach efforts
by developing and presenting hands-on biological experiments to K-5 elementary
school students. Undergraduate and elementary students will learn to gather,
analyze, and interpret data. Society will profit from scientifically literate
citizens with intellectual background crucial in making educated decisions about
applications for science in their everyday lives.