* 1147073
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Innovation: Integrative Analysis of the Anatomic and Genetic Landscapes in the Mouse Brain
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Patric Lundberg, Eastern Virginia Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2015
* USD 42,014.00

Grants are awarded to Old Dominion University and to Eastern Virginia Medical
School in order to develop novel computational methods for analyzing the Allen
Brain Atlas data set, which contains the most comprehensive collection of
genome-scale, cellular-resolution, three-dimensional gene expression patterns of
the mouse brain. Global analyses of these data would elucidate the anatomic and
genetic landscapes of the mammalian brain, leading ultimately to the
understanding of brain functional circuitry. This project will develop a class
of novel computational methods for integrative analysis of the anatomic and
genetic landscapes in the mouse brain. To enable genome-wide global computation,
this project will investigate hierarchical models for incorporating genome-wide
and brain-wide structures. Additionally, tensor computation techniques will be
developed for data compression and visualization. Insights obtained through the
application of advanced computational methods as proposed here have the
potential to enable and accelerate biological insights and generate
experimentally testable hypotheses. In particular, this project is expected to
enable significant progress in the areas of (1) understanding the structure and
development of the mammalian brain through the multidimensional analysis of
genetic networks that can be identified through systems-level analysis of gene
expression, (2) understanding molecular pathways that are active and contribute
to the function of the mammalian brain, and (3) understanding how disruptions of
genes and thus molecular pathways might contribute to pathologies of mouse and
ultimately human brains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will play an integral
part in educating and training students. The Allen Brain Atlas resources have
been integrated into undergraduate and graduate curricula as appealing
pedagogical tools. This project will go beyond the raw data by extracting new
knowledge from them, thereby significantly enriching current curricula and
catalyzing new course development. The anatomic and genetic connectivity maps
will be used as innovative pedagogical tools, where they offer visually
appealing aids and examples for teaching a variety of topics and provide
opportunities for in silico laboratory exercises. The educational activities
will leverage Old Dominion University's top-class distance learning program
whose sites are specifically designed to serve people with limited educational
resources. For more information please visit the project website at
http://compbio.cs.odu.edu/NSF-ABI/.