* 1147759
* Collaborative Research: Remote Sensing of Electron Density Using Auroral Radio Emissions
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Peter Yoon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 07/31/2016
* USD 40,000.00

This project will investigate the role of radio waves in the electromagnetic
coupling of the magnetosphere to the ionosphere. In particular it will examine
auroral hiss and medium frequency bursts (MFB), which appear in the auroral
zones as a prompt response to the onset of a magnetic substorm. In addition to
the association with substorm onset, auroral radio emissions are associated with
a number of other auroral phenomena, such as poleward-moving arcs and increases
in radio wave absorption. The project will use a combination of experimental
measurement and theoretical and numerical analysis. An important part of the
project will be the measurement of full waveforms and fine structure in MFB
events. The waveform measurements will be performed at multiple sites and for
multiple events. In some cases it will be possible to use incoherent scatter
radar data to determine the plasma density structures within the ionosphere that
affect the propagation and dispersion of the waves. Statistical analysis of MFB
events, in conjunction with conjugate satellite measurements, will be used to
determine the nature of electron precipitation associated with the events. The
theoretical and numerical analyses will determine whether or not Langmuir and
Z-mode waves can explain the mode conversion processes need to explain the
generation of medium frequency bursts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetosphere-
ionosphere coupling and magnetic substorms have been identified as central
problems to our understanding of near-earth space plasmas. This project will
examine the role that auroral hiss and medium frequency wave bursts play in M-I
coupling. Both graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this
project in all aspects of the research, including the development of wave
measurement instruments, the deployment of the instruments, the analysis of the
data obtained from the instruments and the related plasma theory. The majority
of the research will take place at Dartmouth College and will offer
opportunities for first and second year women to participate in the research
through the Dartmouth Women-in-Science Program (WISP).