* 1147843
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Sustainable Development of Next-Generation Software in Quantum Chemistry
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Edmond Chow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2017
* USD 614,654.00

Quantum chemistry can provide highly accurate results for arbitrary molecular
systems, making it a vital component in many different disciplines such as
materials science, biology, physics, chemical engineering, mechanical
engineering, environmental science, geology, and others. It is particularly
critical in the rational design of drugs, catalysts, organic electronics,
nanostructured materials, and other designed materials. Because of their steep
computational costs, quantum chemistry codes must exploit parallel computing and
must constantly adapt to rapidly changing high performance computing
technologies. This creates a significant barrier for the adoption of new
technologies into quantum chemistry codes. Our project involves the development
of a parallel, highly reusable library for advanced numerical approximations in
quantum chemistry. This will be the first unified library of such techniques,
designed for high performance and also reusability by independent research
groups. The PANACHE (PArallel Numerical Approximations in CHemistry Engine)
library will fill this need. To maximize its impact, PANACHE is being designed
to be used by multiple quantum chemistry software packages. PANACHE dramatically
speeds up quantum computations, making it much easier to gain insight into a
wide array of problems, from studies of reaction mechanisms in catalysis to the
design of improved organic photoelectronic devices.

Our highly interdisciplinary project (involving two theoretical chemists and one
computational scientist as co-PI?s) provides excellent opportunities for
training graduate students and postdocs in the areas of numerical methods, high-
performance computing, quantum mechanics, and computational chemistry. Computer
code resulting from this project will be released as freely-available open-
source software, enabling its use with any other software package. Workshops on
the new software will be held to introduce these new tools to other software
developers, and online training material and graduate course material will be
developed to improve education in the use of numerical methods in computational
science and quantum chemistry.

This award pertains to the Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation
(SI2) solicitation.