* 1147161
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSE: Sage-Combinat: Developing and Sharing Open Source Software for Algebraic Combinatorics
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Gregg Musiker, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2016
* USD 195,688.00

Sage is an open source general purpose mathematical software system that has
developed explosively within the last six years. Sage-Combinat is a subproject
whose mission is "to improve Sage as an extensible toolbox for computer
exploration in (algebraic) combinatorics, and foster code sharing between
researchers in this area". There is a long tradition of software packages for
algebraic combinatorics. These have been crucial in the development of
combinatorics since the 1960s. The originality of the Sage-Combinat project lies
in successfully addressing the following simultaneous objectives. It offers a
wide variety of interoperable and extensible tools, integrated in a general
purpose mathematical software package, as needed for daily computer exploration
in algebraic combinatorics; it is developed by a community of researchers spread
around the world and across institutions; and it is open source and depends only
on open source software. Among the proposers, Stein is founder and lead
developer of Sage while Bump, Musiker, and Schilling are strong contributors to
Sage-Combinat. Hivert and ThiÂ´ery (Paris-Sud, Orsay), founders and lead
developers of Sage-Combinat, are both strongly affiliated with this project.
Some of the research areas addressed in this project include symmetric
functions, in particular Macdonald polynomials for arbitrary Cartan types and
their nonsymmetric analogues, crystals, rigged configurations and combinatorial
R-matrices, affine Weyl groups and Hecke algebras, cluster algebras, and
posets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop Sage-Combinat in areas
relevant to the ongoing research of the participants, together with relevant
underlying infrastructure. The project will include three Sage Days workshops,
and will be affiliated with a third scheduled workshop at ICERM. These workshops
include a strong outreach component and have been a potent tool for connecting
researchers and recruiting Sage users and developers. The grant will also fund a
dedicated software development and computation server for Sage-Combinat, to be
hosted in the Sage computation farm in Seattle. Emphasis will be placed on the
development of thematic tutorials that will make the code accessible to new
users. The proposal will also fund graduate student RA support, curriculum
development, and other mentoring.