* 1147702
* Digital Mapping and Comparison of Natural and Synthetic Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Alan Howard, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2015
* USD 79,960.00

Advances in remote sensing and geographical information science (GIS) resulted
in proliferation of medium- to-high resolution digital elevation models (DEMs)
of global or continental-scale spatial extents. A DEM requires further
algorithmic processing in order to provide information for geomorphologic and/or
geologic analysis. The standard DEM-derived product is a map of shaded relief
that provides a three-dimensional depiction of the terrain. It enables visual
terrain analysis, but it is not meant for an automated, algorithm-based
analysis. This research project will develop a methodology for auto-generating a
thematic map of landforms and tools for its automated analysis. Unlike shaded
relief maps, which depict variations in elevation field, the new
"geomorphometric" map will depict semantic interpretation of terrain. It will
offer an alternative tool for visual geomorphologic analysis, and it will be
susceptible to automated terrain analysis. Machine vision-based methodology will
be used to generate a robust geomorphometric map in a manner that is
computationally efficient. The investigators will deliver a geomorphometeric map
of the entire conterminous Unites States based on 30 meters per pixel DEMs.
Automated analysis of terrain will be performed by measuring a quantitative
similarity between any two "landscapes" for small sections of the map.
Similarity-based analysis will be used to determine landscape archetypes, which
are characteristic patterns of landforms found across the conterminous Unites
States. The new methods also will used to calculate a degree of correspondence
between real and simulated landscapes, thus assessing relative success of
different landscape evolution models.

This project will use machine-vision and similarity-measure techniques to
provide better tools for terrain analysis. The project will yield a method for
robust and efficient generation of geomorphometric maps, which will provide
significant enhancements to shaded relief, thereby facilitating more complete
analysis of terrestrial and planetary terrains. The project will provide
objective means of landscape classification, a new direction in the field of
geomorphometry. It will enable objective, easy-to-interpret comparison of
synthetic landscapes to ground truth and produce much-needed quality metric to
landscape evolution models. The project further integrates domains of geography
and spatial science with computer science domains of pattern recognition and
content-based image retrieval.