* 1147987
* A Partnership for the Improvement of Secondary Mathematics Teacher Preparation in the Common Core Era
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* W. Gary Martin, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Jacobson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,932.00

This RAPID project responds to the new Common Core State Standards for
Mathematics (CCSS-M), a state-led effort coordinated by the National Governors
Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers. The CCSS-M brings
both unprecedented opportunities and significant challenges for institutions of
higher education. They prompt the need for secondary mathematics teacher
preparation programs to address changes in the knowledge that teachers need -
both in mathematical content and in instructional approaches. Content challenges
include topics and approaches in the content standards in the CCSS-M that are
not commonly addressed in mathematics content classes taken by prospective
teachers; examples include transformational geometry and inferential statistics.
The CCSS-M's Standards for Mathematical Practice imply the need for adjustments
in how mathematics content courses are taught so that prospective teachers
develop a strong grounding in these practices. Similarly, methods courses will
need to include attention to instructional practices that ensure K-12 students
achieve the CCSS-M content and practice standards. In addition, programs need to
work with K-12 institutions to align field experiences around the CCSS-M.
Ultimately, significant changes will be necessary in the experiences that
preservice secondary mathematics teachers are provided in their teacher
preparation programs to ensure that they are prepared to teach the
CCSS-M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RAPID work involves development of a
partnership of universities, K-12 education, and other stakeholders to begin
collaboration on the curriculum research and development needed to ensure that
secondary mathematics teacher education programs effectively prepare secondary
mathematics teachers to teach the CCSS-M. Leading the effort is the Science and
Mathematics Teacher Imperative (SMTI), a coalition of 125 public research
institutions organized by the Association of Public and Land-grant Universities
to stimulate high quality STEM teacher preparation and enhance learning across
specific programs and approaches. Universities will qualify as partners in this
CCSS-M initiative based on their commitment to engage in "ground-up" redesign of
their program. Criteria for partnership include: (a) administrative support from
the provost, deans of relevant colleges/schools (e.g., Education; Arts and
Sciences), and department heads (e.g., Mathematics, Curriculum and Instruction),
(b) established collaborations with one or more K-12 school districts, and (c)
the existence of a team of mathematicians, mathematics educators, and affiliated
K-12 school personnel committed to work on the initiative. Partners agree to
participate in the development and testing of courses, units, tools,
instructional approaches, and assessments useful in the redesign of their
secondary mathematics teacher preparation programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
major activity of the RAPID is a conference that will bring partners together to
further define the full scope of work for institutional change, including
defining characteristics of effective teacher preparation and identifying
priorities for action in redefining secondary mathematics teacher preparation. A
key product of the conference is a report that outlines findings of the
attendees and forms the basis for a subsequent research and development path for
redesign of teacher preparation programs to be developed by 7-9 core institution
of higher education along with their K-12 partners. This report will be
distributed to the larger community, including individuals within institutions
of the SMTI as well as non-SMTI members, both for reaction and for consideration
as a framework for their teacher preparation programs.