* 1147271
* Collaborative Research:  A functional complex of mating behavior traits features hypervariable protein pheromones.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Lynne Houck, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

Courtship behavior in animals typically involves gaining the attention of a
potential mate by using a complicated set of behaviors: visual cues, physical
contact, vocalizations, or pheromones. Many vertebrates produce pheromones that
affect male-female interactions. In the salamander mating system, male
pheromones are delivered during courtship when a female requires persuasion to
respond to the male. Our study system has focused on terrestrial salamanders
because these vertebrate animals have a mating system that is strongly based on
pheromone communication during courtship. What we can learn from pheromone
communication in salamanders will relate to chemical communication across all
vertebrates, including humans. In past work, this group has documented the
effect of male courtship pheromones on female reproductive behavior. These
pheromones clearly act to increase the female's receptivity to the male. This
research team also has basic information about the biochemical nature of the
male pheromones: non-volatile proteins that can be synthesized. This new
research addresses questions on how a male's pheromone mixture actually
functions to stimulate a female, with pheromone effects measured in terms of her
olfactory response, brain activity, and mating behavior. Female responses to
specific mixtures of synthesized pheromones will be recorded. This group expects
that (a) pheromone proteins will elicit the stronger effects when used in
combination, and (b) females vary in their preference for particular
combinations. A strength of our proposal is that both graduate and undergraduate
students will receive interdisciplinary training in at least three different
research laboratories focusing on different areas of the proposal (biochemistry,
behavioral science, and neurohistology), as well as field research experience
collecting and maintaining salamanders. This team will continue their outreach
efforts with university and local high school science programs to enhance
students' understanding of scientific research.