* 1147430
* CAREER: Studies of Dynamics and Control of Quantum Many-Body Systems Far from Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Lea Ferreira dos Santos, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2017
* USD 475,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on quantum many-body systems far from equilibrium. There are three
main research thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Transport properties of
integrable and nonintegrable systems far from equilibrium: The PI will focus on
the conditions under which ballistic and diffusive transport behaviors are
established. Both will be considered, that of isolated systems and that of
systems interacting with two heat baths at different temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The conditions for thermalization in isolated quantum
many-body systems. It has been argued that thermal equilibrium is achieved when
the eigenstates of the system become chaotic. However, open questions remain.
The PI will investigate how the system relaxes to equilibrium, particularly when
the factors that prevent thermalization are included. The PI also aims to
develop a proper definition of entropy for systems out of
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The development of new quantum control
methods to induce a desired transport behavior. The PI aims to develop tools to
achieve, through dynamical decoupling techniques, regimes and phases of interest
for theoretical and experimental studies of nonequilibrium quantum many-body
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These three research lines will be developed in
parallel being amplified by the synergies that result from the study of
different aspects of similar systems. Experiments will motivate the choice of
models that will be used. Among these are experiments on thermal transport in
magnetic compounds; on thermalization and quantum phase transitions in ultracold
atoms trapped in optical lattices; and on control of magnetization and
information transfer in spin systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports education and outreach activities with the goals: to continue engaging
female undergraduate students in research projects, in part through new projects
inspired by the research; to modernize the curriculum at Stern College for Women
of Yeshiva University with new courses that expose all science students to
programming and to concepts of modern physics at an early stage of their
undergraduate studies; to create a webpage for posting computer codes from
courses and research projects together with their explanations, aiming at
contributing to the integration of teaching and research at other institutions;
and to offer research opportunities for high school students in the New York
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education on how heat, magnetism, and
information propagate through systems of electrons, or more generally through
systems of many interacting particles that are described by the laws of quantum
mechanics. These systems are generally very far from the balanced state of
equilibrium. The PI aims to advance understanding of nonequilibrium quantum
physics which is far less understood than equilibrium quantum physics. The
research is likely to have impact beyond the specific context and may have
impact on other disciplines from physics, chemistry, and materials to biology
and climate. Specific goals of this project include understanding how the
behavior of systems that are far from equilibrium unfolds with time, how such
systems eventually relax to reach equilibrium, and how can nonequilibrium
systems be controlled and manipulated to produce a desired
outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technological perspective, understanding
and controlling the transport of heat, magnetization, and information in quantum
systems of interacting particles is vital. One of the most challenging aspects
in the development of new electronic devices, such as microchips and hard disks,
for instance, is the mitigation of local heating. At the level of magnetization
currents, the understanding and control of magnetization transport are essential
for spintronics, where the magnetic properties of the electron are exploited in
addition to the electron charge for device operation. Quantum computation and
quantum information processing, which may revolutionize computation capabilities
and encryption technology for security, also require efficient methods for the
transport of information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
education and outreach activities with the goals: to continue engaging female
undergraduate students in research projects, in part through new projects
inspired by the research; to modernize the curriculum at Stern College for Women
of Yeshiva University with new courses that expose all science students to
programming and to concepts of modern physics at an early stage of their
undergraduate studies; to create a webpage for posting computer codes from
courses and research projects together with their explanations, aiming at
contributing to the integration of teaching and research at other institutions;
and to offer research opportunities for high school students in the New York
area.