* 1147806
* CAREER:  Mobility of Unfrozen Water in Frozen Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Margaret Darrow, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 424,954.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research that will
improve our understanding of how frozen ground behaves as it interacts with
thermal changes in the surrounding environment. A key element in understanding
soil freezing and thawing processes is the ability to predict the mass fraction
and mobility of unfrozen water (that is, how much water remains liquid at below-
freezing temperatures within frozen soils, and how it moves). Historically,
microscale phenomena associated with unfrozen water has been challenging to
measure and poorly understood. This research uses an innovative combination of
state-of-the-art measurement techniques to quantify relationships among
hypothesized key variables in soil freezing and thawing processes, namely
unfrozen water content and mobility, soil zeta potential (a parameter related to
mineral surface charge), and soil micro-fabric. Specifically, the PI will (1)
measure mass and molecular mobility of unfrozen water in frozen cation-treated
soils using pulsed nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods; (2) correlate these
with measurements of soil micro-aggregate formation and micro-fabric using X-ray
computed tomography (CT) scanning, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) methodologies; and (3) correlate these measurements to
zeta potential of cation-treated soil particles at sub-freezing temperatures.
Students recruited from the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program
(ANSEP) will participate in this CAREER research and in K-8 outreach through a
hands-on geotechnical engineering module delivered to middle school-aged
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to accurately predict heat and mass
balance of frozen soil systems, frozen soil strength, and frost heave magnitude
- all of which depend on unfrozen water - will support planning for permafrost
response to climate change, and will facilitate more efficient and economic
engineering design for cold regions. Results from this CAREER research may be
used to improve heat and mass transport models, frost heave models, and models
of frozen soil creep by incorporating enhanced unfrozen water content functions,
which will account for unfrozen water mobility and its dependence on soil-
specific physicochemical properties. The improved models will have far-reaching
effects, including: contributing to the scientific community studying methane
release from degrading permafrost; serving as planning tools for Arctic
communities that must relocate due to unstable permafrost; increasing the
analysis accuracy of unstable slopes in frozen ground; resulting in more cost-
effective designs accompanied by less structural damage and safety risks for
projects such as buried chilled gas pipelines; and predicting frost heave
susceptibility and magnitude more accurately, which will support design of
safer, more durable roads in cold regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of
education, involving ANSEP students in this research will encourage
underrepresented student groups to become engineering professionals with strong
outreach skills, who can return to rural Alaska to inspire the next generation
of engineers. Increasing the involvement of Alaskan Native students in frozen
ground engineering will result in a stronger, highly-trained workforce, capable
of addressing geotechnical problems unique to the Arctic, which is critical for
the long-term viability of their communities and for the successful development
of the Arctic, the next frontier in energy resource development. Exposing middle
school-aged students to hands-on engineering activities and to problems germane
to their local environment will promote an early interest in engineering that
can segue into an engineering career.