* 1147422
* SI2-SSE Collaborative Research: SPIKE-An Implementation of a Recursive Divide-and-Conquer Parallel Strategy for Solving Large Systems of Liner Equations
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Ahmed Sameh, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

Drs. Negrut, Sameh, and Knepley will investigate, produce, and maintain a
methodology and its software implementation that leverage emerging heterogeneous
hardware architectures to solve billion-unknowns linear systems in a robust,
scalable, and efficient fashion. The two classes of problems targeted under this
project are banded dense and sparse general linear systems.

This project is motivated by the observation that the task of solving a linear
system is one of the most ubiquitous ingredients in the numerical solution of
Applied Mathematics problems. It is relied upon for the implicit integration of
Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) and Differential Algebraic Equation (DAE)
problems, in the numerical solution of Partial Differential Equation (PDE)
problems, in interior point optimization methods, in least squares
approximations, in solving eigenvalue problems, and in data analysis. In fact,
the vast majority of nonlinear problems in Scientific Computing are solved
iteratively by drawing on local linearizations of nonlinear operators and the
solution of linear systems. Recent advances in (a) hardware architecture; i.e.,
the emergence of General Purpose Graphics Processing Unit (GP-GPU) cards, and
(b) scalable solution algorithms, provide an opportunity to develop a new class
of parallel algorithms, called SPIKE, which can robustly and efficiently solve
very large linear systems of equations.

Drawing on its divide-and-conquer paradigm, SPIKE builds on several algorithmic
primitives: matrix reordering strategies, dense linear algebra operations,
sparse direct solvers, and Krylov subspace methods. It provides a scalable
solution that can be deployed in a heterogeneous hardware ecosystem and has the
potential to solve billion-unknown linear systems in the cloud or on tomorrow?s
exascale supercomputers. Its high degree of scalability and improved efficiency
stem from (i) optimized memory access pattern owing to an aggressive pre-
processing stage that reduces a generic sparse matrix to a banded one through a
novel reordering strategy; (ii) good exposure of coarse and fine grain
parallelism owing to a recursive, divide-and-conquer solution strategy; (iii)
efficient vectorization in evaluating the coupling terms in the divide-and-
conquer stage owing to a CPU+GPU heterogeneous computing approach; and (iv)
algorithmic polymorphism, given that SPIKE can serve both as a direct solver or
an effective preconditioner in an iterative Krylov-type method.

In Engineering, SPIKE will provide the Computer Aided Engineering (CAE)
community with a key component; i.e., fast solution of linear systems, required
by the analysis of complex problems through computer simulation. Examples of
applications that would benefit from this technology are Structural Mechanics
problems (Finite Element Analysis in car crash simulation), Computational Fluid
Dynamics problems (solving Navier-Stokes equations in the simulation of
turbulent flow around a wing profile), and Computational Multibody Dynamics
problems (solving Newton-Euler equations in large granular dynamics problems).

SPIKE will also be interfaced to the Portable, Extensible Toolkit for Scientific
Computation (PETSc), a two decades old flexible and scalable framework for
solving Science and Engineering problems on supercomputers. Through PETSc, SPIKE
will be made available to a High Performance Computing user community with more
than 20,000 members worldwide. PETSc users will be able to run SPIKE without any
modifications on vastly different supercomputer architectures such as the IBM
BlueGene/P and BlueGene/Q, or the Cray XT5. SPIKE will thus run scalably on the
largest machines in the world and will be tuned for very different network and
hardware topologies while maintaining a simple code base.

The experience collected and lessons learned in this project will augment a
graduate level class, ?High Performance Computing for Engineering Applications?
taught at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. A SPIKE tutorial and research
outcomes will be presented each year at the International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis. A one day High
Performance Computing Boot Camp will be organized each year in conjunction with
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) conference and used to
disseminate the software outcomes of this effort. Finally, this project will
shape the research agendas of two graduate students working on advanced degrees
in Computational Science.