* 1147336
* LTREB Renewal: Collaborative research: What controls long-term changes in freshwater microbial community composition?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* George Kling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 185,212.00

Advances in DNA sequencing have revolutionized the study of microorganisms such
as bacteria, revealing their genetic identity and ecological potential.
Microbial communities carry out critical processes that regulate the amounts and
forms of important nutrients and carbon, which are essential for all ecosystem
services on Earth. Results from the first five years of this research program
demonstrated that the biodiversity and activity of these communities varies
tremendously among environments and over time. Microbial biodiversity and
ecosystem functions are controlled (1) by local environmental conditions that
affect growth, and (2) by dispersal via wind and water. However, the relative
importance of these factors is still unknown. This research project will
characterize these two fundamental controls on the distribution and activity of
microbes in Arctic lakes, streams, and soils, and will reveal how seasonal,
annual, and long-term shifts in microbial species are affected by climate
change. This research will use the data archive of environmental measurements
produced by the Arctic Long Term Ecological Research program (LTER), and will
use next-generation DNA sequencing technology to assess microbial community
composition and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project
is to measure shifts in microbial biodiversity, bacterial respiration, and
ecosystem function associated with the current and dramatic environmental
changes in the Arctic. Bacteria and other microbes ultimately control the
production and consumption of the heat-trapping gases carbon dioxide and
methane. In the Arctic, warming temperatures are thawing permafrost and exposing
a vast store of previously-frozen organic carbon in soils. If this carbon is
released to the atmosphere as heat-trapping gases the rate of climate warming
will increase, further thawing the soils and exposing more carbon to microbial
attack. The strength of this positive feedback loop is controlled by bacteria,
because their respiration converts the soil carbon to carbon dioxide and methane
which is then released to the atmosphere. In addition, this project will
contribute to teaching and outreach through the NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates and Research Experience for Teachers programs, graduate student
and postdoctoral scientist training, and collaboration with the Earth Microbiome
Project (http://www.earthmicrobiome.org).