* 1147728
* Mechanisms of Mineral Dissolution: Time-Resolved Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction of Fe-and Mn-oxides with Dissolved Organic Ligands
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Jeffrey Post, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 02/29/2016
* USD 350,349.00

Technical Description. This project will explore the dissolution of iron and
manganese oxides by siderophores using real-time, in situ X-ray diffraction to
determine mechanisms and rate laws for these important soil reactions. Our
preliminary results reveal that the siderophore desferrioxamine-B (DFOB) at
concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 10 mM will induce complete dissolution of the
layered Mn oxide birnessite within hours. Moreover, Rietveld analysis of our
time-resolved synchrotron XRD data have revealed that Mn(III) is selectively
removed from the birnessite structure relative to Mn(IV). Removal of 20 mol%
Mn(III) induces a critical instability in triclinic birnessite, and the
structure collapses when vacancy concentrations increase beyond this
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These observations lead us to hypothesize that the
mechanism by which siderophores dissolve minerals depends on the heterogeneity
of metal valence state. In mixed-valence metal (hydr)oxides, siderophore-
mediated dissolution occurs by a structural collapse after a critical
3-dimensional vacancy concentration is achieved. In contrast, homovalent metal
(hydr)oxides dissolve by the more conventional mode of 2-dimensional surface
depletion. We will test these ideas by applying TR-XRD techniques to DFOB-
assisted dissolution of a variety of heterovalent oxides (e.g., magnetite [Fe3+
(Fe2+,3+)2O4], hausmannite [Mn3+(Mn2+,3+)2O4], riebeckite
[Na2Fe2+3Fe3+2(Si8O22)(OH)2] and homovalent oxides (e.g., hematite [Fe3+2O3],
goethite [Fe3+O(OH)]), in the presence and absence of
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Mineral dissolution
mechanisms are foundational to a range of societally important issues, including
soil fertility and the cycling of metals in the critical zone, contaminant
transport, the sequestration of CO2, and the chemistry of Earth?s surface
waters. Most prior studies of the rates by which minerals dissolve in aqueous
solutions have monitored reaction progress through changes in fluid chemistry.
Here we propose a novel and complementary strategy that correlates the chemical
evolution of the fluid with structural changes in the reacting solid. By this
approach, we can rigorously couple the chemical kinetics of the fluid with
structural mineral transitions, greatly expanding our understanding of the
underlying reaction mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work described in this
proposal will help reveal the factors that control the mechanisms and rates by
which siderophores can extract insoluble metals to sustain healthy metabolic
activity in soil and marine environments. Siderophores are low-weight, biogenic
compounds that occur ubiquitously in micromolar concentrations in soil and
marine waters, and they are produced by a wide variety of microbes, fungi, and
grasses to gain a selective advantage in severely Fe-limited conditions.
Siderophores can extract Fe(III) and Mn(III) from nearly insoluble Fe(III) and
Mn(III,IV) oxides with extremely high specificity, transporting the cations to
parent organisms to satisfy nutritive or redox metabolic needs. Insights gained
from this work may lead to a better understanding of methods to increase metal
bioavailability in iron-deficient agricultural regions, and they will improve
our understanding of mineral weathering, a major means of atmospheric CO2
drawdown.