* 1147446
* Bonding Analysis of Ab Initio Electronic Wave Functions in Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Klaus Ruedenberg, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2016
* USD 587,911.00

Klaus Ruedenberg and Mark Gordon of Iowa State university are supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry division to develop a general method for resolving the bond energies
in any molecule and between interacting molecules in terms of contributions that
arise from the deformations of the individual atoms and from the interactions
between different atoms. The latter are furthermore resolved in terms of
contributions that are attributed to distinct physical interactions, viz. quasi-
classical electrostatic interactions, interference interactions and charge
transfer effects. The analysis is extracted from the accurate ab initio energy
expression by transformation into a basis of quasi-atomic orbitals that are
intrinsically deduced from the accurate ab initio wave function. The role of the
various contributions and of their kinetic and potential energy components in
the establishment of chemical bonding is investigated for a number of reactions.
On this basis, conceptual characterizations of bonding are identified and a
rigorous ab initio basis for similarities and distinctions between different
bonding patterns is established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current quantum chemistry
can generate quantitative information and predictions that are valuable and
useful in many areas of chemical work and that the purely experimental approach
is unable to supply. These capabilities are the result of advances in
mathematical algorithms in conjunction with the steady increase in the speed and
storage capacity of electronic computers. The increasing complexity of the
computational techniques has made it, however, extremely difficult to perceive
the physical reasons why bonds form and break between atoms, even in simple and
fundamental chemical reactions. This lack of physical insight has created a
large gap between the number crunching approach and the chemical intuition that
has served experimental chemists well for two centuries, and the bridging
between the two has proved to be nontrivial. The present work identifies the
physical contents of these complex calculations and extracts an interpretation
of chemical bonding that can fit into the intuitive frame work of chemical
reasoning. Previously untapped chemically interesting information, which is
imbedded in accurate quantum mechanical computations, is made accessible.