* 1147270
* Deciphering BMP signaling and the role of Schnurri transcription factors using a deep sequencing approach in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Xiaohui Xie, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 04/30/2015
* USD 550,000.00

BMPs were first identified for their bone-inducing properties. Subsequently it
was discovered that BMPs control numerous events in embryonic development and
adult tissue homeostasis including cell type specification, stem cell
maintenance, cell death, and cell division. As BMPs play roles in a large
variety of biological processes, defects in BMP activities are linked to various
diseases including developmental defects and cancer. In order to further uncover
the root causes of other developmental defects and diseases, identification of
genes regulated by BMPs is essential. This project incorporates state-of-the-art
molecular biology approaches to uncover the intricacies of BMP target gene
regulation. The intellectual merits of this proposal are to provide a global
view of BMP function in a depth that is unprecedented in the current literature.
This project is likely to uncover the involvement of BMPs in various diseases
and biological processes including the maintenance of stem cell properties.
Findings from this project will also explain how BMP signaling has evolved to
control development in different biological and evolutionary contexts. This
project will also have an educational impact as over one dozen undergraduates
and graduate students will be trained in the areas of molecular biology,
developmental biology, and computational biology.