* 1147776
* Self-Esteem Threat as a Moderator of the Mechanism Underlying Exaggerated Positivity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 251,214.00

This project investigates why people so consistently view themselves through
rose-colored glasses. What exactly are people thinking when they claim that
their personalities are more desirable then they actually are -- or that they've
achieved more than they actually have? Some researchers claim that these rosy
views come about because people simply want to feel good. Instead of
acknowledging their negative aspects, people focus more on their good qualities
when evaluating themselves. Other researchers claim that consistently rosy self-
views have less to do with the goal of feeling good and more to do with
evaluating one's self in the quickest and easiest manner possible. Many of
people's decisions and judgments are based on the first thing that comes to
mind. Further, many times, the first thing that comes to mind happens to flatter
the self -- which makes it appear as though people are striving to make
themselves look good. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project attempts to
integrate the "hot" (motivational) perspective and the "cold" ("what's on your
mind?") perspectives on overly favorable self-views -- by suggesting that both
are correct under different conditions. The key may be that people approach an
evaluation of themselves differently depending on whether there is a recent
challenge to their positive feelings about themselves. For example, people faced
with recent criticism may restore their positive feelings by emphasizing their
positive qualities when describing themselves. However, when those same people
find themselves in situations that do not challenge their positive feelings,
they may use the first thing that comes to mind to describe themselves. If that
happens to be self-flattering, they will make the same rosy claims but for very
different reasons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will investigate
(a) how criticism shapes how deeply people have to think to make rosy claims
about themselves, (b) how criticism affects people's willingness to consider
information beyond that which comes to mind easily, and (c) exactly which brain
regions support people's rosy views of the self. The results will help reconcile
the competing views on why people so often make rosy claims about themselves.
Additionally, the results may point out an exception to current theories about
how people's emotions influence their thoughts (e.g., fear may not always make
people think harder) and will expand the psychological understanding of how the
brain supports the human sense of self. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As shown in past
research, the common tendency for people to see themselves through rose-colored
glasses has long-term costs for health, education, and workplace performance.
For example, people who fail to acknowledge health problems and health risks do
not seek appropriate treatment. Further, many clinical disorders involve
unrealistic beliefs about the self -- such as substance abusers' beliefs that
they can use "just this once" without relapsing or narcissists' beliefs that
they are superior to others. People who are overconfident about their academic
ability or work skills also perform poorly in school and at work. By identifying
exactly when and why people are most likely to view themselves accurately,
versus through rosy lenses, this research can inform interventions that will
help people better decide when they should seek treatment, study harder, or
allow more time to complete an important task. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also advance the scientific training of students at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. In addition, the results will be broadly
disseminated because the lab interfaces with psychologists, neuroscientists,
economists, and professionals in the fields of medicine and law through
publications, academic presentations, Continuing Education (CE) presentations,
and training programs.