* 1147461
* Workshop on Locality and Directionality at the Morphosyntax-Phonology Interface
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Vera Gribanov, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 27,071.00

To understand how the cognitive systems responsible for language are structured,
it is necessary to determine how different linguistic systems--those governing
sound (phonology), meaning (semantics), and structure (morphosyntax)--interact.
This grant supports a workshop that brings together researchers working on the
interface between structure and sound, and it focuses on two major questions.
The first question focuses on how the structure of words affects their
phonology. When one set of grammatical features (e.g., third person singular)
may have more than one phonological realization in a given language, what
conditions how the choice is made? It is widely acknowledged that the way a
complex word is structured may limit which of its parts can access other
information in other parts, but how those limits are determined differs across
several currently prominent theories. The workshop brings together linguists
with diverse views on this issue in order to tease apart these predictions for
morphologically complex words across languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second
and less well-explored question addresses the effects of phonology on the
structure of words and sentences. A historically prevalent view is that syntax
is "phonology-free," in that syntactic operations are not sensitive to
phonological structure (e.g., questions are not formed just because a word
starts with the sound [b]). This view, however, is currently being challenged by
new theoretical approaches that use advances in corpus and experimental
methodologies, and which allow for the investigation of more subtle effects of
phonology on syntax than traditional linguistic methods do.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While both of these research questions have received
growing attention in the past ten years, little has been done to forge a
connection between them. This connection is essential, since our understanding
of the morphosyntax-phonology relationship--and the overall architecture of
language--relies on an empirically motivated conception of how these components
of language interact with each other. One difficulty facing the study of the
phonology-syntax relationship is that few individual researchers have the full
set of knowledge and skills required for deep investigation at both ends of the
interface. This workshop seeks to facilitate progress in this area by bringing
together linguists from different subfields and with different theoretical and
methodological approaches. It encourages investigations based on novel cross-
linguistic, experimental, and corpus data, and has broad potential ramifications
for the study of language, psychology, and cognition.