* 1147630
* Integrating Consumer-Resource Theory into Density-Dependent Mechanisms for Limiting Population Growth and Overexploitation in a Pollinating Seed-eating Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Julian Holland, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2013
* USD 219,540.00

Mutualistic species can show great variation in their demographic rates and
natural abundances. Central to advancing the study of mutualistic interactions
is a mechanistic theory for and empirical tests of their density dependence and
population dynamics. This project extends consumer-resource theory of predator-
prey and competitive interactions to the density dependence of mutualistic
interactions using the pollinating seed-eating mutualism between senita cacti
and senita moths in the Sonoran Desert of Mexico and Arizona. Using both
experimental and modeling methods, the project will examine how variation in the
densities of each mutualist affects variation in the other's demographic rates
and abundance, and in turn, how such density-dependent consumer-resource
interactions may prevent unbounded population growth and overexploitation from
arising. Addressing such a shortcoming may more generally aid in understanding
how mutualism contributes to patterns and processes of biological systems
worldwide, ranging from the reproduction, survival, and dispersal of many plants
and animals to ever growing conservation efforts arising from their ecosystem
services (e.g., pollination, seed dispersal, nitrogen fixation). The project
also provides research, education, and cross-cultural training for undergraduate
students by directly involving them in international research and public
outreach associated with National Parks in Mexico and the United States.