* 1147042
* EAGER: Physiological Canalization and Individual Variation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Douglas Crawford, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* scott santos
* 08/31/2015
* USD 323,983.00

In the morning people wake up and have breakfast, they eat lunch around noon,
and in the evening they eat dinner. If it is too hot, or too cold, one turns on
the air conditioner or the furnace. When people are sick or suffering from a
laceration, they seek treatment with antibiotics (if appropriate) or rest in
bed. However, in the natural environment for wild outbred populations of
organisms, life has many more unexpected environmental variations. For the fish
Fundulus heteroclitus (the focus of this proposed study), the environment is
both unpredictable and extremely variable. In their natural habitat Fundulus
live in a constantly changing environment because they feed in the upper
estuaries of coastal North America. At low tides they are either in deeper tidal
creeks experiencing lower ocean temperatures (10-25°C) or, especially in spring
and summer, can become temporarily lodged in the upper estuaries in warm tidal
pools (25-35°C). They experience daily variation in salinity as they move with
the tide up into marshes, from full strength seawater (33 parts per thousand,
ppt) to less than 3 ppt if it is raining heavily. This application focuses on
how environmental variation affects phenotypic variation in mRNA expression. The
hypothesis proposed in this application is that much variation is hidden by the
variable ecological settings where most natural populations exist. The counter-
intuitive hypothesis is that for a subset of genes, the physiological responses
to variable environments constrain inter-individual variation in mRNA
expression, and in so doing mask functional genetic variation or polymorphisms.
If correct, then physiological canalization of gene expression hides genetic
variation. Thus, this research provides a novel perspective on how so much
hidden genetic variation arises and why it persists in natural populations.
There are no prior analyses aimed at understanding how the environment affects
the variance in mRNA expression, and a major impediment to such studies is that
estimating variance requires specific experimental designs with large sample
sizes. This application overcomes the design challenges, and will yield unique
statistical analyses of how the variance in gene expression is a function of the
environment, and in turn affects evolutionary processes. The fundamental
importance of this proposed research is that it explores mechanisms whereby much
genetic variation may be hidden, and addresses how large amounts of genetic
variation can be maintained in natural species populations. The findings have
the potential to significantly alter views of the results of experiments
conducted under standard, well-controlled laboratory conditions, and thus
influence physiological, evolutionary and human health
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has broader impacts in three areas.
First, contributions to the scientific community include a large dataset on gene
expression, cDNA sequences, and proximal promoters that can be used in other
studies on metabolism, physiological acclimation and the regulation of gene
expression. These data will be made available publically. Second, a graduate
student will be trained in a diversity of biological fields, including genomics,
ecology and physiology, and in statistical analyses. Finally, undergraduate
students will be attracted to this project through interactions with programs at
the University of Miami that recruit students from underrepresented groups and
engage them in hands-on scientific research.