* 1147593
* Day-to-Day Coping with Peer Victimization: Diversity of Friends, Bystanders, and Responses
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Adrienne Nishina, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 05/31/2016
* USD 545,999.00

A large body of literature has clearly shown that students who experience peer
victimization (also commonly known as bullying) also exhibit a host of
psychological, social, physical, and educational problems. Surprisingly,
however, little research has been conducted regarding what students should do
when they get picked on (i.e., what coping strategies work best). In addition,
virtually no work has considered the extent to which social environments, such
as friendship groups or social status within a school, may be associated with
whether a student chooses a particular strategy or whether or not a particular
strategy works. The purpose of this study is to identify key factors of
students' peer groups that can be targeted to ameliorate the negative
consequences of daily peer victimization. The investigators propose inquiry into
two specific areas: (a) Do social environments predict sixth-grade students'
coping responses? and (b) How do coping strategies and social environments
interact to predict well-being in the face of daily peer victimization
experiences? The planned study will utilize daily-report methodology over 2
weeks to assess the social environmental factors associated with peer
victimization experiences, effective coping responses, and current well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Academy of Pediatrics has identified bullying
as a serious health concern for U.S. adolescents, making the study of peer
victimization, coping, and contextual factors highly relevant for middle-school
students. In recent years, educators, parents, and others who work with youth
have become more aware of bullying and interested in what they can do to help
lessen the occurrence or negative effects of bullying. Sixth grade, the
transitional year to middle school, appears to be the time when exposure to peer
victimization peaks. At the same time, young adolescents may not have a coping
strategy repertoire to easily deflect these negative peer encounters. Teachers,
schools, and parents need to be better informed about the nuances of these
complex social interactions in order to minimize their negative impacts. The
proposed methodology will allow for a rich examination of social contextual
factors that may influence victims' coping responses. In other words, there may
not be a one-size-fits-all set of responses that work for all youth. Instead,
certain strategies might work better in some situations and for some youth than
others. The findings from the study will bridge and expand both the peer
victimization and coping literatures by incorporating ecologically valid daily
reports to understand responses and adjustment to specific victimization
experiences. Because this work is to be conducted in three different urban
communities within Wisconsin, California, and Oregon with an ethnically diverse
sample of students from African American, Asian American, Latino, and Caucasian
backgrounds, it lays the groundwork for determining promising new directions for
cost-effective peer victimization interventions that are relevant for helping a
broad spectrum of U.S. youth in the current changing ethnic landscape.