* 1147429
* Collaborative Research/LTREB Renewal: Successional Pathways and Rates of Change in Tropical Forests of Brazil, Costa Rica and Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Robin Chazdon, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2017
* USD 431,527.00

This is a long-term project to study regeneration in tropical forests. The
neoSelvas project unites six independently developed studies in a coordinated
effort to understand and predict vegetation change during regeneration of
tropical forests following pasture abandonment or shifting cultivation in
Central and South America. It compares temporal variation in forest structure
and species composition within plots with spatial variation observed among plots
of different ages (a chronosequence). Over the coming five years, annual
inventory data will be used to calculate rates of recruitment and mortality of
tree and shrub species in different stages of regeneration and to characterize
changes in the functional characteristics of tree species across plots and study
areas and over time. At the end of this project, the accumulated data will
provide a deeper understanding of the factors affecting species colonization,
dispersal, functional trait distributions, and community assembly during
succession. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project results will provide new insights
into mechanisms of regeneration in tropical forests. Datasets from the project
supply essential information to guide forest restoration, carbon storage, and
biodiversity conservation, and to enhance ecosystem modeling and global change
predictions. These are all topics of direct societal relevance. Study plots
provide collaborative opportunities for over 30 undergraduate, masters,
doctoral, and postdoctoral researchers from Brazil, Costa Rica, US, Mexico, and
The Netherlands.