* 1147341
* Building a new community of practice: Translating what we know from research and from the field into planning 21st century learning environments
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jeanne Narum, Independent Colleges Office
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 08/31/2013
* USD 49,848.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;The PKAL Learning Space Collaboratory (LSC) is
developing and implementing a workshop involving: "Planning spaces for learning
for 21st century undergraduate learners: Translating what we know from learning
about learning into policies and practices for shaping, building, and
maintaining 21st century learning environments." This effort addresses the gap
between research and practice in shaping learning environments. There currently
are no easily accessible research-based resources, protocols, or tools through
which the impact of space on learning can be explored in the process of planning
spaces. The goals of this project are to develop and disseminate such resources
and to engage a visible, sustainable community of practice that finds them
immediately useful. The developed resources are being disseminated virtually via
the LSC website, through regular LSC Teambox discussions, workshops, and other
venues, as well as at events sponsored by collaborating partners and other
national educational, scientific, and professional organizations. The project
activities are offering an opportunity to triangulate the connections among:
findings from current research (on learning, pedagogical practice,
organizational change); current practice in the field (e.g., studio class-labs,
interdisciplinary STEM labs, high-technology information commons, green
buildings); and the work of those now responsible for shaping and sustaining
21st century learning environments. The project team is analyzing experiences,
stories, and findings from the field through the lens of their particular
expertise, seeking key lessons that would inform those ready to ground their
planning efforts on learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;The effort is building networks for exchanging ideas,
critique practice, and identify important issues relative to planning spaces for
learning. Through the LSC workshop, new questions are surfacing that will inform
future practice in the field and influence future research. Beyond the LSC and
its eight collaborating partners, ten national disciplinary, educational, and
professional associations are vetting and promoting the use of project
resources. The resources are being made accessible through the LSC website,
advancing the continuing efforts of researchers and practitioners to understand
why spaces matters to the quality and character of the undergraduate learning
experience.