* 1147577
* Collaborative Research: The Fortress and the Grassroots: Archaeological Investigations of Early Complex Societies on the Tsaghkahovit Plain, Armenia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Adam Smith, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 84,203.00

Funding from the National Science Foundation will underwrite two years of
archaeological research by Drs. Adam T. Smith (University of Chicago), Ian
Lindsay (Purdue University), and Lori Khatchadourian (Cornell University) into
the rise of the earliest complex sociopolitical regimes in southern Caucasia
during the Late Bronze Age (ca. 1500-1150 BC). The co-PIs will join their long-
time collaborator, Dr. Ruben Badalyan (Armenian Institute of Archaeology and
Ethnography), and an interdisciplinary team of specialists in faunal and floral
analysis, archaeometallurgy, and geochemistry to investigate regionally
distinctive approaches to political authority through two seasons of excavations
at the fortress sites of Gegharot and Tsaghkahovit in central Armenia.
Traditional models of the rise of political complexity, built around archetypal
centers such as Mesopotamia and the Maya lowlands, typically describe the
origins of archaic states as the result of a gradual coalescence of settled
agricultural communities, the surpluses from which fueled emerging political
economies. In southern Caucasia, our research to date has revealed a different
course of political coalescence during the mid-2nd millennium BC, when complex
polities emerged not from settled farming villages but from nomadic,
hierarchical pastoral groups.

Prior excavations at the fortresses of Gegharot and Tsaghkahovit have uncovered
tantalizing evidence of emergent political formation manifested in
architecturally discrete areas for elite institutions. Most intriguingly, cultic
buildings at Gegharot, complete with altar and ritual equipment (such as
censors), revealed evidence of storage and metalworking, suggesting well-
integrated political, economic, and ritual institutions. At the other end of the
social spectrum, test excavations and a pilot magnetometry survey at the base of
the Tsaghkahovit fortress have provided the first documented accounts of a Late
Bronze Age residential complex; significantly, however, the informality of the
domestic architecture, combined with relatively thin, single-floor occupation
layers, hints that the settlement may not have been as enduring as the
fortresses that oversaw them, possibly a result of seasonal occupation by
transhuman pastoralists. Our research seeks to understand the internal factors
through which solidarity was maintained as sedentary political institutions
faced the prospect of legitimizing their right to rule over subject populations
seeking to maintain their historical legacy of mobility. Through continued
detailed excavations and geophysical survey, our goal is to develop a detailed
model of the practices that bound the region into a coherent socio-political
order by charting the formation, operation, and ultimate collapse of Late Bronze
Age regimes at the intersection of the fortress and the grassroots.

The resulting data will impact broader debates that center on the formation of
complex socio-political regimes, the constitution of subject communities, and
the inter-digitation of settled institutions and nomadic pastoralists. The
project will also train American and Armenian graduate students in advanced
archaeological data collection, recording, sampling, and remote sensing
techniques. Materials from the proposed excavations will provide the foundation
for exhibits planned for the Yerevan Museum in 2012 and the Oriental Institute
(Chicago) in 2013. Project staff will also continue to offer periodic lectures
on its activities in the local schools of the Tsaghkahovit plain.