* 1147545
* Collaborative Research: A potential new dust source in the southern hemisphere: Reactivation of the Kalahari dunes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Paolo D'Odorico, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2016
* USD 215,872.00

A potential new dust source in the southern hemisphere: Reactivation of the
Kalahari dunes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main sources of atmospheric dust on
Earth are located in drylands and at present, most of the active dust sources
are in the northern hemisphere, which accounts for more than 90% of global dust
emissions. Although, currently, the contribution of dust emission from the
southern hemisphere is relatively low, reductions in vegetation cover due to
land use or climate change provide the potential for new source areas to emerge.
The Kalahari Desert is a potentially large dust source in the Southern
Hemisphere, which is prone to remobilization in response to possible losses of
vegetation cover. Reactivation of the Kalahari dunes and subsequent emission of
dust has the potential to cause considerable changes to the atmospheric
composition and biogeochemical cycling of the Southern Hemisphere. Quite
surprisingly, the impact of dune activation on the regime of dust emissions from
the Southern Kalahari landscape has never been investigated before. Moreover, it
is not clear whether reactivated dunes could support the same biomass as the
ecosystem in its stable state. The objective of the proposed research is to
investigate the response of the Kalahari environment to changing climate and
land use. It will assess changes in land cover and dust emissions resulting from
the predicted aridification of interior southern Africa, large scale
encroachment of woody plants, and increasing population and demand for animal
products from this region dominated by pastoral land use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will shed light on the large scale implications
of climate change and overgrazing in one of the most vulnerable arid landscapes
in the southern hemisphere. Through a variety of field measurements both in
degraded and well managed grazing lands in Botswana, it will provide an
integrated assessment of the natural and human threats faced by the Kalahari
environment and its people, and allow for an evaluation of the sustainability of
different land use strategies. These assessments will provide critical
information for land users and managers in other environmentally sensitive arid
regions. Beyond the regional impacts in Africa, this research will provide a
quantitative assessment of the potential dust emissions from the Kalahari, which
may considerably alter the composition and biogeochemistry of the atmosphere of
the Southern Hemisphere. Because of the crosscutting nature of this work, it is
supported by NSF?s programs in Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics, Geography
and Spatial Sciences, Earth Science Instrumentation and Facilities, and Office
of International Science and Education.