* 1147590
* INDP: Inquiry Hub
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Michael Wright, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,520,531.00

The "Inquiry Hub" project brings together a partnership of educational
researchers, computer scientists, school district leaders, curriculum
developers, interactive resource providers, and multiple publishers of STEM
curricula to undertake a systemic approach to learner-centered teaching that
promotes adaptability and responsiveness to the differing needs of diverse
learners. The partnership integrates several prominent technology and curriculum
innovations resulting from prior NSF support, which are being deployed in
iterative cycles of user-driven, design-based implementation research. Formative
data such as usage logs, surveys, interviews, and classroom observations are
informing successive versions of this work; and a longitudinal analysis
utilizing hierarchical linear modeling is being used to evaluate impact on
teacher practice and student learning. The project has three primary outputs: i)
a content platform to make rigorous, learner-centered curriculum resources more
widely accessible to students, teachers, and districts; ii) innovative software
adaptation services, coupled with targeted professional development, to
significantly improve teachers' ability to customize their teaching with
learner-centered curricula so as to better meet the needs of diverse learners;
and iii) a network of partner organizations and businesses to provide the social
platform necessary for scaling and sustaining the project's activities. The
intellectual merit of this project lies in its demonstration of a model for
employing digital curricula and cyberlearning services to bring about
improvements to teaching and learning at scale. In particular, it is advancing
theory and practical knowledge in three areas: i) the state- of-the-art in
computational infrastructures to support an efficient way to offer customized
views of content, ii) learning science theory to study how innovative
cyberlearning services enable teachers to make effective adaptations to learning
resources so as to meet the needs of diverse learners, and iii) understanding of
the social structures and collaboration processes needed to scale and sustain
research-based, cyberlearning innovations that involve multiple institutional
actors. The project's broader impacts are being felt through its development of
a new organizational and business model for bringing research-based, digital
curriculum and software services to market. Furthermore, testing the
implementation of this project in a large, diverse urban district is
demonstrating its viability as a cost-effective mechanism for bringing learner-
centered teaching and curriculum to scale in a way that leads to improved
learning for all.