* 1147813
* NeTS:Collaborative Research: Cognitive Capacity Harvesting Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Yuguang Fang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 291,400.00

Due to the emergence of ever increasing diversified applications provided by the
smart devices such as smart phones, traditional telecommunications systems such
as the wireless cellular systems no longer meet the ever exploding traffic
demand, and cannot effectively deal with the shortage of available spectrum or
congestion over wireless systems. On the other hand, tremendous temporal and
spatial network resources, such as spectrum and computational capability, are
severely under-utilized. Obviously, how to proactively harvest such residual
resources and utilize them opportunistically to support diversified user traffic
is an important yet challenging research direction. Although cognitive radio
networks are to address this pressing issue, there is lack of viable network
architecture in taking full advantage of the opportunistic spectrum access and
there exist many practical design issues to be resolved. In this project, the
PIs propose a flexible Cognitive Capacity Harvesting (CCH) network architecture
to intelligently harvest network resources in both time and space and develop
the corresponding technologies to support users' services effectively. Moreover,
the CCH network along with the newly developed networking technologies can
enable non-cognitive devices to significantly gain benefits from cognitive radio
networks and provides innovative approaches to the cognitive radio networks
design. Furthermore, this project research opens a new school of thoughts in
better utilizing the residual network resources and potentially changes the
design approaches for next-generation telecommunications systems. Finally, this
project involves the international partners and can enhance the international
components in the educational program and prepare more competitive workforce.