* 1147057
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mechanisms for the decline of leaf hydraulic conductance with dehydration, and plant and environment level impacts
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Diane Pataki, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2013
* USD 96,791.00

In this project,the mechanisms and consequences of a major plant response will
be determined that is increasingly recognized to play a central role in
processes at cell, tissue and whole-plant level - the vulnerability of the leaf
water transport (hydraulic) system to dehydration. Equally, the implications of
leaf water transport for stomatal control and urban forest-level transpiration,
a major component of city water use, will be clarified. For diverse urban trees
in Los Angeles, the project will combine new experimental and nano-microscopy
techniques with modeling to determine the relative roles in the dynamics of leaf
hydraulic conductance (Kleaf) of mechanisms including air blockage within the
leaf veins, cell collapse, and changes in the activity of membrane proteins
(aquaporins). Second, the project will study the role of Kleaf in the
determination of the stomatal response to atmospheric drought. A novel computer
simulation model of the water transport and gas exchange systems will be
developed, to be parameterized with data from experiments and from anatomical
analyses. This model will predict the effect of xylem anatomy and its dynamics
during transpiration or drought on the responses of stomata. The project will
test and refine this model against experimental measurements of gas exchange
responses for the urban trees. The third objective is to combine the
measurements and model with additional functional trait data to predict tree
water use and water use efficiency, and to test these predictions with sapflow
and growth measurements for urban trees. Overall,this research will break new
scientific ground in clarifying the dynamics of plant water transport, and
improving prediction of urban forest water use, especially critical for
conservation of water resources. The broader educational impacts include
collaborative data collection within a mentoring program for under-represented
undergraduates in research, to improve participation and appreciation of urban
ecophysiology and ecology.