* 1147079
* ABI Development:   Galaxy-P: A new community-based informatics paradigm for MS-based proteomics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Timothy Griffin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,428,795.00

The University of Minnesota -- Twin Cities is awarded a grant to develop a
framework for the integration of tools for mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics
research that builds on the community-driven analytical framework for genomic
data analysis named Galaxy. Developed at Penn State University, Galaxy is
designed specifically to enable existing applications to become usable by life
scientists while enhancing reproducibility functions through data capture,
workflow development and sharing. This project will extend this framework by
deploying and integrating a series of key software programs for MS-based
proteomics data analysis, thus creating Galaxy Tool Modules for Proteomics which
will be Galaxy-P (http://getgalaxyp.org/). Reliance on computation and
informatics is inherent to system-wide molecular studies at the level of the
genome, proteome and metabolome using high throughput analytical platforms.
Analysis and management of such data requires informatics solutions, including
software for capture, processing, analysis, annotation and dissemination of the
data and experimental procedures used. Unfortunately, in many cases these
informatics solutions do not meet the needs of the researchers, detracting from
their use and adoption and thus creating an analytical bottle-neck in biological
research using high throughput technologies. This is especially the case in the
still maturing field of MS-based proteomics where a significant shortcoming is
the difficulty in accessing and assembling useful software into integrated
workflows or pipelines, especially by users who lack computational expertise.
Too often data analysis is left to the core proteomics lab or expert in
computation with limited involvement of the project researcher. Also lacking is
an effective means to document and share experimental procedures and workflows
and the more systematic adoption of scientific community standards.
Consequently, process transparency, repeatability and dissemination of
effective, complex data analyses suffer. Due to these collective shortcomings
the full depth and richness of information of MS-based proteomics data is not
realized, limiting new discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;Development of Galaxy-P will not
only provide informatics solutions to Minnesota researchers, but also a freely-
available platform enabling integration of genomic and proteomic data and
analytics for a broad community of systems biology researchers. In addition, the
project will leverage unique training resources in place at the Minnesota
Supercomputing Institute (MSI) and area undergraduate colleges, developing a
local area network and mechanism for training opportunities for young scientists
in systems biology.