* 1147165
* Functional roles of FERONIA, LORELEI and relative proteins in regulating pollen-pistil interaction
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Alice Cheung, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2017
* USD 686,000.00

Pollen-pistil interaction is a general term referring to a large number of male
(pollen) and female (pistil) interactive events in flowering plants that
together lead to seed production. Fertilization depends on growth of the pollen
tube within the pistil to deliver sperm, which the pollen tube carries as cargo
in its cytoplasm, to the female apparatus, known as the female gametophyte,
where the egg cell resides. Upon penetrating the female gametophyte, the pollen
tube bursts discharging sperm, enabling fertilization while late-arriving tubes
are prevented from entering the already-visited female. The goal of this project
is to reveal the mystery behind how these intriguing male-female interactive
processes are accomplished. This project takes advantage of the excellent plant
model system Arabidopsis, in particular two already characterized mutants
defective in the proteins called FERONIA (a Roman goddess of fertility and
abundance) [FER] and LORELEI (LRE) (the Germanic mermaid who lured sailors to
shipwreck). Loss of these proteins results in multiple pollen tubes being lured
into the mutant female, but instead of bursting these pollen tubes continue to
grow on a wandering journey inside the female, not discharging their sperm,
resulting in a sterile interaction incapable of producing seeds. This project
combines molecular genetics, biochemical and cell biological approaches to
determine how FER and LRE together generate the female environment capable of
mediating a productive male-female encounter. The knowledge obtained will
explain a major step used by a plant to produce seeds and will help development
of strategies to ascertain preservation and diversification of plant species and
ensure production of earth?s major food source, seeds. The project will
therefore significantly serve the public?s interests.

Broader impact. By providing training at the doctoral and postdoctoral, this
project prepares future leaders in science. Parts of this project are designed
to provide research experience to undergraduates, thus broadening the pipeline
for future scientists at an early stage. On an even more fundamental level, the
project will also create opportunities for hands-on experimentation for high
school teachers to extend/renew their classroom and laboratory resources.