* 1147605
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ideology and Political Organization in the Middle Lambayeque Valley, Northern North Coast of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Prudence Rice, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 19,985.00

Under the direction of Dr. Prudence Rice, Ms. Cristina Rospigliosi will conduct
archaeological research at the Middle/Late Sicán site of Luya (A.D.
900-1350/1375), located in the Lambayeque Valley on the northern north coast of
Perú. Luya is composed of public architecture, featuring twelve adobe mounds
built around an open space. The site has been described as an important public
center and satellite both of the regional capital of Vista Florida, and of the
Sicán Site, the capital of the Sicán state. Luya is important because it will
contribute insight into an important but previously unexplored topic on the
north coast: the functional roles and relations between capital cities and
second-tier sites in early states, especially the role of
ideology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although dealing with a past time period the
research has direct relevance today because it provides insight into the
mechanisms which underlie the regional organization of traditional societies and
the role which ideology may play in integrating them into functioning units.
Such information would be relevant to understanding processes which are
currently being played out in multiple parts of the world. An archaeological
approach has the ability of tracing such processes on century and millennial
time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Middle Sicán polity has been characterized
as a centralized religious state exerting ideological control over six
contiguous valleys in the Lambayeque region. But no archaeological research has
been carried out to examine the function, role, and relations of second-tier
sites in this state, outside the site core. Moreover, early ethnohistorical
records depict regional polities as independent from each other, rather than
integrated under a central government. And although the role of ideology in
ancient polities is an important topic in Andean archaeology, it has not been
commonly studied by analyzing data from monumental
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand socio-political relations in
the Sicán polity beyond its core area, this research has three goals: (1) to
determine the socio-political function of Luya; (2) to determine if elements of
the Sicán ideology assumed to be shared throughout the polity can be identified
at Luya; and (3) to record spatial, material cultural, and political changes
between the Middle and Late Sicán periods at a hinterland site. Six months of
fieldwork at Luya will include excavations at three mounds, test pits off the
mounds, and mapping of revealed architecture. Architectural analyses will
include spatial organization, activity contexts, and building techniques (e.g.,
construction chambers, adobe builders' marks), which will be compared to
published data from the Sicán Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts, beyond
the dissertation itself, include the training of Peruvian archaeology students
as field and lab assistants. The project also aims to create awareness among the
local community about the importance of their pre-Hispanic monuments and
heritage. Luya has been and continues to be heavily looted, a problem fueled by
socioeconomic factors and a lack of knowledge about the cultural and sustainable
value of archaeological sites. Community workshops will thus be organized twice
a month, along with lectures at local public schools, to explain the results of
the scientific archaeological excavations at Luya, thus contextualizing the
information about cultural heritage. Likewise, fieldwork will be carried out by
a crew of local workers. Considering the current value of archaeological
restoration projects in the region, this project will provide local people with
the basic tools to organize future conservation, management, and sustainable
economic and heritage projects such as tourism.