* 1147123
* The roles of FoxH1 and TGFbeta signaling in directing asymmetric cardiac morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Rebecca Burdine, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 01/31/2015
* USD 450,823.00

How cells are arranged in three dimensions to produce functional organs such as
the heart is a fundamental question in biology that has not been fully
addressed. Once cells are instructed to become heart tissue, they must
coordinate their movements to organize into a multi-layered functional
structure. One critical aspect of this process is how cells arrange differently
on the left versus the right side of the heart, commonly referred to as left-
right patterning. Previous work has determined that the FoxH1 transcription
factor plays an important role in integrating multiple TGFbeta signals in heart
cells so that they respond appropriately to left-right patterning information.
Utilizing the powerful genetics available in the zebrafish system, the roles of
FoxH1 in coordinating TGFbeta signaling and directing left-right cell migrations
in the developing heart will be explored. The outcome of this work will be a
better understanding of how the heart forms, especially with regards to left-
right patterning. This information will have significant impact on stem cell
studies aimed at producing functional organs for transplant. This project is
well suited to be conducted by graduate students and undergraduates and will be
the framework for recruiting women and underrepresented minorities into research
through thesis work at Princeton and through the Summer Research Experience
program conducted by the Department of Molecular Biology.