* 1147977
* Sources of soil organic matter transported by soil erosion in fire-prone upland ecosystems of the Sierra Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Stephen Hart, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2015
* USD 75,000.00

Lateral redistribution of soil organic matter (OM) by erosion controls soil
carbon stocks, stability, and mechanisms of stabilization in both natural and
anthropogenically disturbed ecosystems. Little is known about the interactive
effects of erosion and fire on dynamics of soil OM. Yet it is critical to
understand how the coupled processes of fire and erosion affect stability and
stabilization mechanisms of soil OM in fire-prone ecosystems because stability
and stabilization mechanisms of soil OM (including the association of OM with
soil minerals physically through aggregation and chemically through complexation
of organic functional groups with metal oxides) determine 1) amount of soil OM
that is combusted during fires, 2) proportion of soil OM that is redistributed
and mineralized during erosional transport of sediments downhill, and 3)
stability of eroded and deposited soil OM. In this project, we aim to determine
the effect of watershed size and source of eroded OM on soil OM dynamics
primarily in the Kings River Experimental Watershed in California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is critical to develop an understanding of the
pedologic, hydrologic, climatic, and geomorphic factors that control variability
in source of eroded organic matter (OM), as these factors can influence
concentration and composition of OM mobilized by soil erosion, and its
enrichment in eroded sediments. This, in turn, has significant implications for
determining whether erosion renders fire-affected ecosystems sources or sinks
for atmospheric carbon dioxide. In addition to tackling these questions, data
collected as part of this study will serve as benchmark for studying the effect
of prescribed forest fires on soil OM dynamics over short and long timescales.