* 1147755
* Investigating the Biological Function of Sterols and Hopanoids in Methylococcus capsulatus
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Roger Summons, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2014
* USD 198,270.00

The majority of life's history had been dominated by microbes whose metabolic
inventions have significantly altered the Earth's surface environment and, in
turn, impacted the evolution of life on Earth. Yet our ability to study
microbial life in the context of the Earth's distant past has remained a
difficult challenge primarily because microbes do not readily leave diagnostic
morphological fossils. One of the predominant strategies to overcome this
challenge has been the use of "molecular fossils." This approach correlates the
occurrence of preserved lipids in ancient rocks with their production in modern
bacteria. Two sets of lipids that have emerged as powerful geological biomarkers
are sterols, produced primarily by eukaryotes, and the sterol-like hopanoids,
produced only by bacterial species. In this project, investigators will study
the biosynthesis and physiological function of both of these lipids in
Methylococcus capsulatus. The ability to produce both sets of lipids is rarely
observed in the bacterial domain. Therefore, this organism provides an excellent
model system for examining the evolutionary and physiological significance of
both hopanoids and sterols with the expectation that these studies will allow
for a more informed and robust interpretation of the occurrence of sterols and
hopanoids in the rock record. These studies will be carried out through a
collaborative effort merging the fields of microbiology and organic
geochemistry. The project will train an early career research scientist from an
underrepresented minority group and a graduate student in the interdisciplinary
field of geobiology.