* 1147543
* The role of within-category variability in the development of induction
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Marjorie Rhodes, New York University
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 06/30/2016
* USD 337,975.00

From early in development, children use categories to learn about the world
around them. For example, upon learning something about an individual (e.g.,
that a spider bites), children can generalize this information to the category
as a whole (e.g., all spiders), and use this information to guide behavior
(e.g., to avoid spiders). A critical--and often useful--assumption that
underlies this form of reasoning is the belief that members of a category are
highly similar to each other. Yet, this assumption can also lead children
astray. For example, if children assume that all dogs are friendly because their
own cocker spaniel is friendly, they may engage in dangerous behavior if they
encounter a vicious dog. Effective induction thus must balance the belief that
category members are similar to each other with the recognition that categories
also include important variability. These studies examine how the balance
between these beliefs contributes to developmental changes in learning across
childhood. These studies test the hypotheses that (a) younger children
(preschool-age) tend to overlook within-category variability, leading them to
over-generalize new information, (b) children recognize more within-category
variability as they get older, leading to more efficient inductive learning, and
(c) guiding younger children to recognize the importance of within-category
variability helps them to learn more efficiently.

This research aims to uncover the cognitive developmental processes that lead
children to generalize information more or less effectively. In doing so, this
research has three immediate implications for education. First, these studies
aim to identify a strategy--instruction on within-category variation--that can
lead children to generalize information more accurately and efficiently, which
could be implemented in a range of educational contexts. Second, these studies
illustrate the developmental factors that contribute to children's understanding
of a key component of the scientific method--that it is important to obtain
converging evidence from diverse sources before drawing a broad conclusion--and
thus have implications for how to teach about the scientific method effectively.
Third, because reasoning about variability is central to a conceptual
understanding of evolution, this work will examine an important developmental
factor that should be addressed in the design of science curricula. These
studies speak to the key theoretical question of how the mechanisms by which
humans acquire new knowledge change across development, and thus have broad
theoretical significance for cognitive and developmental psychology. This
research also supports extensive training opportunities for students and
educational opportunities for families and educators.