* 1147498
* CAREER: Towards a quantitative picture of gene regulation in individual cells
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Ido Golding, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2019
* USD 931,510.00

In this project the PI will create a quantitative description of the "gene
regulation function", i.e. the variation of the transcription of a given gene
with the amount of its regulating transcription factor in individual cells.
Specifically, the PI will quantify how gene activity, in the form of the
discrete time-series of mRNA production events, is modulated by varying
concentrations of transcription factors. The PI will examine three paradigmatic
gene circuits of increasing organismal complexity, from bacteria to mammals. To
perform these measurements, he will use a synthesis of traditional biochemistry
and molecular biology techniques, single-cell fluorescence microscopy, advanced
image processing and data analysis algorithms, accompanied by coarse-grained
theoretical models and stochastic simulations of the underlying kinetics. A
significant intellectual outcome of this project will be the first precise
quantitative description of the gene regulation function at the level of
individual cells, individual transcription events and absolute numbers of
proteins and RNA, in genetically unperturbed systems. This mesoscopic
description will provide a bridge between two existing levels of description:
the molecular (microscopic) level, at which a wealth of information is
available, largely through classical biochemistry and biophysics in vitro; and
the macroscopic level of gene-network topologies, obtained mostly through
classical genetics, but which lacks any quantitative details on the regulatory
interactions between elements. The PI and Dr. Sokac in collaboration with Rice
University will provide a one-week wet-lab based teaser course for quantitative
undergraduates (Q-students) from math, physics, chemistry, computer science and
engineering. The goals of the course are to show Q-students how quantitative
methods apply to biology, and encourage them to pursue independent research
projects. Q-students will be coached on how to find undergrad research positions
in labs at the Texas Medical Center, and once placed, they will receive support
from mentors and colleagues in a weekly evening discussion group run by the PIs.
Ultimately, the goal is to recruit Q-students to careers in biological research.

This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Division of Physics and the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.