* 1147439
* Collaborative Research: LTREB: The role of ecological heterogeneity in a long-term grassland restoration experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Sara Baer, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 318,914.00

Many aspects of plant community structure and ecosystem functioning have been
degraded by human disturbance to the environment, and may not return without
human intervention through ecological restoration. Restoring biodiversity in
disturbed ecosystems is a nearly-universal challenge, as well as an opportunity
to test general ecological principles about species coexistence. This project
will extend a 14-year test of whether heterogeneity in the environment creates
vacancies and accessible resources that allow new species to establish and
coexist in a community. Seeds of new species will be added to a prairie
restoration experiment that was initiated in 1997. The experiment includes plots
with up to four levels of soil heterogeneity, which has resulted in the
development of plant communities that vary in the number and abundance of
species among soil treatments and different years. The 14-year analysis of plant
communities in this experiment demonstrated that plant diversity has declined
over time, but more species have been maintained in plots with variable soil
resources. If plots with greater ecological variability contain more resources
for new species to exploit in space and time, then this study will demonstrate
that the general ecological principle "heterogeneity begets diversity" can be
applied to increase biodiversity in restored grasslands, where declining plant
diversity over time is a common phenomenon. Further, this study will identify
which plant traits contribute to successful establishment and persistence, which
will inform species selection to maintain biodiversity over the long term. This
project will also provide support for graduate education, offer hands-on
training in restoration to undergraduates, and foster public education about
prairie restoration as a demonstration site and resource for docent training,
natural resource managers, high school teachers, and the general public.