* 1147779
* Self-regulation and threat: Shifting tactics in the face of threatening stereotypes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Steven Stroessner, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 02/28/2015
* USD 251,141.00

Human beings are motivated to maintain their safety and security. This research
investigates whether people who are concerned with safety and security are
likely to use and respond to stereotypes implying danger or threat. According to
the investigators, individuals who are motivated to maintain safety and security
(i.e., those operating under what is termed a "prevention focus") process
negative or threatening information differently from benign or positive
information. These types of people are expected to seek out and pay more
attention to stereotypical information implying danger and show greater
automatic endorsement of stereotypes implying threat. These effects are expected
to emerge when threat is perceived to be psychologically proximate (close in
time or in location) rather than distant. Stereotypes that are seen as
particularly threatening because they are psychologically close are expected to
exert a strong influence on judgments and behavior of individuals concerned with
safety. Interestingly, stereotypes that are unrelated to their primary concern
(i.e., safety) are expected to be utilized less compared with people not
concerned with safety. A series of experiments will be conducted in order to
address the implications of this shift in evaluative and stereotypical judgments
and tie this research to several issues of social importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to transform thinking about
stereotyping and motivation and the interplay between them. People must
regularly confront threat. When certain social groups and their members are seen
as threatening, people often react in a manner that is self-protective but is
harmful to the members of that group and society more generally. This research
will help us understand when and how people respond to groups that are seen as
threats to safety and security. By understanding the underpinnings of support
for public policies that serve to maintain safety and security, policy makers
can establish effective policies while avoiding unintended negative social
consequences that might arise in times of threat. Finally, this work includes
female undergraduate students, as well as members of ethnic minority groups.