* 1147499
* Testing and improving methods for efficient annotation through the construction of a large parsed corpus
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Anthony Kroch, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,225.00

Electronic corpora annotated with linguistic information play a crucial role in
natural language processing (NLP) and in linguistic research. Treebanks (corpora
annotated with syntactic information) are especially important since they mark
the grammatical structure necessary for understanding sentence and discourse
meaning. For NLP, treebanks provide testbeds for developing language
understanding systems. For linguistic research, they provide the basis for
precise and replicable studies of the patterns of use of syntactic forms.
Unfortunately, accurate annotation is difficult. Automatic parsers have
relatively high error rates and the correction of these errors by human
annotators is both slow and itself error-prone. Based on recent advances that
Dr. Kroch and his collaborators have made in the creation and quality control of
three large treebanks for different languages, Dr. Kroch proposes a major effort
to improve corpus construction through the creation of a two-million-word
English treebank. Along with this useful and substantial result, the project
will develop and test hypotheses on speeding up treebank construction. The work
will be guided by two complementary strategies. The first aims to reduce the
parser's error rate by enhancing the part-of-speech (POS) tagged input to the
parser while the second aims to make the correction of residual errors more
efficient by shifting some of the burden from human to automatic error detection
and correction. Speeding up the construction of accurate, consistent treebanks
will improve the size and quality of training data for parsers, leading to
improved performance in real-world NLP applications that rely on parsing. The
availability of larger treebanks and of better methods for constructing them
will also improve linguistic research. Moreover, as treebanks grow in size, they
will become more useful in literary and historical studies, where the rhetorical
structure of texts will become investigable in a more precise way than is
currently possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the intellectual merit
of the proposed research and the impact it can be expected to have on text-based
research that relies on automated processing techniques, the project will
provide valuable training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.
In contributing to improvements in automated techniques for language processing,
this project may also benefit the analytic needs in industry and government
security.