* 1147537
* Morphology: how does it vary and what does it reveal about evolution? Ontogenetic and phylogenetic variation in extant brachiopod crura and loops
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Sandra Carlson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 06/30/2017
* USD 228,584.00

Morphology? how does it vary and what does it reveal about evolution?
Ontogenetic and phylogenetic variation in extant brachiopod crura and loops

Abstract

Organism shape is the medium through which the underlying genetic makeup of the
organism interacts with the environment. Only by studying shape and how and why
it varies, can evolutionary biologists begin to understand the product of
underlying genes/environment interaction. Because shape is the primary source of
heritable information from extinct (no longer living) organisms, paleontologists
assume that the boundaries of shape variation correspond closely to clades
(evolutionary entities), as implied by the hierarchy of rank-based taxa. This
assumption is seldom tested. This research project will test the clade status of
taxa recognized in extant Brachiopoda, one of the most paleontologically
significant metazoan groups in terms of diversity and abundance for over half a
billion years. Roughly 95% of species are extinct; with the 5% of rhynchonellide
and terebratulide brachiopod species extant (still living), we have a rare
opportunity (1) to test molecular and morphological phylogenies at different
hierarchical levels, never before attempted for this clade; (2) to compare the
size and shape of functionally significant features, primarily features called
crura and loops, among adults within and among species, and across growth
stages; (3) to use this information to produce quantitative comparisons among
adults and growth stages in crura and loops, and place the growth
transformations in an evolutionary context informed by both shape and molecules.
If paleontologists cannot reliably distinguish evolutionarily informative from
significantly misleading shape variation, evolutionary interpretations drawn
from the observed variation are fundamentally untestable. The results of this
study on living brachiopods can have profound implications for macroevolutionary
interpretations derived from taxonomic data on any group of extinct metazoans,
in revealing problems associated with uncritically accepting untested
assumptions of homology (shared common ancestry of features).

Analyses will be conducted on representative species of all living
rhynchonellide and terebratulidine genera, and all lving terebratellidine genera
for which molecular sequences have been made available, using parsimony and
Bayesian analysis. Growth variation in crura and loops will be quantified using
geometric shape analysis on 3D images obtained from microCT scans of calcareous
lophophore supports in living brachiopods. Growth character polarity in crural
and loop development will be compared with phylogenetic polarity using outgroup
analysis. Tree comparison methods will be utilized to evaluate patterns of
qualitative and quantitative morphological character distribution, and to
compare results from molecular and morphological analyses. Total evidence
analyses will also be conducted and compared with those derived from morphology
alone and molecular sequence data alone. Although the word brachiopod is not a
household word, as is clam or snail, brachiopods provide an excellent
opportunity to study changes in morphology over lifespans and lineages, with
enormous extinct diversity preserved in the fossil record and a smaller, more
manageable diversity living today. This research project will contribute to the
education of undergraduate and graduate students through coursework in
evolutionary biology and paleontology at UC Davis, and will support the training
and mentoring of a female graduate student and female post-doctoral researcher.
We will take advantage of opportunities to share our research results with the
public at Picnic Day (a UC Davis campus-wide annual open house) and the Explorit
Science Center (City of Davis). Three-dimensional images of brachiopods will be
fully accessible on a website created to share the visual results of our
research. We are beginning to develop a more sophisticated understanding of the
development and evolution of morphology in vertebrate animals, yet our
understanding of evolutionary morphology across a much more diverse array of
marine invertebrate animals lags well behind. Our research will strive to
introduce and explain a portion of the fascinating paleobiological complexity of
one group of marine invertebrates to the general public, and engage the public
in discussions about the nature of evolution: recognizing, characterizing, and
interpreting change over time.