* 1147790
* Economic Models for Collaborative Access Network Provisioning: US-Finland Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Allen MacKenzie, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 290,000.00

Increased capacity in wireless networks has largely come from shrinking cell
sizes, but continuing this trend has become impractical for large operators.
Small wireless networks are also straining in overcrowded spectrum bands. The
problems are particularly acute in high-density 802.11 deployments. It is clear
that a collaborative approach, taking advantage of both large infrastructure
deployment by operators and distributed deployments of 802.11 and femtocell
networks could be extremely beneficial. This project focuses on three major
problems related to heterogeneous wireless networks. First, models are developed
that quantify the gains from cooperation between large operators and small-scale
operators and end users deploying their own wireless access networks. Second,
game theoretic and pricing models are developed to study incentive structures to
support collaboration in heterogeneous wireless networks. Third, a threat model
is developed to specifically model security threats that would impact a
heterogeneous wireless network through a holistic vulnerability assessment.
These three tasks are all complemented by frequent prototyping and
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be immediately applicable
to real networks and will quantify the benefits of collaboration for network
operators. In addition, the collaborative project will deepen technological
collaboration between the United States and Finland. The models developed in
this project will all be available and published in the scientific literature,
providing a holistic understanding of heterogeneous wireless networks. These
models will catalyze the further technical development of protocols and
standards to support open, heterogeneous wireless networks.