* 1147049
* ABI Development:  Access, visualization, and statistical tools for the analysis of butterfly monitoring data
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Joseph Ja'Ja', University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,134,741.00

An award is made to the University of Maryland to bring together a network of
butterfly monitoring groups and experts in both informatics and statistics to
develop a series of tools to greatly expand the access and use of butterfly data
and knowledge. Citizen-scientists throughout North America perform thousands of
surveys as part of a continent-wide network of butterfly monitoring programs,
yet data from these surveys, are little known due to a lack of: 1) knowledge
about and access to the data, 2) tools to visualize and share these critical
data sets, and 3) appropriate models for analysis. Through this project, several
new tools will be developed and launched, including a web interface and
visualization tool for a continental-scale butterfly monitoring program, a
framework for the distribution and visualization for data emerging from a large
network of butterfly monitoring programs, and a web-enabled database of species
traits, and a suite of statistical models to analyze data resulting from the
most common types of butterfly monitoring protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
efforts will be targeted toward developing tools that are broadly transferrable
among butterfly monitoring programs as well as other insect monitoring programs,
such as those focused on dragonflies, crickets, ladybeetles, and bees. Tools
will be designed to be useful not just to the scientific and management
communities, but also for the general public, the primary collectors of
butterfly monitoring data. Throughout this project, undergraduates, graduates,
and post-doctoral associates will be involved in all stages to foster education
in information technology and statistical analysis.