* 1147215
* Collaborative Research:  Evolution of Multicellularity:  Fluid Mechanics of Feeding by Unicellular vs. Multicellular Choanoflagellates
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Mimi A Koehl, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 10/31/2016
* USD 350,846.00

The evolutionary origin of multicellular animals from a single-celled protozoan
ancestor represents a pivotal transition in life's history and one of its
greatest unsolved mysteries. Recent genetic studies have shown that the most
primitive animals (sponges) are very closely related to a group of protozoans
called choanoflagellates. A choanoflagellate cell swims by undulating a single
flagellum and captures food (bacteria) from the surrounding water on a collar of
microvilli (hair-like protrusions of the cell surface) that rings the flagellum.
Some single-celled choanoflagellates can be induced to form multicellular
colonies via cell division. One such species that lives in estuaries,
Salpingoeca rosetta, is used to study the evolution of multicellularity. For
multicellularity to evolve, there must have been a selective advantage to being
multicellular, but since both unicellular and colonial choanoflagellates still
exist today, there may be different environmental conditions under which single-
celled or multicellular forms perform better. One important aspect of
performance that affects choanoflagellate survival and reproduction is feeding
on bacterial prey. Marine habitats can differ in the size, spacing, and richness
of patches of bacteria. This study uses S. rosetta to study the consequences of
being multicellular vs. unicellular to foraging success, and to discover the
mechanisms responsible for differences in performance. The objectives are: 1) to
quantify the swimming behavior of unicellular vs. colonial S. rosetta in
environments in which bacteria are unevenly distributed, to determine if and how
choanoflagellates aggregate in patches of high prey concentration; 2) to
determine the feeding rates of unicellular vs. colonial S. rosetta for a range
of bacterial prey concentrations; and 3) to study the fluid mechanics of water
current production and prey capture by S. rosetta, to elucidate how being part
of a colony alters the feeding current, and the mechanisms and effectiveness of
prey capture. The diverse expertise of a multidisciplinary team will be focused
on these objectives: Koehl (fluid dynamics of organisms), King (molecular
evolution of choanoflagellates), Stocker (biophysics and ecology of microscopic
aquatic organisms), and Fletcher (advanced optical techniques for imaging
microscopic organisms). This study not only explores the role of foraging as a
selective factor in the evolution of multicellularity, which set in motion all
subsequent animal evolution, but also has ecological significance. Protozoans,
both unicellular and colonial, play an important role in aquatic food webs. This
project is the first to study, within a single protozoan species, the effects of
being uni- vs. multicellular to foraging by these ecologically-important
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide research training for
graduate students in a project involving both physics and biology, helping them
develop skills for collaboration across disciplines. The microfluidics system
developed for this project will be useful for studying other microscopic
organisms in patchy environments, and our robotic flagellum is a prototype for
future studies of undulatory swimming.