* 1147930
* RAPID: Mechanisms of 20th Century Mediteranean Drying:  The Role of External Forcing Versus Natural Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Mingfang Ting, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2012
* USD 37,000.00

This is one of 16 Rapid Response (RAPID) projects funded as the result of a Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 11-006) encouraging diagnostic analyses of climate model
simulations prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Report (IPCC AR5). Research conducted in these projects is expected
to lead to more detailed model intercomparisons, better understanding of robust
model behaviors, and better understanding and quantification of uncertainty in
future climate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project considers the
drying of the Mediterranean region over the second half of the 20th century as
portrayed in the ensemble of 20th century climate simulations prepared for the
AR5. The central question motivating the project is whether this drying occurred
due to natural variability or anthropogenic greenhouse warming. The PIs note
that continued drying of the Mediterranean is a robust result across the
ensemble of climate model projections of greenhouse gas-induced warming over the
21st century, so there is reason to believe that the region is susceptible to
drying as a consequence of global warming. On the other hand, much of the
observed drying of the Mediterranean can be linked to the prolonged period in
the late 20th century during which the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) was in
its high phase, as the high phase is associated with a northward shift of the
Atlantic stormtrack that provides the Mediterranean with much of its wintertime
precipitation. The extent to which the NAO is influenced by global warming is
not known, and several mechanisms of influence have been proposed. Work
performed in this project uses statistical analysis, primarily in the form of
signal-to-noise maximizing empirical orthogonal functions (EOFs), to determine
the relative importance of natural variability and greenhouse gas-induced global
warming in producing Mediterranean drying in 20th century climate simulations.
Additional analysis using a decomposition of the ensemble-mean moisture budget
is used to discriminate between possible mechanisms for global warming-induced
drying.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project lies in its
support of the IPCC AR5, which is intended to provide information on climate
change and its consequences to decision makers worldwide. In particular, the
work will provide guidance for decision makers concerned with Mediterranean
drying, as the drying of recent decades may or may not reverse depending on
whether it is part of a natural fluctuation or a consequence of secular global
warming. The mechanisms of natural variability and forced change explored in
this project may also be consequential for climate change occuring in other
parts of the world including the semiarid subtropical regions of the United
States.