* 1147666
* Global patterns and long-term trends in lake temperature: A collaborative workshop to synthesize in situ and remote sensing data and analyze controlling factors
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* John Lenters, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 49,973.00

Recent studies have revealed significant warming of lakes throughout the world,
but scientists are just beginning to understand the global extent, regional
patterns, causes, and ecological consequences of lake warming. The Global Lake
Temperature Collaboration (GLTC) was established in 2010 to coordinate
activities of an international group of investigators with access to global lake
temperature records. The GLTC, now comprised of more than 50 investigators, will
hold a workshop to bring participants to a common location to synthesize
temperature data collected at lakes and by satellites into a global database,
assess the causes and ecological implications of the observed changes in lake
temperature, identify directions for future research, and develop plans for data
management and education and outreach. Specific research topics that will be
addressed at the workshop will include temperature trends and how they vary
around the globe, climatic and geographic factors that may influence temperature
trends, comparability of temperature trends in surface and deeper waters, and
likely ecological consequences of observed changes in lake temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the workshop will include the development of
international collaborations, enhancement of infrastructure for research and
education by creating a unified database of lake temperature data, integration
of research and education through student interaction and curriculum
development, and dissemination of workshop results and data through
publications, conferences, a project website, and education and outreach
activities.