* 1147988
* Minority Undergraduate/Graduate Student Technical Presentation Experience at the 2011 NOBCChE Annual Technology Conference
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Dale Mack, Nat. Org. of Black Chemists & Chem. Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Darren Dutterer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 19,920.00

The National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and
Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE) requests funds to support the attendance of sixteen
(16) undergraduate and graduate students from the departments of chemistry and
chemical engineering, and related sciences at selected Historically Black
Colleges &amp; Universities (HBCU) and Minority Institutions (Minority
Institutions include Hispanic Serving Institutions and Tribal Colleges) to
attend and participate in technical symposia at the 38th NOBCChE Annual
Technology Conference in Houston, TX from April 18 - April 22, 2011.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits to the students are:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Opportunities to present their original research to a forum composed of
industry, government and academic peers.&lt;br/&gt;2) Opportunities to meet
colleagues at other HBCU/MI and majority Institutions to develop research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;3) Engage representatives from majority academic
institutions to explore opportunities to pursue graduate degrees in the
aforementioned disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;4) To meet and engage accomplished
minorities in the Scientific and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;5) Exposing
minority students and students of HBCU/MI to new ideas and innovations in an
atmosphere with accomplished minorities in STEM