* 1147407
* Behavior of Nd isotopes at the Ocean-Sediment Boundary:  Addressing the "Nd Paradox"
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2017
* James McManus, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2017
* USD 439,864.00

Neodymium isotope ratios (143Nd/144Nd) are increasingly used as tracers of past
ocean circulation patterns. However, our understanding of marine Nd dynamics,
and thus the reliability of Nd as an oceanic tracer, is currently complicated by
an apparent disconnect between the isotopic compositions of Nd (which are
distinctive between ocean basins) and the distribution of elemental Nd (which
appears to be driven by water column cycling). It is important to resolve this
"Nd paradox" in order to refine tracer studies of past ocean behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research suggests that the decoupling of isotopic
and elemental Nd may occur near the interface between marine sediments and
bottom waters. This study, conducted by researchers at Oregon State University,
investigates exchange reactions between dissolved and particulate Nd occurring
at and around this interface, with a focus on the influence of diagenetic
sedimentary processes on Nd isotope ratios. Porewater, sediment, and water
column samples will be collected along the Oregon continental margin and
analyzed for Nd isotopes and other relevant tracers (including rare earth
elements, carbon, and nitrogen). The resulting dataset will not only help to
resolve the Nd paradox, but will also be applied to future conceptual and
chemical modeling efforts, which in turn will inform the development of
paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will be incorporated into the COSEE (Center for Ocean Science Education
Excellence) Pacific Partnerships ocean literacy effort. A PRIME (Promoting
Research Investigations in the Marine Environment) intern, as well as two OSU
students (PhD and undergraduate), will be involved in this research. The project
includes international collaboration with a geochemist from the University of
Bristol, which will strengthen Oregon State University's analytical
capabilities. Funding will also help support an early-career researcher at
Oregon State University.