* 1147748
* Collaborative Research: Sediment Transport and Storage in Tidal Floodplain Waterbodies
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Anna Martini, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 09/30/2016
* USD 31,054.00

Oxbow lakes, off-river coves, quarries and other backwater environments are
common along the floodplain of many tidal rivers, and provide the accommodation
space necessary for significant amounts of fine-grained storage. This process-
based study will quantitatively evaluate the manner in which these tidal
floodplain waterbodies infill. The project is motivated by the important role
these environments play in the storage of sediments and associated contaminants,
and the broad significance of these understudied systems to local ecosystems and
human populations. The overarching goals of this study are to: 1) quantify the
dominant processes governing the timing and magnitude of transport and trapping
within tidal floodplain waterbodies; 2) evaluate the role these environments
play in the storage of a river?s fine grained sedimentary budget; and 3) assess
how sediment and associated contaminant storage rates vary in response to land-
use changes, industrial development, and tidal influence. The lower reach of the
Connecticut River exemplifies a tidal river with prominent tidal floodplain
waterbodies and will serve as our field site. Our research approach combines
water column observations, numerical model simulations, and an extensive coring
campaign, and is designed to encompass all of the primary spatial and temporal
scales necessary to constrain fine-grained trapping and
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similar to low-lying coastlines around the world,
the east coast of the U.S. is rich with tidal rivers and fringing tidal
settings. This project will gain essential information on how sediment and
associated heavy metal contaminants are distributed within these tidal
environments. The study has additional significance in that our field site (the
Connecticut River), is the largest river system in the northeast, one of only 14
American Heritage Rivers designated by the U.S. EPA, among only 26 U.S. wetlands
recognized for international significance by the United Nations, and among 40 of
the ?Last Great Places? in the Western Hemisphere designated by The Nature
Conservancy. Educational outreach includes undergraduate presentations to high
school classes, and the opportunity for high school seniors to work with the
research team over a six-week internship in the summer. We will train one Ph.D.
student with funding from this project.