* 1147787
* RUI: Developing Acetylene-Activated SNAr Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Jeffrey Katz, Colby College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 10/31/2016
* USD 312,000.00

With an RUI Award from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program,
Professor Jeffrey L. Katz of Colby College will research the merging of the
synthetically powerful carbon-carbon triple bond, with a classic organic
transformation, the nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) reaction. The Katz
group has found ethynyl groups to be sufficient for activating fluorobenzenes
toward nucleophilic substitution. Such acetylene-activated SNAr reactions will
be pursued in three areas. First, through kinetics measurements and experiments
of reaction scope, students in the Katz laboratory will study the electronic
nature of acetylene functional groups with respect to aromatic substitution
processes. Second, acetylene-activated SNAr chemistry will be exploited for the
rapid synthesis of complex heterocycles, and heterocyclic arylethynyl-
substituted luminophores. Finally, acetylene-substituted SNAr reactions will be
applied to the synthesis of oxacalix[4]arene macrocycles, and the formed
oxacalix[4]arenes bearing acetylene groups will be studied as a new class of
bifunctional molecular receptors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RUI award will also
support students working with Professor Katz as part of a research-based
mentoring program for underrepresented minority students in chemistry at Colby
College. Professor Katz is the creator and Director of the Colby Research
Scholars (CRS) Program, an academic-year program for minority students to pursue
independent research projects with faculty in the sciences as early as their
freshman year. Professor Katz also serves as co-Director of the Colby
Achievement Program in the Sciences (CAPS), a summer bridge program for entering
first-year students from underrepresented backgrounds. In conjunction, these
programs seek to recruit and retain minority students into chemistry and other
scientific disciplines. Students participating in the CRS and CAPS programs in
the Katz laboratory will have active roles in the proposed research, participate
in research group meetings, attend and present posters at local and national
meetings, and interact academically and socially with other student-scientists.