* 1147522
* SI2-SSE: A Unified Software Environment to Best Utilize Cache and Memory Systems on Multicores
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Xiaodong Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

This project further develops and maintains a set of system and application
software to benefit application users of multicores by providing a unified
software environment where multicore system utilities can be easily used as
common functions in various applications. The project consists of the following
three tasks. First, we further improve our cache-partitioning OS utility, and
make efforts to add two other critical system utilities: (1) Multicore buffer
cache management to prevent the shared cache from thrashing and pollution; (2)
multicore-aware synchronization lock management to effectively make process
assignments such that the co-running processes would minimize bandwidth
consumption within a multicore chip and cross multiple multicore chips. Second,
we continue our efforts to develop a software runtime library that enables
programmers to explicitly manage and optimize the shared cache usage and memory
accesses by allocating proper cache space and memory modules for different data
sets of different processes. Finally, we provide a unified software environment
for application users. With a set of easy interface functions, the users can
access both middleware runtime library and the system utilities without a
requirement of knowing architectural and system details.

The broader and transformative impact of the project can be significant: (1) Our
software will provide effective and accessible solutions for significant
performance improvement in multicores for a large scope of application
community. (2) Gaining the insights into system interactions among applications,
OS, and multicore architecture, we will provide valuable guidance for designs
and implementations of application software. (3) The software is online with a
maintenance for a public, wide, and sustained usage, which will directly impact
open source software, and contribute to application users. (4) The research and
software development of the project will train both undergraduate and graduate
students for their future technical innovations in academia and industries.