* 1147145
* ABI Innovation:   Synergistic application of cheminformatics and computational geometry approaches for predicting protein-protein interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Denis Fourches, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2016
* USD 869,120.00

An award is made to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill to develop
and deliver, ultimately in the form of user-friendly software, novel approaches
to analyzing protein-protein interactions (PPIs) that employ a unique
combination of concepts at the interface of structural bioinformatics,
computational geometry, and cheminformatics. Protein-protein interactions play a
central role in all major signaling events that occur in living cells. A new
family of cheminformatics descriptors of PPIs derived from Delaunay tessellation
of PPI interface termed SNAP3 (Simplicial Neighborhood Analysis of Protein-
Protein Packing), based on the previously-developed SNAPP approach, will be
developed. These descriptors will be employed as part of novel approaches to (1)
identify hot spot regions on protein surfaces and (2) predict the structure of
protein-protein (or protein-peptide) complexes using novel GridDock docking
method to be developed in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the post-
genomic era, analysis and prediction of PPIs is considered critical for
elucidating of many if not most protein functions to better our understanding of
cell biology, cellular networks and human diseases. This project will provide
both the experimental and computational communities with novel and powerful
methodologies and software for analyzing and predicting PPIs and enable several
important applications including: (1) unique description and comparison of PPIs
using chemometric approaches; (2) the identification of unknown PPI hot spots on
protein surfaces; and (3) rational design of novel peptides with desired binding
specificity against target proteins. It will have a broad impact by making all
PPI datasets, computational tools, and models developed accessible via a new
module within the publicly available framework, the ChemBench web portal.