* 1147954
* Collaborative Research: Morphodynamics of the Madeira  River: an Amazonian anabranching mega-river facing imminent disruption
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Edgardo Latrubesse, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2014
* USD 70,036.00

Morphodynamics of the Madeira River: An Amazonian Anabranching Mega-River Facing
Imminent Disruption&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Madeira River, the largest
tributary in water discharge and sediment transport of the Amazon basin, will be
dammed by the end of 2012. This project will collect hydrogeomorphologic and
hydraulic information before human intervention. The main objectives are to a)
analyze the fluvial morphodynamics to understand the mechanism controlling the
development of anabranching patterns in this megariver (this information will
serve as baseline for examination of anthropogenic effects); b) identify the
geoenvironmental mosaic of the floodplain and the morphosedimentary processes
controlling its evolution and architectural style, and c) provide predictive
mathematical tools and generate new concepts for management of anabranching
rivers. The field work in Brazil, using research vessel-based surveys from Porto
Velho to Humaita, will span the Madeira's flow before regulation, with surveys
during low and high water stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a
unique and last opportunity to study the dynamics and morphology of the largest
tributary of the Amazon River before it is dammed. The researchers will
collaborate with Brazilian colleagues on two expeditions in 2012--at low water
and high water. In addition to providing rare insights into the workings of so-
called "Mega-rivers", the results and data base obtained from these expeditions
will be fundamental for assessing and modeling the short and medium-term impacts
of the dam on the Amazon and the Amazon plume as a result of the alteration of
sediment and water fluxes. The project will support the interdisciplinary
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students, and its results
are expected to inform Brazilian and international institutions involved in
environmental management in the Amazon basin.