* 1147707
* Memory Specificity Across Cultures
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Angela Gutchess, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* kerry marsh
* 03/31/2016
* USD 300,003.00

This project investigates cross-cultural differences in memory. In six
experiments that integrate behavioral and neuroimaging (fMRI) methods, this
approach analyzes how the details people remember for visual images differ
across cultures. The lens of culture can direct preferred modes of processing
and/or attention to particular features of the environment, and this will affect
what is remembered. In a comparison of East Asian, Turkish, and Western (i.e.,
American) cultures, Angela Gutchess of Brandeis University will examine cultural
differences in exactly what people remember. Americans are predicted to remember
more specific details due to their preferential attention to features. In
contrast, the groups will be well-matched on general memory, which is not
dependent upon attention to features. Predicted cultural differences in memory
should reflect the use of intentional strategies, and directing people's
attention to specific, relevant features should reduce cross-cultural
differences in memory. Furthermore, aging, which reduces the availability of
cognitive capacities to deploy strategies and process details in explicit
memory, should reduce cross-cultural differences in memory specificity. In
contrast, for implicit memory, cultural differences in memory for specific
details will continue to be observed because the development of implicit
memories is not thought to depend on cognitive capacity. Functional neuroimaging
methods will provide converging evidence for cultural differences in memory
specificity, and identifying neural regions will help the PI to distinguish
between different theoretical accounts for why people from different cultures
remember things differently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
the proposal include examining cultural differences across both explicit and
implicit memory, which are thought to be separable memory systems. To date, the
majority of research findings on memory are based on Western populations,
meaning that theories of memory may largely characterize Westerners and may not
generalize to other populations. The study of cultural differences will lead to
a more inclusive field of psychology, with a better understanding of which
memory principles are universals vs. are culture-dependent. The proposed work
will make substantial advances in understanding the mechanisms of cross-cultural
differences in memory specificity by employing a multimethod approach using
sensitive memory measures, including neuroimaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
studying memory in a multicultural world, the proposed studies may contribute to
better cross-cultural understanding as well as better scientific understanding.
Little work has investigated cultures outside of the East/West dichotomy. If the
nature of memory formation differs across cultures, this could help people
better understand why people from Eastern and Western cultures often view the
world differently because what we remember powerfully shapes what we believe. In
legal settings, for example, people who remember more details of the situation
in which a crime was committed may hold a perpetrator less responsible than
people who focus solely on (and disproportionately remember) the perpetrator's
actions. Diverse populations will also be included in this research through
international collaboration and participation of non-Westerners in the proposed
research. This will provide a training ground for young scientists across
international sites and heightening their awareness of the impact of culture on
psychological processes. Finally, the work will be broadly disseminated through
participation in international conferences as well as science outreach programs.