* 1147678
* Dialect Evolution and Ongoing Variable Linguistic Input: Production and Perception of the English spoken in the Pacific Northwest
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Alicia Wassink, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2017
* USD 265,399.00

The Northwestern United States (including Washington state) is the product of a
rich history of Native American, European, Asian, and other influences. The
Pacific Northwest English (PNWE) project explores the extent of English dialect
mixture and development in this region. The story of the Pacific Northwest is
one of constant settlement and immigration. Although a few pockets of
historically-isolated communities can be found, most Northwesterners live in
places where their voices intermingle with people of different
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two hundred years after Lewis and Clark's
historic voyage to the Pacific coast, researchers at the University of
Washington ask: has the Northwest been established long enough to have unique
dialect features? Has the history of ongoing settlement made it the truest of
American melting-pots? How much has contact between Native-Americans, African-
Americans, Mexican-Americans and Anglo-Americans shaped the speech of this
region?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the way Washingtonians speak,
and explores how listeners (from the PNW and elsewhere) react to PNWE speech.
Speech data will be collected from Washington-born subjects in both rural and
urban parts of the state. Data from three generations of speakers allows
examination of the progression of change over time. This study employs
quantitative Sociophonetic methods that allow measurement of the acoustic signal
produced when we speak. Of particular interest are a set of sound changes that
appear to be focused in PNWE, including one in which vowels such as appear in
the words BEG and BAG are both shifting in this variety of English to rhyme with
the vowel in BAKE. This type of change captures a subtle but important aspect of
linguistic change. Though speakers in this region do not hear themselves
producing these differences, such differences mark their speech, and are "big"
enough differences to confuse listeners from other regions. This type of
phenomenon is of interest to linguists, because it sheds light on how languages
change, and on long it takes for language change to take place, all below the
level of human consciousness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts are
varied and strong. Student researchers will gain valuable experience in
sociolinguistic fieldwork and the scientific analysis of language variation. The
researchers will be drawn from a wide range of ethnic minorities, including
native Americans, which have been underrepresented in linguistic research. There
is considerable interest among the general community in the topic of varieties
of English in the local area. Oral histories and sound clips from speakers from
the region, as well as other data, will be included in a website freely
available for public access.