* 1147550
* Self regulation through motivated perception and mobilization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Emily Balcetis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 11/30/2015
* USD 199,952.00

Obesity is an epidemic that comes at great social and financial cost. Obesity is
the result of, among other factors, failures to self-regulate exercise
behaviors. That is, obesity is exacerbated because people experience difficulty
sustaining the type and intensity of exercise necessary to experience weight
loss and health-gains. Dr. Emily Balcetis (New York University) will conduct
NSF-supported research on an interdisciplinary theory referred to as motivated-
perception-for-self-regulation that has direct implications for self-regulation
failures and their consequences for obesity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of
Motivated-Perception-For-Self-Regulation illustrates and four proposed
experiments test sequential processes that contribute to self-regulatory success
in light of obstacles that threaten goal-pursuit. This theory primarily focuses
on one internal obstacle: low physiological potential that results from chronic
fatigue, poor fitness, or temporary states of depletion. The theory proposes
that motivated visual perception assists in overcoming the obstacle of low
potential by mobilizing the body for action. That is, visual biases assist in
self-regulation by temporarily increasing energy the body has available for
action, a process the theory refers to as motivated mobilization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For instance, the proposed research asks if people who are
overweight perceive distances to be longer, hills to be steeper, and ascents to
be greater than people in better physical conditions. Alternatively, if
motivations to engage in physical activity increase, do people who are committed
to losing weight perceive distances to be short even when they are physically
taxed? Will these perceptual biases temporarily change perceivers?
energy?changes which may improve or impair abilities to engage in the
exercise?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a secondary aim, this proposal will test one
intervention designed to experimentally induce perceptual bias among at-risk
populations. These studies will test whether a focused attentional style (an
"eyes on the prize" manipulation, with the prize typically being a finish line)
can be used to reduce perceptions of the physical difficulty of an exercise
task. This intervention is specifically designed to encourage action that will
help promote adherence to exercise goals in at-risk populations who struggle
with obesity. By manipulating the scope of visual attention, the research
simultaneously tests an intervention and provides direct experimental evidence
for the role of visual bias in regulatory success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed theoretical model will transform the understanding of role of
psychobiology, social psychology, and cognitive science in successful self-
regulation. This interdisciplinary research connects various approaches to test
a unifying theory of self-regulation in a way that provides greater explanatory
power than other models that more narrowly focus on a single microprocess. The
implications of the proposed theory could be far reaching, but will begin within
the important domain of exercise. This model has the potential to be
transformative theoretically, in addition to providing translational research
within the study of the chronic health problem of obesity.