* 1147289
* Physiological mechanisms of migratory traits
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Marilyn Ramenofsky, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2017
* USD 572,001.00

This proposal focuses on both spring and fall migrations of White-crowned
Sparrows. The primary goal of this research is to determine the physiological
mechanisms regulating migratory traits and the environmental signals birds rely
upon for preparation and completion of each journey. Although spring and autumn
migrations cover the same distance, all other facets of these trips are
different and birds have evolved distinct strategies to complete each
successfully. The underlying physiological bases have as yet to be rigorously
investigated and the investigator posits that understanding these mechanisms is
of growing concern as many migrant populations are declining rapidly owing to
marked changes in the environment and loss of habitat. The proposed studies take
advantage of two sub-species of White-crowned Sparrow, one that migrates long
distances and one that no longer migrates and is resident. The investigator
proposes to examine 1) the differences in muscle development and fat storage in
the two subspecies as one prepares for spring migration and the other does not;
2) the different hormonal mechanisms involved in the spring and fall migrations,
and 3) differences in preparation for the fall migration between young and adult
birds. Results from this study may offer new insights into the mechanisms
regulating migration while directing further investigations to define the
cellular bases that influence the potential success or failure of a migratory
population. The project would support a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate
student and involve several undergraduate assistants. Outreach to the public
would occur in California and Alaska through established collaborations between
the investigator and the SLEWS (student and landowner education watershed
stewardship) program associated with the Audubon Farm and Center for Land-based
Learning and the Alaska Bird Observatory, respectively.