* 1147962
* Infrasonic and Gravity Wave Studies in the Central United States
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Michael Hedlin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2014
* USD 180,124.00

Infrasonic and Gravity Wave Studies in the Central United
States&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismometers of the Transportable Array (TA) not
only directly measure ground motion due to sources within the Earth's solid
interior, they also indirectly provide valuable information about other
phenomena that affect ground motion, such as atmospheric infrasound and gravity
waves. Recently all 400 sites of the TA were retrofitted with barometers and
infrasonic microphones. The Earthscope Science Plan includes as a scientific
target the "cryosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere". Specifically, "studies of
the infrasonic field allow for novel deep sounding of atmospheric structure and
facilitate quantitative characterization of volcanic, oceanic, and other
infrasonic sources." It has been recently shown that the density of TA sites
permits one to accurately locate infrasonic sources, regardless if the
infrasonic signals are registered by seismometers or microphones. This project
is expanding upon previous Earthscope-funded work on the detection and location
of more than 900 infrasonic pressure disturbances, or "skyquakes", that were
registered by the seismic USArray during 2007-08 in the western U.S.
Specifically, methods are being improved and applied to the seismo-acoustic
USArray in the central U.S. Previously undetected skyquakes are being identified
as are sources of gravity waves that propagate across the TA. The goals of this
project are to identify the occurrence, waveform structure, and propagation
statistics of these sources from 01/2009 through 03/2012. Correlations are being
made between these events and atmospheric phenomena such as tornadoes and gust
fronts. This work is resulting in two new databases of infrasonic and gravity
wave event locations, arrival characteristics, and waveforms. The project is
also illuminating infrasonic arrival branches in fine detail from several high-
quality events.