* 1147158
* Collaborative Research:   ABI Development:   A Modular, Community Based Design Platform for Synthetic Biology (Clotho)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,098,166.00

Synthetic biology attempts to design novel biological systems to address a
number of challenges in bioenergy, biotherapeutics, and bioremediation. However,
synthetic biology is facing two very fundamental challenges: data management and
standardization. This project will complete the development of the Clotho
software platform for synthetic biology. Clotho is an environment which links
repositories of biological data (databases) to modular, user created 'Apps'
through a common interface which reflects a data model specifically tailed to
synthetic biology. Apps then can be used together to create specific design
flows ranging from high level specification of biological functionality all the
way down to basic sample tracking and laboratory management. The project strives
to (1) create the first standardized data model for synthetic biology captured
as a software platform. (2) To create a complete application programming
interface to access this data model via software 'Apps'. (3) To create a global
community of users via a website designed from the ground up to create, share,
and collaborate around software development. (4) To create a polished initial
software distribution including appropriate user interfaces and applications to
address the immediate needs of synthetic biology labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader significance of this project is to establish a design framework for the
automation and standardization of software in synthetic biology. Educational
opportunities include Clotho development in the International Genetically
Engineered Machine (iGEM) competition. Design automation coursework will use
Clotho at UC Berkeley and Boston University. The App store (clothoapps.org) will
serve as a portal not only for Clotho development but also as a community
resource. Discussions regarding software tool development and use, documentation
of ongoing research projects, and storage and retrieval of code and software
libraries will be enabled by this effort. Finally, the International Workshop on
Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) will host Clotho developer and user meetings.