* 1147410
* Graduate Education in Chemistry in the Context of a Changing Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Dorothy Zolandz, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 10/31/2012
* USD 132,923.00

This award from the Special Projects Program of the Chemistry Division to the
Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology (BCST) of the National Research
Council funds an examination of the status and goals of graduate education in
chemistry in the context of current societal challenges and employment
opportunities for Ph.D. chemists. The BCST will convene stakeholders from
academe, industry, and government to discuss these issues, and issue a summary
report. This effort will provide a baseline of knowledge and opinions that can
be used by NSF and other organizations as they try to optimize their support for
graduate education in chemistry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
graduate experience is focused on developing a student's ability to formulate
research questions and address them with a sound plan of research. It follows an
expert/apprentice model to develop the next generation of independent chemistry
researchers. As such, judgment as to the adequacy of any individual course of
education at the graduate level is largely subjective, and entrusted to the
thesis committee, whose members make judgments based on their experience and on
their perception of the expectations of the community with respect to the
abilities that a new Ph.D. should possess. This activity will examine these
expectations in the light of current fiscal conditions and societal needs. It
will consider whether the goals and expectations of current Ph.D. programs in
chemistry are well-aligned with the current needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The activity will enhance the infrastructure for education by a
critical evaluation of current goals of graduate education against goals and
needs of employers and broader society. It will contribute to the alignment of
graduate education with societal needs in commerce, sustainability, and other
critical areas.