* 1147602
* EAGER: REPWiNet: Renewable Energy Powered Wireless Networks - Architecture, Protocols and Implementations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Nirwan Ansari, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 126,000.00

This project aims to provision energy-efficient communications by powering
wireless access networks with renewable energy. Wireless access networks and the
power grid are envisioned to be deployed in a distributed manner in which a
distributed base station consumes less amount of power that can be generated by
renewable energy. Optimization theory and game theory are applied to study the
interaction between the wireless access networks and the power grids, to
optimize the operation of wireless access networks by integrating the power
distribution of the micro grid into the design and optimization of the wireless
access networks, and to design the operation of the micro grid by considering
characteristics of both the power demand of the consumers (wireless access
networks) and the distributed energy resources (renewable power generators). The
research explores the potential of applying renewable energy into powering
wireless networks, and stimulates the large scale application of renewable
energy in helping green the society and reduce the carbon footprint of the
environment. Two major results are anticipated: 1) the algorithms that optimize
the operation of renewable energy powered wireless networks (REPWiNet), and 2)
the communication protocols that coordinate the wireless access network with the
underlying power grids. The insights and results derived from designing REPWiNet
will provide guidelines not only for designing wireless access networks but also
for designing the power distribution and coordination in micro grids. Research
results will be posted on a website as well as submitted for publications in
journals and presentations at premium conferences.