* 1147367
* LTREB Renewal: Multidecadal performance of tropical rainforest canopy trees -  climate change, disturbance, and ontogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Deborah Clark, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 01/31/2018
* USD 441,524.00

Detecting and measuring the impacts of climatic changes on tropical rainforests
requires long records of careful annual measurements. Given that tropical forest
may harbor 25% of the planet's terrestrial carbon, understanding the effects of
changing climate on tropical rainforest trees has global significance. Since
1983, annual growth and survival have been measured for diverse canopy tree
species in a lowland tropical rainforest at La Selva, Costa Rica. A major
discovery revealed by these unique long-term records is that tropical rainforest
tree growth has been slowed by very small increases in yearly temperatures. This
five-year project renewal, which will bring the total period spanned by the La
Selva measurements to 33 years, will greatly increase scientific understanding
of the impacts of warming and of other potentially changing climatic factors on
tropical rainforest trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is the longest
investigation of annual tropical rainforest performance worldwide. Unprecedented
high temperatures are projected to affect all tropical regions in coming years.
This study will make it possible to measure directly how tropical trees are
responding to these changing conditions. This project has significant societal
relevance, as productivity declines by these carbon-rich forests could translate
into large carbon-dioxide emissions from the world tropics, thus accelerating
global warming. Data from this project are freely available through publication
in Ecological Archives. The investigators also maintain a very active program of
public outreach.