* 1147542
* 2nd Generation Pyrylogen and 1st Generation Viologen Electron Transfer Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Edward Clennan, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 510,810.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
supports the work of Professor Edward L. Clennan at the University of Wyoming.
The research will focus on the synthesis and characterization of 2nd generation
dicationic light harvesting molecules. The highly charged frameworks of the 1st
generation of these unique materials were designed to improve their efficiency
as photoinduced electron transfer (PET) sensitizers by inhibiting energy wasting
return electron transfer. The 2nd generation sensitizers that will be
synthesized will have structural features that will improve their hydrolytic
stabilities. They will also be partnered with a series of different charge
balancing counterions in order to probe the counterion effect on reaction
efficiencies. The photophysical and electrochemical characteristics of these new
materials will be investigated and their abilities to increase the number of
product molecules formed per photon used in several PET reactions will be
determined. The ability of these new sensitizers to increase the chain length of
a prototypical electron transfer chain reaction by inhibiting the chain
termination step will also be examined. The value of these new sensitizers will
also be demonstrated in several synthetically useful
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new sensitizers will provide access
to greener, more environmentally friendly, higher efficiency photoinduced
electron transfer reactions. These reactions have the far-reaching impact of
being able to produce new materials that are difficult or impossible to obtain
using other methods. In addition, these new sensitizers are themselves
fascinating new materials that have potential uses in devices as diverse as
molecular switches, field-effect transistors, organic photovoltaic devices, and
organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). Finally, the students who will work on
this project will obtain valuable experience in a wide range of computational
and experimental tools.