* 1147548
* EAGER: Bipolar Vacuum Microelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Brian Stoner, Research Triangle Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 01/31/2014
* USD 149,963.00

A revolutionary new device concept that could enable the transformation of
vacuum microelectronics from single charge carrier to bipolar devices (i.e.,
positive and negative charge) is proposed. This transformation is achieved by
creating and modulating both ions and electrons simultaneously in a single
vacuum microelectronic device (VMD) and has recently been demonstrated by RTI
International and Duke University. This achievement represents the first
demonstration of bipolar operation in a VMD, and the researchers believe the
EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Program provides an ideal
mechanism for exploratory study of this new device concept, gaining a basic
understanding of the new device operation and its ultimate potential in
comparison to other electron devices. These bipolar vacuum microelectronic
devices (BVMDs) have only recently been demonstrated for the first time, and
thus they are at such an early stage of development that they do not fit within
either existing or pending research programs. However, BMVDs represent a
potentially transformative paradigm for electron devices. If this proposed EAGER
program is successful, it could lead to entirely new fields of applications for
VMDs in similar ways that CMOS technology transformed solid-state electronics.

The BVMD operation provides the equivalent of a field configurable bipolar
junction transistor with all the advantages of VMDs with respect to operating
temperature, radiation hardness, and high power/frequency capabilities. This
proposal will focus first on developing a figure of merit that relates BVMDs to
VMD and solid-state devices, followed by a detailed investigation of device
operation across different pressure, temperature, and operational modes. The
device model will be developed based on the COMSOL simulation platform, enabling
detailed analysis of both electron and ion flux in the device as functions of
various operating conditions (e.g., pressure, power, frequency). The simulations
will be used to determine operational figures of merit and to aid in the design,
development, and testing of next-generation BVMD devices. The successful
research will enable both a better understanding of the device physics behind
BVMDs and the ability to assess their ultimate potential.