* 1147122
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Factors Mediating Particle-Selection Processes in Suspension-Feeding Molluscs: A Functional and Comparative Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Sandra Shumway, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 04/30/2016
* USD 447,007.00

Bivalve molluscs (e.g., clams, oysters, scallops) are among the most important
members of bottom-dwelling communities, both for their environmental impacts and
commercial value. These animals possess highly efficient and complicated
mechanisms for filtering the water around them, and capturing and sorting
particles therein. Their feeding processes strongly couple water-column and
bottom communities, and can influence the general "health" of near-shore
ecosystems. Bivalves are well adapted for selecting between living and non-
living particles that they filter from the water, ingesting some and rejecting
others back into the environment. Because of their key role in the marine
environment, it is important to understand the mechanisms by which bivalves
discriminate among particles and the factors that control this process.
&lt;br/&gt; In this research, scientists from two universities will collaborate
to elucidate how bivalves sort food particles obtained from the environment.
Based on their recently developed assays, the researchers have developed several
lines of research that will allow them to investigate the bases of selection at
the cell and organ level. In particular, they will study the interactions
between particles and the feeding organs, including: a) non-specific physical
and chemical interactions (e.g., charge, wettability, density); b) specific
chemical interactions (e.g., sugar-lectin associations); c) behaviorally
mediated interactions brought about by chemoreception and changes in the
activity of particle-transport cilia.&lt;br/&gt; Understanding the factors that
control diet selection has provided important information on a range of
biological systems including interspecific interactions, marine community
structure and bioenergetics. The proposed research represents the first step in
defining the underlying mechanisms of diet selection in bivalves and will
significantly advance an understanding of this fundamental process. This study
will also add to the growing body of knowledge of lectin-based recognition
systems in animals. The researchers will train graduate and undergraduate
students who will be involved in various aspects of the research and will
participate in scientific conferences. Results will be disseminated through
scientific literature, conferences, and articles for non-specialists. The
research team will partner with Connecticut's COSEE-TEK to provide technology-
based educational experiences for formal (e.g., high school teachers) and
informal (e.g., aquarium staff) educators. Educators will receive basic training
in the operation of instruments used in the proposed research and learn how they
can be applied to the study of marine organisms.