* 1147275
* Novel Endocrine Actions of Myostatin; Impacts on Somatomediation
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Buel Rodgers, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2016
* USD 668,747.00

The endocrine control of animal growth is far more complex than generally
presumed. A common model for growth regulation suggests that growth hormone (GH)
released from the pituitary gland stimulates the production of insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-I in the liver, which in turn stimulates many of the
resulting growth processes. This is known as somatomediation. The model is
almost 40 years old and is a ubiquitous feature in Endocrinology textbooks.
However, several recent studies suggest alternatively that IGF-I produced
locally (e.g. in muscle &amp; bones) is a far more important regulator of growth
than is circulating IGF-I, although these studies define growth almost entirely
from a bone perspective. The model ignores other regulatory factors (e.g.
myostatin) and does not incorporate recent studies suggesting that growth
dependency on circulating IGF-I may be a tissue-specific phenomenon. In fact,
recent data suggest that myostatin, a potent negative and local regulator of
muscle growth, may also inhibit hepatic IGF-I production and that muscle is more
dependent upon circulating IGF-I than is bone. A better understanding of
somatomediation and how it is influenced by myostatin will help explain this
extremely important endocrine concept. The objective of this research project is
to determine myostatin's novel endocrine role in negatively regulating
somatomediation. The central hypothesis is that myostatin's ability to inhibit
striated muscle growth is mediated in part by directly reducing the hepatic
production of IGF-I and its bioavailability in circulation. The hypotheses will
be tested by pursuing the following three specific aims: (1) determine how
myostatin regulates circulating IGF-I, (2) determine how myostatin-regulated
liver IGF-I production controls striated muscle growth and (3) determine
myostatin's impact on pituitary GH release. Graduate and undergraduate students
will perform these studies and will include those from under-represented groups.
Results from the studies will be incorporated into courses taught by the
principle investigator and will be presented in joint seminars with the
Washington Center for Muscle Biology in addition to being broadly disseminated
through traditional venues. The studies will also benefit society as a whole
through many outreach activities that target K-12 students, their families and
the general public.