* 1147369
* LTREB:   Understanding controls on state-tranisition on Yellowstone's northern range
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* David Cooper, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2016
* USD 449,978.00

The extirpation and subsequent reintroduction of the gray wolf to Yellowstone
National Park has created a rare opportunity to understand how predators can
change ecosystems. Wolves were extirpated from Yellowstone during the early
twentieth century. Their loss led to a dramatic increase in the number of elk,
which is believed to have subsequently caused substantial changes in vegetation
along the park?s network of streams. Wolves were reintroduced to Yellowstone in
1995. It was hypothesized that the reintroduction of wolves would cause a rapid
restoration of riparian communities due to their effects on elk numbers and
behavior. A 10-year experiment manipulating herbivory and water availability has
thus far found little support for the idea that wolves have changed the
ecosystem by releasing plants from herbivory by elk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
abundance of elk in the Park has only recently declined to levels that were
typical prior to the extirpation of wolves. Thus, it is plausible that there has
not been sufficient time for vegetation to respond to reduced elk density
resulting from wolf reintroduction. The 10-year experiment will be continued to
better understand how climate, hydrology, and herbivory may control riparian
ecosystems. The manipulative experiment will be supplemented with landscape-
scale observations to provide a larger scale context in which to understand how
wolves, elk, bison and weather interact to determine the state of the ecosystem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demonstrated interest of citizens in the unfolding
story of wolves in Yellowstone assures that research findings will be
communicated in the popular media. In addition, the research team will
collaborate with Yellowstone National Park staff to offer citizen education to
three million visitors to the park through interpretive programs. Additional
broader impacts will result from graduate and undergraduate student training,
and because data from this long term study will be made easily available to the
scientific community.