* 1147221
* Transcription factors in the neural crest gene regulatory network
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* John Manak, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2017
* USD 822,962.00

The neural crest is a population of migratory stem cells that contributes
extensively to development of many of the structures that define vertebrates,
including the jaw. Because the neural crest is important both in vertebrate
development and in vertebrate evolutionary origins it has been the subject of
intense study for decades. It is now well accepted that a cascading network of
regulatory molecules collectively known as the neural-crest gene regulatory
network commits progenitor cells to the neural-crest fate, and that disruption
of this network grossly perturbs development of the animal. It is known that
multiple transcription factors and chromatin-modifying proteins, which are two
categories of genetic regulatory molecule, contribute to the network. However,
the specific interactions among these regulatory molecules remain poorly
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This question will be tackled using genetic
approaches in zebrafish embryos. Embryonic development in zebrafish, as all
vertebrates, depends on the neural crest. Zebrafish embryos develop externally
of the mother and are transparent. These features make them particularly well
suited to investigations of mechanisms of embryonic development shared by all
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the conclusion of this work, an
understanding of how each of these regulatory molecules fits within the neural
crest gene regulatory network will be gained, as well as knowledge of the order
of function of each protein and of the nature of the regulatory interactions,
i.e. activating or inhibiting, to which they contribute. An understanding of how
a transcription factor that is required in multiple cell types is directed to
neural-crest specific targets by a chromatin-modifying protein should also be
advanced. The potential impact of this work is a profoundly improved
understanding of the genetic mechanisms governing neural crest development and
vertebrate evolutionary origins. This work will provide training in cutting-edge
molecular genetic methods for students from under represented minorities, and
includes outreach at local public schools.