* 1147621
* INDP: InquirySpace: Technologies in Support of Student Experimentation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Uri Wilensky, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 05/31/2016
* USD 2,117,904.00

It is widely recognized that much of science can more effectively be learned if
students learn science in ways similar to the ways scientists build new
knowledge. Yet classroom implementations of scientific inquiry often convey an
inaccurate understanding of the ways scientists learn, as they often fail to
give students opportunities to connect data they've collected as evidence to
science theory. In addition, a major barrier to effective student inquiry has
been inherent difficulties in interpreting data, e.g., finding patterns in data
from series of experiments performed under varying conditions. The platform to
be developed in this project, called InquirySpace, addresses both of those
issues. It integrates three proven technologies that together have capabilities
for supporting both authentic scientific inquiry and pattern finding in data --
the versatile modeling environments of NetLogo and the Molecular Workbench,
real-time data collection from probes and sensors, and the powerful visual data
exploration capabilities of Fathom and TinkerPlots. They are being integrated
into a coherent, Web-based environment enabling rich, collaborative scientific
inquiry. By adapting the software tools to execute inside browsers, InquirySpace
is designed to function in schools where firewalls and inflexible technology
setups are often insurmountable barriers, to run on most computer platforms used
in schools, and to be extensible to mobile platforms following the project's
end, removing major barriers to the use of inquiry across grades and not only in
high-performing schools, but also in under-resourced schools in which students
often are performing below grade and for whom text-based instruction is
decontextualized and difficult. Research will investigate pedagogical practices
for integrating software functions in ways that allow students to have the
experiences of scientists without being overwhelmed by the proliferation of
tools needed to carry out an investigation as well as technological needs in
integrating such tools. Products will include a set of design and use principles
for creating and integrating technology in support of scientific
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The InquirySpace project provides insight into one
of the most difficult problems in science instruction -- supporting authentic
scientific inquiry in a way that both promotes deep science learning and conveys
an accurate understanding of the practices of science. This project will show
how to integrate sophisticated software functions that support science inquiry
in ways that allow middle and high school students to have scientific inquiry
experiences that have a sophistication similar to the experiences of scientists
but without being overwhelmed by the multitude of tools, and resources, and
representations available to support their work. Findings from this project have
the potential to deepen our understanding of how to help students learn science
concepts and scientific inquiry through inquiry activities, and draw attention
to the importance of computational tools in supporting this learning.