* 1147467
* EAGER: Optical Control and Reporting of Cystosolic and Organellar pH in situ
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2011,10/31/2013
* Gregory Macleod, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 10/31/2013
* USD 257,074.00

All forms of life rely on biochemical processes and these processes are either
accelerated or inhibited according to the concentration of protons (pH) in their
immediate vicinity. The pH changes that occur within nerve cells are therefore
predicted to have a profound influence on the ability of nerve cells to transfer
and store information. However, it is very difficult to measure or control pH in
the nerve cells of live animals, and as a result the influence of pH changes on
the nervous system, is difficult to test. Here, the investigators propose to use
optical techniques, combined with genetically-encoded proteins, to measure and
control the pH of live nerve cells in fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster).
Fluorescent proteins will be used to measure pH, and light-activated proton
pumps will be used to control pH. When deployed in the same cell, these proteins
will provide the means for establishing dynamic control of pH. These tools will
be invaluable for investigating the extent to which the pH fluctuates in nerve
cells during naturally occurring activity, and for testing the role of these pH
changes in maintaining the capacity of the nerve cells to transfer and store
information. Further, the development of these tools for fruit fly nerve cells
will facilitate their application in other fields of the biological sciences,
from mycology and plant physiology to renal physiology and oncology. Transgenic
animals and plasmids generated through this project will be made available
directly to the scientific research community. Information regarding the
performance and application of the tools will be made available through
publications in scientific journals and presentations at scientific meetings.
This project will directly provide research training for an MD/PhD graduate
student and training opportunities for PhD graduate students, undergraduate
students, high-school students and K-12 teachers.