* 1147250
* Spatio-temporal regulation of hormonal interactions in Arabidopsis shoot apex: Live imaging and cell type-specific analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Venugopala Gonehal, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* philip becraft
* 01/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

The arrangement of leaves along a plant shoot or branch is determined by the
manner in which undifferentiated cells in shoot apical meristems (SAMs) cells
are allocated to leaf primordia. The arrangement is critical because it
determines the plant's light harvesting capability, which in turn influences
biomass production. This project aims to understand dynamic processes that
control the spatial patterning of leaf development in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. The plant hormones auxin and cytokinin play crucial roles,
but while computational models explain the importance of auxin, the function of
cytokinin is not well understood. This is because cytokinin regulates several
interconnected processes that cannot be easily deciphered by traditional static
analytical methods. This project will elucidate the role of cytokinin using
transient manipulation of hormone levels and signaling followed by live imaging
and high-resolution molecular analysis. It will also explore how auxin and
cytokinin influence locally-acting transcription factors implicated in leaf
patterning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project outcomes will be used to develop
predictive computational models to facilitate engineering of crop plants for
optimal light harvest and increased productivity. The live images of actively
developing shoot apices of plants and dynamic data sets will be used in a new
interdisciplinary graduate course on developmental dynamics, and in an
undergraduate cell biology course. These data also will be incorporated into a
summer workshop for schoolteachers that will introduce them to recent progress
in dynamic analysis of developmental systems. The dynamic data sets will be made
available through a web portal (http://cybersam.ucr.edu/Plone) for use in
research and teaching. The project will also provide training in live imaging,
image processing and high-resolution genomics for a postdoctoral fellow, a
graduate student and several undergraduates.