* 1147233
* Integration of Odor Stimulus Features during Olfactory Processing
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Neil Vickers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 12/31/2016
* USD 431,000.00

Airborne chemicals (odors) present in the environment provide a valuable source
of information for animals about the suitability of food, potential mates and
habitats, as well as threats such as the presence of predators. The olfactory
system equips animals with the ability to detect and assess the chemical nature
of their surroundings and adjust their behavior appropriately. Single odors are
often complex chemical mixtures that occur together because they are released
from a defined source. However, a single odor does not occur in isolation--it is
intermingled with other odors in the background. This project seeks to
understand the mechanisms by which the brain picks out and recognizes individual
odors against a noisy backdrop. Recordings will be made from single neurons in
the olfactory centers of the moth brain while manipulating the presentation of
odors to the antenna (nose) of the insect. The results will provide new insights
about the mechanisms by which odor information is represented by the brain and
how this contributes to the recognition of complex odors as cohesive 'objects'.
In addition to contributing to the basic understanding of how the sense of smell
works, it is also expected that the use of pest insects, as the study system,
may provide novel insights useful to the agricultural community in monitoring or
disrupting insect behavior. Insects are excellent tools for introducing and
engaging K-12 school children in the scientific process and such appropriate
activities will form a part of the current project. High school students and
undergraduates will also participate in this project.