* 1147831
* Collaborative Research:  Deep Structure of Three Continental Sutures in Eastern North America
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2019
* Vadim Levin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 04/30/2019
* USD 305,898.00

Our world's continents have been compared to both icebergs and onions. They are
like icebergs in that they consist of a buoyant solid floating on a sea of
deeper denser material, and also in that they are mostly unseen, with keels
extending down to 250 km (150 mi) beneath the Earth's surface. They are like
onions in that they consist of a central core surrounded by a sequence of
younger layers that has grown around it. The process by which continents were
formed remains a geologic mystery. Two of the keys to that mystery lie in the
structure of the deepest part of the central core (or "craton", to use the
geologic term) and of the boundaries between the layers ("sutures" or "terrain
boundaries"). Earthscope's Transportable Array (TA) is a tremendous asset to
seismologists studying Earth structure, because it provides extremely high-
quality data for the entire land area of the US, a region that includes many
important geological features, including plate boundaries, rift zones and hot
spots. However, its impact on the "origin of the continents" question is
limited, because the core of the continent is not beneath its footprint, but
rather lies a little to the north, in Quebec. Our project, timed to take place
when the TA is operating in eastern US, is synergistic and provides a companion
data set specifically targeted at the cratonic core and surrounding terrain
boundaries. We are deploying seismometers in a line stretching from coastal
Maine (the edge of the continent) to northern Quebec (its core). The density of
stations is variable, and is highest in the three places where terrain
boundaries are crossed. We use earth-imaging techniques to test three
significant hypotheses: 1) that the bottom of the continental keel is a distinct
interface that deepens towards the cratonic core; 2) that the properties of the
continent are regionalized (that is, each layer of the onion has its own
recognizable properties), with terrain boundaries having a signature that
extends right down to the bottom; and 3) that the part of the Earth below the
bottom of the continents (the "asthenosphere") is flowing around the keel (in
the same sense that ocean water flows around the keel of an iceberg). The
project is supporting two graduate students, providing them with a venue to
develop their professional skills as both researcher and teachers. Seismometer
operations and data analysis involves undergraduate research assistants, in both
summer internship and academic-semester employment modes. During the summer,
educational features are incorporated into the fieldtrips to better introduce
these undergraduates to the science underpinning the project and more generally
to prepare them for a career in science. These include daily science
discussions, stops to view important geological features and visits with
scientists from collaborating institutions.