* 1147104
* RAPID:  Deploying VentCam as a Data Collection Base Station for the Axial Seamount SensorBot Array
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Timothy Crone, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2012
* USD 36,724.00

The PI requests funds to repurpose the VentCam seafloor camera system to act as
a data receiving base station during a test of the SensorBot array at Axial
Seamount on the Juan de Fuca Ridge during August of 2011. The SensorBot array is
a set of optically communicating and fluorescently sensing polycarbonate spheres
that measure diffuse hydrothermal fluid properties using novel fluorescent
polymers developed originally for use in human health applications. The
redeployment of this technology will involve a substantial rewrite of the
VentCam control software, and minor changes to hardware. This project represents
a low-cost opportunity to demonstrate the versatility of the VentCam, and
maximize its benefit to the seafloor scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also demonstrate the versatility of the VentCam system and the
potential applicability of this system to address a variety of seafloor
instrumentation problems. There will be several undergraduate students joining
this cruise who will work alongside scientists, engineers, and the ship?s crew
to gain experience using oceanographic instrumentation and to conduct their own
research. As an early career scientist, this project will support the PI?s
efforts to develop novel seafloor