* 1147236
* Retinoic Acid Signaling induces Ets Repressor proteins to promote primary neurogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Bruce Blumberg, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2016
* USD 520,000.00

Cells in developing neural tissue demonstrate an exquisite balance between
proliferation (cell growth/division) and differentiation (the specialization of
cells into mature neurons). Retinoic acid, an important molecule derived from
Vitamin A, is a critical participant in inhibiting cell proliferation and
encouraging differentiation. How retinoic acid controls this process to promote
the development of mature neurons is not well understood. The Blumberg
laboratory identified a gene named ETS2 Repressor Factor (Erf) that plays a key
role in neural development. Erf expression is controlled by retinoic acid and
loss of retinoic acid or Erf inhibits the formation of neurons. To test how Erf
functions downstream of retinoic acid, the Blumberg laboratory will use a
molecular approach to inhibit or increase the function of Erf in early embryos
and study the expression of important genes involved in the proliferation of
neural precursors and in the differentiation of neurons. They expect to identify
the molecular pathway through which retinoic acid, Erf and its target genes
control the switch between proliferation and differentiation in neural tissue.
Unraveling this genetic program and the molecular interactions required for it
to function will provide important and broadly applicable details about the
proliferation-differentiation switch. This will greatly increase the
understanding of how development works and, in particular, how stem cells decide
to stop dividing and differentiate into various mature cell types. The broader
impacts of this research are in educating and training the next generation of
scientists (including women and underrepresented groups) and in disseminating
the results of Federally funded science broadly. Furthermore, these studies will
benefit society in general by pushing back the frontiers of knowledge regarding
a fundamentally important but poorly understood process in Biology.