* 1147008
* RUI:   Elevated environmental CO2 impairs acclimation to hypoxia in crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Louis Burnett, College of Charleston
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 02/28/2018
* USD 761,978.00

Organisms living in coastal waters are exposed daily to low oxygen conditions
(hypoxia). Some animals adapt to hypoxia by increasing levels of the respiratory
pigment that delivers O2 to tissues. For example, humans make more red blood
cells at high altitude where O2 is limited than at sea level. Other organisms,
such as deep-diving and hibernating animals, can lower their metabolism,
reducing their need for O2. Estuarine organisms rely on these and other
strategies to tolerate hypoxia. Less well-recognized is that high levels of CO2,
hypercapnia, occur naturally with hypoxia in coastal waters, causing significant
acidification. Yet, virtually nothing is known about the combined effects of
hypoxia and hypercapnia on estuarine species. In the current studies Pacific
whiteleg shrimp, Litopenaeus vannamei, and Atlantic blue crabs, Callinectes
sapidus, will be exposed to combinations of low O2 and high CO2. Changes in O2
delivery to tissues will be quantified by measuring heart and breathing rates,
as well as the molecular composition of their respiratory pigment and its
ability to bind O2. Next, we will look for changes in metabolism and the
energetically expensive process of protein synthesis. Finally we will test how
shrimp and crabs respond to low O2 and high CO2 when performing energetically
demanding activities. With these studies we expect to show that hypercapnia
interferes with normal adaptations to hypoxia in estuarine crustaceans. While
testing this idea, we will continue to teach, train and publish with students
from two primarily undergraduate institutions. The proposed work also draws
attention to the future vitality of shrimp and crab populations which, world-
wide, form the basis of a multi-billion dollar seafood market. These results
should also prove useful in understanding how these economically and
ecologically important species will be impacted in response to future global
changes.