* 1147517
* U.S. participation in the IUTAM Symposium on "Mobile particulate systems:  kinematics, rheology and phenomena" Bangalor, India, January 23-27, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2012
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 10/31/2012
* USD 28,000.00

1147517 PI: Leal

This symposium is sponsored by IUTAM (International Union of Theoretical and
Applied Mechanics) as one of the approximately 15 chosen by the IUTAM General
Assembly for the current two year period. The main themes of this meeting are
granular flows, particle-fluid suspensions, and suspensions of flexible and/or
swimming cells and microorganisms. Although there have been meetings and
workshops on the individual topics, this is the first meeting so far as the
proposer is aware that combines these subjects to seek a synergistic
interaction, and thus push all of the topical areas forward. Particle and
particle-fluid flows are ubiquitous in nature and in industrial processes, yet
their mechanics and kinematics is poorly understood. Such an understanding would
be of great value in the design and optimization of processes for the chemical,
mineral, food and pharmaceutical industries, and also in mitigating the effects
of natural disasters such as avalanches and debris flows. Several factors
contribute to the lack of understanding of these systems, such as the complex
nature of grain interactions (e.g., friction in dry systems, hydrodynamic
interactions in suspensions), limited understanding of the statistics of grain
interactions and microstructure, and the strong dependence of these properties
on the nature of forcing. The emphasis of this meeting will be on the regimes of
flow wherein the particles are mobile or free to flow.

The mathematical tools and experimental techniques developed for the granular
and suspension flows find application in many areas of complex fluids and
multiphase flows. Equally, the development of techniques in allied areas of
physics and mathematics will find applications in the understanding of
particulate flows. As a specific example, rheological models for anisotropic
fluids that have been proposed several decades ago for liquid crystalline
mesophases now find application in the modeling of dense granular flows.
Similarly, the developments of theoretical and computational tools for Stokesian
suspensions now find application in the analysis of biological systems such as
swimming microorganisms. Thus, fostering interaction between these communities
will therefore be of significant benefit to all these areas.