* 1147534
* Collaborative Research:   Anthropological-Genomic Effects of European Colonization on Native North Americans
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Noah Rosenberg, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 139,536.00

European colonists changed the natural, social and cultural environments of
indigenous populations in North America. This project focuses on the effects of
European colonization on Native North Americans through an approach that
incorporates genomic analysis, computational-statistic methods, and integration
with existing databases. The genomic and statistical analysis will be combined
with historical and genealogical information to provide a substantive view of
Native American evolutionary history and the colonization process. Inclusion of
multiple communities from within individual geographic regions across North
America will provide a basis for examining shared and distinctive aspects of the
history of European colonization within each of these regions. The study
examines the amount of non-Native ancestry in each group and the properties of
events that contributed the non-Native ancestry to Native American communities.
In addition, the study examines admixture-driven selection, that is, regions of
the genome in which genomic signatures characteristic of non-Native American
ancestry have an elevated frequency in Native Americans. This project serves as
a model for understanding the genomic effects of European colonization in other
parts of the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project works to create mutually
beneficial and trusting relationships between Native American communities and
scientific researchers. Central to this effort is a summer workshop for Native
American students to discuss genomic research. In addition, two molecular
anthropology students and one postdoctoral fellow will be trained in the latest
genomic analyses. This project expands collaborations of researchers with an
interest in studying important recent historical events in Native American
history.