* 1147919
* RUI: Geophysical Measurements Using Ring Lasers and Arrays
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Robert Dunn, Hendrix College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2016
* USD 121,590.00

In keeping with the goal of the "RUI: Geophysical Measurements Using Ring Lasers
and Arrays" award to help create an infrastructure for advancing research in the
Earth sciences, undergraduate students at Hendrix College in Conway, Arkansas
are examining the rotational ground motion generated by earthquakes in the
Central United States, atmospheric infrasound, and the characteristics of the
Mississippi Embayment. In these studies, the students are utilizing measurements
from large ring laser gyroscopes in conjunction with the seismographs and
barometric pressure gauges that are part of the NSF Transportable EarthScope
Array. Seismologists have known for years that earthquakes generate rotational
ground motion in addition to vertical and lateral ground movement; the potential
hazards from the rotational components of earthquakes are not completely
understood. Two approaches for measuring the rotational components of seismic
waves are through the use of large ring laser gyroscopes and arrays of
seismographs. In addition to being sensitive to seismic waves, large ring laser
gyroscopes have proven to be sensitive to atmospheric infrasound. Measurements
from the ring laser gyroscopes and the barometric pressure readings from the NSF
Transportable EarthScope Array are in use by the students to study the
infrasound signatures from phenomenon as varied as hurricanes, volcanoes,
Chinook winds over the Rocky Mountains, and microbaroms from ocean standing
waves. As an example, infrasound signatures from hurricanes can provide
information about their internal structure and perhaps provide information about
their intensity variations. During 1811-1812, three large earthquakes in the
Mississippi Embayment shook the Central United States with epicenters close to
the small town of New Madrid, Mo. Estimates of the earthquake magnitudes range
from slightly above seven to nearly eight. If earthquakes of this magnitude were
to reoccur, there could be catastrophic damage to metropolitan areas such as
Memphis, TN. In an attempt to better understand the danger from the New Madrid
fault, NSF has funded the deployment of a dense seismic array that will
supplement the NSF Transportable EarthScope Array. Hendrix College students are
using the results from the dense array in their rotation ground motion studies
and are gaining hands-on seismological field experience in helping to deploy
seismographs in the dense array.