* 1147622
* Collaborative Research: Imaging the Cascadia Subduction Zone: A Ship-to-shore Opportunity
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Geoffrey Abers, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2015
* USD 209,402.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanic plates store water as hydrous
minerals through alteration at mid-ocean ridges and ocean basins, and release
that water as these minerals break down in subduction zones. The relatively
small Juan de Fuca plate allows an opportunity to completely image this process,
from ridge to subduction zone thrust. This project enhances a major active-
source seismic cruise of the R/V Langseth that will traverse the Juan de Fuca
plate during the summer of 2012, extending the active seismic acquisition
towards the shore and deploying 6 additional ocean bottom seismometers and 48
onshore seismometers to record the offshore sources. This will allow us to
extend the velocity models landward of the trench, covering the locked zone and
the up-dip edge of the part of the plate boundary that is characterized by
episodic tremor and slip. The recorded data will overlap spatially with two of
the densest receiver function transects across a subduction megathrust and will
allow us to conduct an integrated analysis of the short-period and broad-band
seismic response of thrust zone structure. By sampling along two corridors, one
coming ashore in Washington and one in Oregon, we can investigate the hypothesis
that subduction zone thrust properties vary along strike due to variable
hydration of the oceanic plate, and explore relationships both in the locked
zone and in the region of slow slip that may be affected by variations in
hydration of the subducting plate. The integrated analysis of active-source with
coincident existing passive-source data will place multiple-wavelength
constraints on the extent to which thrust zones are characterized by substantial
excess pore pressure or thick metasedimentary subduction channels. In addition,
off Oregon we propose to shoot 5 shorter lines to enhance and extend the
existing 3D coverage of ray paths in a segment of the margin that displays
strong evidence of along-strike heterogeneity, including evidence for subducted
seamounts that impact interplate coupling. Paleo-seismic data indicate that this
segment is a major transition in the recurrence interval of plate boundary
earthquakes. These hypotheses are closely related to many of the "Outstanding
Questions" in the EarthScope Science Plan for 2010-2020, and address several
motivating questions of the GeoPRISMS Subduction Cycles and Dynamics
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Non-technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The largest earthquakes on earth arise from the thrust faults of subduction
zones, and the most likely place for a magnitude 9.0 earthquake in the 48
contiguous United States lies in the Cascadia subduction zone, just offshore
Oregon, Washington, and northern California. Still, little remains known about
the behavior of such fault zones, because their physical characteristics cannot
be sampled directly at the depths that earthquakes occur. The scarcity of
historical earthquakes on the Cascadia thrust zone further clouds our
understanding of it. Seismic waves provide the main tool for examining the
nature of these faults, allowing to construct images of these regions in a
process that is analogous to a combined CAT scan and ultrasound of the human
body. Prior studies have indicated an important role for water and sediment in
allowing or regulating large earthquakes, and have been interpreted to show that
thrust fault zones are either thick regions of very high pore pressure or
regions lubricated by sediment. In this study, we take advantage of a
previously-scheduled active-source seismic survey just offshore of the Cascadia
subduction zone, focused on imaging the incoming Juan de Fuca plate, to gather
additional data to sample the structure of the thrust zone. The project includes
both offshore and on land seismograph deployments. We will compare the
information we obtain on the structure of the fault zone here with images of the
incoming plate being obtained farther offshore to see how the plate changes as
it enters the subduction zone. We will also compare our results to images
obtained previously using much lower frequency earthquake sources and to images
from other subduction zones that have recently experienced very large
earthquakes (e.g. NE Japan and central Chile). This study will improve our
understanding of the relationship between fault zone structure, incoming and
upper-plate structure, and earthquake hazards in the region. The project also
emphasizes student training across a broad spectrum of field acquisition and
seismic analysis techniques.