* 1147166
* ABI Development: Dryad: scalable and sustainable infrastructure for the publication of data
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Hilary Davis, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2015
* USD 2,403,637.00

Duke University, in collaboration with North Carolina State University and
University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, is awarded a grant to enhance the
services provided by Dryad (http://datadryad.org), a recently launched
repository for data underlying the findings in the scholarly bioscience
literature. Dryad is distinguished by the close association of data deposition
with the process and business of scholarly publishing, and by using article
publication as a model for how researchers can benefit from data sharing
infrastructure. In a short time, dozens of journals have adopted Dryad as a
mechanism for data archiving, and the repository is now at a point of transition
to a sustainable organization that has the capacity to make thousands of new
datasets each year openly available for reuse in perpetuity. Technical and
organizational innovations supported by this award will enhance the Dryad's
scalability and sustainability. The technical goals include: automation of
metadata curation and preservation tasks; developing more efficient and scalable
processes to integrate the manuscript submission processes of journals with the
data submission process of Dryad; enhancing the features and usability of the
deposition interface; and improving the machine and human interfaces for
filtering, searching and accessing repository contents. Dryad?s business model
will be refined through evaluation of the costs and benefits of data archiving
and data reuse to stakeholders, and continued evaluation of Dryad's role with
respect to the many emergent technologies in the world of publishing and data
repositories. Dryad's sustainability will be addressed by implementing a
nonprofit governance and revenue model that has been developed over the past
three years by diverse stakeholders in the research, publishing, library and
funder communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of Dryad stem from
its potential to transform the way research data are communicated and preserved.
The credibility and effectiveness of the research enterprise is due in large
part to the social contract behind scholarly publishing. Researchers are
incentivized to disclose their work to their peers in return for professional
credit. In so doing, they also expose their findings to be confirmed or refuted,
and enable other researchers to build upon their results. Dryad seeks to extend
this social contract to research data by providing a model for how a
disciplinary repository can incentivize researchers to disclose the data that is
of the greatest value for scientific reuse, that associated with publications,
and realize the manifold benefits of free access to scientific data in
perpetuity. This award will provide resources for Dryad to to reach out to the
next generation of researchers through educational initiatives and partnerships
with the broader community. As new journal and funder mandates raise demand and
expectations for data management, preservation, and dissemination services,
Dryad - as a stable, community-governed organization - aims to be in a position
to provide the necessary infrastructure, as well as provide a focused forum for
participating journals, societies and publishers to take coordinated, and well-
informed, steps toward improved policy and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;___________________________________________________________________________
__