* 1147230
* ABI Development:   An extensible software platform for integrating multiple sources of data and uncertainty using hierarchical statistical models
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Perry de Valpine, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 05/31/2017
* USD 912,896.00

Hierarchical statistical models allow estimation of patterns in complex
biological data while accounting for relationships such as temporal or spatial
patterns or shared sampling units. A great variety of analysis algorithms for
hierarchical models have been developed by statistical researchers but are
unavailable to practitioners such as experimental or field biologists. These
include many types of Markov chain Monte Carlo, as well as sequential Monte
Carlo, importance sampling, approximate Bayesian computation, and other
numerical methods and approximations. In addition, there are many higher-level
algorithms that use these as components of methods for model selection, model
averaging, maximum likelihood estimation, generating predictions, and more. This
project will involve development of an open source, extensible software
environment for flexible composition of hierarchical models and algorithms. The
software will include low-level components in which algorithms will be executed
for speed, high-level components in which algorithms can be composed and managed
from the R statistical software environment, and middle-level components to
interface the first two. Many algorithms will be implemented and disseminated
for application using the new software. Moreover, it will provide a foundation
for ongoing development and sharing of new and improved algorithms in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hierarchical statistical models are used in many
domains of biology to provide robust conclusions and management guidance that
harness all available data. Areas of application include wildlife conservation
and management, ecosystem processes such as carbon cycling, organismal growth
and development, and cellular biochemical networks. In all of these areas,
biologists need to use complicated data to estimate the processes and rates of
change occurring in their study system. This project will provide a next
generation of software to make available numerous algorithms to many researchers
to achieve this goal. These algorithms will facilitate research workflows by
allowing researchers to extract the most information from their data in an
efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;