* 1147583
* Studies on the visual phonetic basis of some language sound patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Keith Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2015
* USD 300,173.00

Over the years linguists have studied and explained the sound systems of
language in terms of "sounds". Our words for this area of study "Phonetics" and
"Phonology" even employ the Greek root for sound: phon. Yet, language is
acquired in face-to-face communication in which children watch as well as listen
as adults model language. The PI has found that phonetic explanations of sound
change sometimes fail because they refer only to muscular or acoustic properties
of speech neglecting what talking faces look like. The proposed research
identifies five such problem spots in current thinking, presents the rationale
for hypothesizing that visual phonetic information may be involved, and outlines
proposed tests of these hypotheses. The ultimate goal is a workable theory of
language change that will make it possible to predict future
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first set of three audiovisual perception
studies in this project will examine the potential impact of visual phonetic
cues in historical sound changes involving place of articulation. These include
studies on the "unmarked" status of coronal consonants, the emergence of glottal
stop from homorganic consonant clusters, and the role of secondary labialization
in the preservation of bilabial and labiodental consonants. The second set of
two studies will again use audiovisual speech perception experiments but in this
set the emphasis is on dialect variation in American English, dealing
specifically with the role of visual phonetic cues for vowels and fricative
consonants. Two visual phonetic descriptive studies, one on low vowels and one
on interdental fricatives will be conducted and to provide the empirical basis
for the perception experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its
contribution to the understanding of how humans perceive spoken language and the
effect that visual information has on speech perception, this research project
will integrate education and research by providing valuable research
opportunities for undergraduates and graduate students. It will broaden the
participation of under-represented groups through the involvement of students at
community colleges. It will also result in the broad dissemination of research
through publications in specialist journals and timely web publication of
results and raw materials.