* 1147435
* Collaborative Research: Strain Rate and Moment Accumulation Rate along the San Andreas Fault System from InSAR and GPS
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* David Sandwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2015
* USD 220,015.00

The San Andreas Fault System (SAFS) is a natural laboratory for investigating
the physics of the earthquake cycle along a major continental transform
boundary. Two of the key parameters that can be used for seismic hazard
assessment are seismic moment accumulation rate and strain accumulation rate.
The GPS component of the Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) provides accurate
vector velocities (&lt; 1 mm/yr accuracy) at a spacing of 10 to 20 km along the
SAFS. However, the velocity gradient (strain rate) varies most rapidly within 20
km of the major faults, so strain rate is not well resolved by the GPS data
alone. Radar interferometry (InSAR) provides deformation maps at 100 m spatial
resolution, although factors such as temporal decorrelation and atmospheric path
errors have made it difficult to achieve this full resolution with sufficient
precision to improve upon the GPS measurements. The L-band data provided by the
ALOS satellite (JAXA) retains phase coherence over longer time intervals than
the prior C-band missions. This improvement, combined with stacking techniques
to reduce atmospheric errors, now makes it possible to image the entire SAFS
using InSAR with unprecedented spatial coverage and
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this research is to
construct high spatial resolution vector surface deformation measurements by
combining the high accuracy point measurements provided by PBO GPS data with the
high spatial resolution InSAR measurements available through WInSAR from foreign
and domestic SAR missions. The research has four main
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Resolve secular plate boundary deformation
using new GPS and InSAR measurements provided by EarthScope (PBO and WInSAR).
This involves the development of community software to preprocess the new data
streams to be provided by the ALOS-2 and Sentinel-1 InSAR satellites (2013
launch);&lt;br/&gt;- Use an integrated GPS-4D model-InSAR technique to better
constrain fault slip rates and determine the depth of the locked/creeping
transition on active faults of the SAFS;&lt;br/&gt;- Generate high-resolution
estimates of strain rate and seismic moment rate along major faults of the SAFS;
and&lt;br/&gt;- Explore methods for isolating non-tectonic deformation
contributions common in both InSAR and GPS data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Is California prepared for the next big
earthquake? Estimates of earthquake potential along major faults, such as the
San Andreas Fault System (SAFS), are used for developing scenario earthquakes,
for setting regional building codes, and for setting earthquake insurance rates.
While the timing of a major earthquake cannot be accurately predicted, the
moment magnitude can be accurately estimated from geodetic measurements of
present-day crustal deformation. The current array of 700 continuously operating
GPS stations in western North America does not completely resolve the crustal
deformation gradients (strain) along the major faults because the average
station spacing is too large. This research is refining the crustal deformation
measurements by computing and modeling the synthetic aperture radar data (SAR)
archived at the Western North America InSAR consortium (WInSAR) and the Alaska
Satellite Facility. This involves the generation and archive of large-scale
(1000 km scale) crustal deformation grids at 0.5 km spatial resolution in a
near-automatic fashion. Funding from this grant is supporting two Ph.D. students
at SIO and UTEP (a Hispanic Serving Institute) and is being used for further
development of undergraduate and graduate courses. This funding is also being
used to develop a ?How InSAR Works? module for use in IRIS&amp;#700;s Active
Earth interactive kiosks on display around the country. In addition, funding is
being used to move the GMTSAR software into the GMT distribution system where it
is available to 15,000 users worldwide. We are distributing all high-resolution
vector deformation data and maps to the scientific community and archive the
results at UNAVCO.