* 1147525
* Grammars and Parsers: Toward a Unified Theory of Language Knowledge and Use. Special Session at the 25th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Procesing
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Janet Fodor, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2014
* USD 27,700.00

Funding will support a special session at the March 2012 meeting of the CUNY
Conference on Human Sentence Processing, to be held at the Graduate Center of
the City University of New York. For 25 years the CUNY Conference series has
focused on central issues in psycholinguistics, embracing a full range of
empirical methodologies and theoretical perspectives in linguistics, psychology,
computer science, and cognitive neuroscience. Responding to a remarkable
acceleration of recent research developments in all of these contributing
disciplines, the special session will showcase current models of how language
knowledge and language processing interrelate. This fundamental question
underpins all empirical and theoretical studies of sentence processing. Is it
possible to embed a grammar, as devised by linguists, as a working component of
a processing mechanism for language comprehension or production? Or is it a
mistake even to suppose that 'linguistic' grammars might articulate with
processing in such a fashion? To achieve a comprehensive understanding of how
the human brain is capable of this most distinctively human activity, a sure
sense is needed of the interplay between language knowledge and use. The special
session also marks a broadening of the traditional focus of research on
syntactic processing to include the processing of semantics (sentence meanings)
and prosody (the melody and rhythm of spoken sentences).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six invited speakers will address these topics and the
special session will be rounded out with related presentations selected from
submitted abstracts. Collectively, these presentations will both deepen and
broaden the questions that will occupy the psycholinguistics community in coming
years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will welcome a new generation of
young scientists into the international psycholinguistics community by
supporting students' participation with reduced registration fees and travel
support. Publication of a volume containing the contributions of the invited
speakers and related submitted presentations will make the benefits of this
special occasion available to a wider audience.