* 1147381
* Developing Mechanistic Models for Bedrock Erosion at Waterfalls.
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Michael Lamb, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/29/2016
* USD 275,000.00

The upstream movement of waterfalls controls the shape of many landscapes and
sets the rate by which landscapes respond to changes in climate and tectonics.
However, we currently lack mechanistic models for waterfall erosion which
inhibits our ability to predict landscape response to environmental
perturbations. The goal of this project is to fill this knowledge gap through a
combination of experiments in an indoor waterfall laboratory and monitoring
waterfall processes in nature. The waterfall experiments will be completed in a
new state-of-the-art hydraulic and sediment flume at the California Institute of
Technology. This work will lead to mathematical theories for the sediment
transport capacity and erosion of waterfall plunge pools. The models developed
from flume experiments will be tested against sediment transport data that we
will collect at an active waterfall in the San Gabriel Mountains, CA, and over
longer timescales against a new database of waterfall retreat rates compiled
from previous studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to deriving and testing
models for waterfall retreat, our work will aid understanding sediment routing
and storage in mountain streams because waterfall plunge pools are natural
temporary sediment sinks, with importance for mitigating river flood hazards and
understanding habitats of aquatic organisms that depend on pools in summer
months. A focus of this proposal is an integrated research and education
program. Waterfalls are ubiquitous and awe-inspiring landforms in the natural
landscape; they provide a great medium through which to interest students and
the public in issues of erosion and sedimentation, as well as landscape
evolution. The proposed educational program includes mentoring summer
undergraduate research fellows and PhD students who will be directly involved
with the research. Through the Caltech Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship
program, undergraduate students will define and develop a project, write
research proposals, carry out subsets of the laboratory and field work, submit a
technical paper, and give an oral presentation at a symposium modeled on a
professional technical meeting. Outreach events will be focused on tours,
classroom visits, and field excursions for students and teachers in the Pasadena
Unified School District (P.U.S.D.), a district where the majority of students
are from groups under-represented in geosciences.