* 1147608
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Long-Term Variability in the North Atlantic Subtropical High Driven by Evolving Tropical and Subtropical Large-Scale Heating
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Wenhong Li, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2016
* USD 298,298.00

This project examines changes in the North Atlantic Subtropical High (NASH, also
referred to as the Bermuda High), a large cell of high surface pressure that
forms over the subtropical North Atlantic in summer and affects the weather and
climate of the southeastern United States (SE US). Recent work by the principal
investigators shows that the NASH has intensified in the past 30 years compared
to the previous 30-year period, and that the intensification was accompanied by
a westward expansion. Similar trends are also found in model simulations of the
effect of increased greenhouse gas concentrations on climate. In addition, the
western portion of the NASH, which overlaps the SE US, has experienced larger
north-south shifts during the past 30 years, and these shifts are associated
with heightened variation in SE US precipitation during this period. Work under
this grant aims to identify and characterize the causes of the changes of the
NASH in observations and climate model simulations through data diagnosis and
numerical modeling. Previous studies suggest that both local and remote diabatic
heating play important roles in the seasonal development and maintenance of the
NASH. Work to be conducted here seeks to identify and quantify the changes of
these heating on interannual and interdecadal timescales, and assess their
relative contributions to the interannual to interdecadal variability in the
NASH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its scientific merit, the work has
broader impacts due to the societal impacts of precipitation fluctuations over
the SE US, a populous region with a substantial agricultural sector. In
addition, the project will support two graduate students, thereby providing for
the future scientific workforce in this area.