* 1147019
* The Consistency of Behavioral Plasticity Across Different Selective Contexts.
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2020
* William Wagner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2020
* USD 512,998.00

Animals often benefit from adjusting their behavior to environmental conditions,
and these responses can be rapid. Yet, individuals often differ in the degree to
which they make adjustments (i.e., plasticity of their traits). For example, by
reducing its activity when a predator is detected, an individual may be less
likely to be detected. For this study, the investigators will assess behavioral
plasticity in four contexts: general activity, foraging behavior, competitive
behavior, and courting behavior. The overarching goal is to test whether
individuals that show greater plasticity in one environmental context also show
greater plasticity in others. To measure response differences, individual
swordtail fish will be tested both in the presence and absence of a predator.
Swordtail fish are a model for melanoma research and their behavior has been
studied for 50+ years. Because an animal's size can affect the costs and
benefits of expressing particular behaviors, size should also affect plasticity
patterns. A single gene largely influences swordtail size, and small males show
greater plasticity in some contexts than large males (e.g., in competitive
behavior). As a genetic basis of size differences has been identified, this is
an ideal system for the proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtually nothing is
known about whether individuals that are more plastic in one environmental
context are also more plastic in other environmental contexts. Yet, such
information is essential for understanding why individuals respond in different
ways to environmental change. As the extent to which plasticity can be
individually optimized and how plasticity operates in different contexts is not
yet known, this work promises to make an important contribution to our
understanding of behavioral plasticity. This project will also provide training
for graduate students, opportunities for undergraduates to gain an intensive
introduction to the scientific process, and outreach activities targeting K-12
students.