* 1147195
* Structural variation of the nitrogen-fixing heterocyst: Addressing the role of gas permeability in evolutionary divergence
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Scott Miller, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/29/2016
* USD 480,653.00

Nitrogen (N) fixation by microorganisms contributes enormous quantities of
usable, life-sustaining N to natural and agricultural systems each year. Because
oxygen irreversibly poisons the N-fixation machinery, managing oxygen exposure
is a central problem for N-fixing organisms, which use oxygen to make energy.
The cyanobacterial heterocyst is a specialized cell designed to provide both
sufficient energy and an environment favorable for N fixation. Here, the
investigators propose to use the heterocyst as a model to address how changing
temperature shapes the form and function of biological structures, which
manipulate gas exchange with the environment. Specifically, the investigators
will combine chemical, physiological, and genetic approaches to test how
naturally-occurring variation in heterocyst architecture associated with
environmental temperature impacts the temperature-dependence of heterocyst
function through the modification of oxygen flow into the heterocyst. The
project promises novel and general insights into how this ecologically and
economically important structure is affected by increasing temperature and its
capacity for an evolutionary response in the face of environmental change.
Because the heterocyst is also currently the best model for producing hydrogen
energy from light, the project outcomes will have implications for how to
engineer a reliable and affordable source of hydrogen. The project integrates
research and education through mentoring and outreach at diverse levels,
including a field course in Yellowstone that reveals the interdependence of
microorganisms and wildlife for controlling N availability in the world's first
national park.