* 1147176
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Shape Analysis for Phenomics with 3D Imaging Data
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Kathryn Dickson, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2019
* USD 151,817.00

The field of comparative morphology has been revolutionized by the application
of high resolution digital imaging methods to non-invasively visualize complex
physiological features. However, truly quantitative characterization and
comparison of complex morphological features still cannot be adequately
addressed by existing methods, which are typically developed only for idealized
2D images or surfaces. The accurate and efficient characterization and
comparison of shapes with 3D noisy imaging data represents highly non-trivial
computational problems which have yet to be adequately addressed in comparative
morphology studies, nor has efficient computational software been made available
to the researchers. The goal of this project is to develop advanced
computational methods for accurate quantitative characterization and comparison
of specimen morphology from high resolution 3D voxel-based digital imaging
modalities. With the growing recognition of the importance of digital libraries
of biological specimens derived from advanced imaging methods, such as the NSF
funded Digital Fish Library (DFL) and Digital Morphology (DigiMorph) projects,
advanced methods for utilizing these data are of great importance, but pose
significant technical challenges. Two broad classes of problems are of critical
importance: 1) The ability to quantitatively characterize complicated
morphological features from high resolution volumetric data and 2) Methods for
comparing such features between specimens. Our objective is to develop two
specific computational methods for geometric morphological analysis that can
optimally characterize and compare geometric features embedded within real 3D
imaging data, and are robust to noise and resolution limitations: 1) A novel
shape analysis method based on signatures derived from spherical wave
decomposition of 3D images; 2) A robust non-linear spatial normalization method
based on diffeomorphic image and landmark registration. The spatial
normalization methods will allow homologous structures to be correctly non-
linearly warped to each other or a common template for comparison, while the
decomposition method will facilitate robust, efficient, accurate, and automated
characterization of shapes embedded within complex 3D datasets. These methods
can then be used to generate species-specific atlases that define normative
morphologies, thus facilitating both inter- and intra-specific comparative
analyses. These methods will then be applied to the general problem of automated
shape segmentation, then tested on two problems of significant biological
importance: 1) Co-evolution of the short-tailed opossum inner ear and cranium
and 2) Three-spine stickleback evolution from freshwater to saltwater
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterization and comparison of morphological
(form, shape, or structure) variations is a problem of significant impact across
a wide range of biological disciplines. The rise of 3D volumetric imaging
methods for digitizing biological samples offers great possibilities for
addressing these issues but requires a theoretical and computational framework
capable of allowing researchers efficient and accurate methods for analyzing
complicated biological structures embedded within 3D volumetric noisy digital
data. The goal of this project is to develop computational tools to address the
two primary issues at the heart of these analyses: The ability to accurately and
efficiently 1) characterize complex morphological features and 2) compare
morphological features between specimens. The ability to perform these is
critical to facilitating the use of all digital library data for quantitative
morphology but to date have not been developed. The goal of this proposal is to
develop analysis software to fill this significant&lt;br/&gt;gap in the bridge
between digital imaging methods and its ultimate potential for transforming the
field of comparative morphology by developing computational methods to address a
broad range of morphological questions that inform our knowledge of the
evolution and diversification of species. The methods developed by this project
will greatly extend the capabilities of researchers and students to incorporate
quantitative anatomical measurements into the study of evolutionary biology. The
methods are general and applicable to any 3D imaging modality and thus will be
of utility to any digital library and will serve as a platform on which new
technologies and methodologies can be applied in the future. The resulting
analysis tools will be open source and disseminated to researchers through the
DFL website (http://www.digitalfishlibrary.org). A corresponding public
education exhibit will be developed at the Cabrillo Marine Aquarium
(http://www.cabrillomarineaquarium.org/). Developing a general computational
platform for the computational morphology from 3D digital data will allow
evolutionary biologists to quantitatively and reproducibly address problems that
provide greater insight into how ecological parameters might be, quite
literally, 'shaping' biodiversity and thus has potentially profound implications
for the field of evolutionary biology.