* 1147118
* Deciphering The Role Of Kisspeptin In The Mediation Of Photoperiod and Gonadal Steroid Signalling Throughout Reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Yonathan Zohar, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 05/31/2014
* USD 150,001.00

Kisspeptin is emerging as an important regulator of reproduction in vertebrates.
In mammals, it is considered to be the "missing link" that mediates
environmental and endogenous information to the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal
(HPG) axis via integration of sensory input and transmission to gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons. Accumulating evidence suggests that the
kisspeptin system acts similarly in teleosts, which comprise the largest class
of vertebrates. However, the study of teleost kisspeptin lags significantly
behind that of mammals. Unlike mammals that possess only single forms of
kisspeptin (KiSS1) and its receptor (KiSS1R), two isoforms of kisspeptin (Kiss1
and Kiss2) and two receptors (Kiss1r and Kiss2r) are expressed in the brain of
most teleost species. Each receptor is activated by the two kisspeptin forms but
shows preference to one form of kisspeptin. Preliminary data in striped bass
suggests that the two kisspeptins have differential roles in the control of
reproduction. Moreover, kiss1r- and kiss2r-expressing neurons interact in
different ways with GnRH neurons in the hypothalamic preoptic area. To elucidate
the exact roles of each form, the kisspeptins and cognate receptors of the
striped bass will be used to pursue specific, selective, and efficient
antagonists for the teleost kisspeptin receptors. As a first step, a suite of
systematically modified kisspeptin peptides will be screened in vitro for their
ability to block kiss1r and kiss2r stably expressed in a COS7 cell line, via two
signal transduction pathways, PKC and PKA. The selected candidates will then be
evaluated in vivo for their biological potencies, efficiency and specificity in
short term and long term treatments. In the short-term experiments, kiss1 or
kiss2 will be co-injected with the tested antagonist into striped bass.
Controlled release delivery implants will be utilized in the long term
experiments. These devices will be pre-implanted two weeks prior to kiss1 or
kiss2 injections. The ability to block kiss1 and kiss2 will be determined by
comparison to known kiss1/kiss2 effects on key hormones within the reproductive
system (GnRHs, LH and FSH). The study is expected to yield at least one potent
specific antagonist for each kisspeptin receptor, thereby enabling studies on
the exact roles and significance of each of the two kisspeptin systems in the
mediation of different signals in various brain pathways, particularly those
affecting the reproductive axis. This tool will pave the way for a wider range
of studies in the field of reproductive endocrinology in vertebrates. The
potential impacts include improvement of reproductive manipulations of farmed
and captive animals.