* 1147822
* Collaborative Research: Immersive Audio-visualization of Seismic Wave Fields in the Earth  (EarthScope Education &amp; Outreach)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Rosamond Kinzler, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2017
* USD 46,525.00

The core of this project is the development of a methodology
(software&lt;br/&gt;and hardware) to produce synchronized visual and sonic
representations&lt;br/&gt;of seismic wave fields in the Earth. Coupling these
senses enables&lt;br/&gt;people, from the general public to seasoned
seismologists, to&lt;br/&gt;appreciate and perceive an enormous richness in the
patterns of&lt;br/&gt;seismic wave fields. The aim is not to simulate the
experience of an&lt;br/&gt;earthquake, but to render the physics of wave
propagation in the globe&lt;br/&gt;and the nature of earthquake physics into a
completely tactile&lt;br/&gt;experience, unlike anything anyone has ever
perceived. The working&lt;br/&gt;group is comprised of earth scientists,
astrophysicists, sound and&lt;br/&gt;graphics engineers and educators, from the
Lamont Doherty Earth&lt;br/&gt;Observatory (LDEO), Princeton University, and the
American Museum of&lt;br/&gt;Natural History (AMNH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
images and sounds are generated from both USArray and GSN data,
as&lt;br/&gt;well as from simulations generated with the spectral element
method&lt;br/&gt;(SEM), using the SPECFEM3D software. Sounds are generated by
shifting&lt;br/&gt;the frequency of the seismic signal into the range of human
hearing,&lt;br/&gt;and are filtered and stretched in time to optimize the
coupled visual&lt;br/&gt;and sonic effects. Once the methodology is in place, it
will take two&lt;br/&gt;general forms:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, a web-based
format that allows people to choose earthquakes and&lt;br/&gt;seismic data to
listen to, with images produced by either a dense&lt;br/&gt;array of
seismometers (i.e. the ground motion visualizations (GMVs)&lt;br/&gt;produced by
IRIS of the Transportable Array data) or a simulation of&lt;br/&gt;the seismic
wave field (i.e. by SPECFEM3D). This format will be useful&lt;br/&gt;for
classroom and laboratory purposes, and interactive museum&lt;br/&gt;exhibits, as
well as for exploratory observation of raw data
by&lt;br/&gt;seismologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, a version will be
developed for the Hayden Planetarium at the&lt;br/&gt;American Museum of Natural
History, in New York City. The images,&lt;br/&gt;projected on the planetarium
dome, will include the surface of the&lt;br/&gt;Earth rendered as a membrane and
also a volumetric rendering in which&lt;br/&gt;the observer will see 3D wave
fronts propagating throughout the globe.&lt;br/&gt;The sounds will be tuned to
the large speaker array in the&lt;br/&gt;Planetarium. Within the context of this
project, several Public&lt;br/&gt;Programs will occur in the Planetarium, in
which the immersive&lt;br/&gt;experience of listening to the Earth will be
guided by the production&lt;br/&gt;team. These Public Programs are the essential
first step towards&lt;br/&gt;developing a full planetarium show on the dynamics
of the Earth at&lt;br/&gt;AMNH.