* 1147043
* Locomotion and adhesion in geckos: The link between ecology, form, and function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Timothy Higham, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 05/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Animals constantly face challenges in their environment, which in part lead to
dynamic and complex patterns of locomotion as well as innovations that allow
animals to move more effectively in their natural habitat. One notable and
extremely interesting innovation is the complex adhesive system of many geckos.
Geckos are remarkable in their ability to climb vertically and sometimes in an
upside-down posture. This biological adhesive system has inspired the
development of gecko-like robots, adhesives, and even gloves. Although the
microstructure and dynamics of the adhesive system have recently been examined,
little is known about how and when this system is used and what impact it has on
the mechanics and neuromuscular control of locomotion. In addition, little is
known about how geckos move in their natural habitat and how the diversity in
toe morphology (bearing the adhesive system) relates to ecology and
biomechanics. This project is focused on illuminating the functional
consequences of morphological and ecological disparity in geckos, and, more
generally, will assess the evolution of function across disparate groups of
geckos. The researchers will integrate approaches and knowledge from
biomechanics, ecology, comparative methods, and physiology to examine locomotion
in geckos. Both fieldwork in Africa and laboratory experiments involving
sophisticated techniques and equipment such as force plates, electromyography,
high-speed video cameras, and micro imaging will be employed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to propelling the understanding of gecko
locomotion, utilizing an integrative approach that incorporates field and lab
studies will greatly enhance the training of young scientists, including a
postdoctoral researcher, graduate students in the United States and Africa, and
undergraduates. Trainees will have opportunities to learn sophisticated
laboratory techniques, as well as gain valuable field experience. The students
and postdoctoral fellow will present their work at international scientific
meetings and publish their work in tier one journals. They will ultimately gain
the independence, experience, and skills necessary for a successful academic
career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific impacts of this work will be wide-
ranging and interdisciplinary. For example, it is likely that species occupying
habitats with drastically different surface textures will also exhibit
differences in macro and micro-morphology. By knowing what morphology best suits
a given surface texture, engineering groups could design surface-specific
adhesives that mimic the gecko adhesive system. In addition, understanding the
neuromuscular control and mechanics during locomotion in an animal with an
adhesive system will also provide insight into the control that is necessary for
gecko-inspired robots.