* 1147353
* Design of Complex Materials from Structurally Simple Gelators, Ionic Liquids, and Polymers and their Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Richard Weiss, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 453,002.00

In this project, co-funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division, Richard G. Weiss of Georgetown University
will investigate the structure and dynamics of self-assembly of molecules
derived from naturally hydroxyalkanoic acids into fibrillar objects and gels and
other molecules yielding new ionic liquids, ionic liquid crystals, and polymers.
Some of the materials will be chiral and/or thermally or chemically reversible
based on the uptake and loss of neutral triatomic molecules, such as carbon
dioxide. By relating the structural and temporal evolution of the aggregation
and nucleation processes, a correlation between nanoscale and macroscale objects
will be made. The influence of solvent, especially as it pertains to the
aggregation and growth of the objects, will be investigated as well. The overall
objective is to create a picture of how and why molecules aggregate into the
various one-dimensional objects so that the rules for such processes can be
applied to a wide variety of systems. The broader impacts involve training
graduate and undergraduate students and postdocs to solve interdisciplinary
problems. In addition, the research will expose the young scientists to
researchers from other institutions within the United States and in developing
countries. While the research will primarily impact fundamental chemical science
the outcomes will also be important for applications in which gels are
important, such as oil recovery, art conservation and food
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gels are composed of extended aggregates of
molecule, and are found in nature as well as industrial products. This research
project will enhance our understanding of how molecules assemble into gel-
forming structures and will form the basis for understanding more complex
natural and engineered systems, such as how amyloid fibers form in the brain,
how blood clots form and how better protective coatings can be engineered.