* 1147402
* Collaborative Research: Using molecular fossils to investigate environmental perturbation during the end-Triassic Mass Extinction: Global vs. local signals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* L. Peter Gromet, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2014
* USD 127,319.00

Collaborative Research: Using molecular fossils to investigate environmental
perturbation during the end-Triassic Mass Extinction: Global vs. local signals

Jessica Whiteside, Brown University, EAR-1147402 Roger Summons, MIT, EAR-1147685

ABSTRACT This proposal aims to determine the nature of the environmental
perturbation at the end-Triassic mass extinction by comparing lipid biomarker
and bulk carbon isotopic records from mid-ocean and more restricted marine rift
basins. This extinction, at 201.5 million years ago, is one of the "big five"
mass extinctions in Earth history, and is associated with multiple, massive
increases in CO2 and global warming linked with eruptive pulses of the
voluminous Central Atlantic Magmatic Province basalts. PIs' study will be the
first to examine in detail a mid-ocean record (Panthalassic basaltic plateau of
the Queen Charlotte Islands, Canada) and contrast that with records from
shallower sections in restricted marine basins in the United Kingdom that have
dominated the discussions of the mass extinction. This proposed analysis is of
critical importance for understanding this singular moment in Earth history, as
well as unraveling the specific cause and effect mechanisms of extinction events
in general, by remedying the dearth of studies that utilize taxonomically and
environmentally diagnostic compounds that can test specific hypotheses regarding
environmental change and extinction mechanisms. In an effort to support emerging
scientists from underrepresented groups, this proposal will support one high
school summer intern from School District 50 (encompassing the Queen Charlotte
archipelago) to assist with lab work and hone geologic skills. Furthermore, PIs
will co-lead a summer field trip for tenth grade students of School District 50,
and their discoveries will be incorporated into the science curricula and
educational programs for 2nd, 4th, 7th, and 10th grades, exposing science to
hundreds of students belonging predominantly (65%) to the Haida Nation and other
First Nations tribes, highly underrepresented groups in the sciences. New
research will be incorporated into the curricula of Brown University and MIT and
will be incorporated into K-12 educational outreach programs at schools local to
PI institutions, in which multiple undergraduate and graduate students
participate.