* 1147743
* RUI: A Neural and Behavioral Examination of Social Exclusion Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Joseph Williams, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 04/30/2015
* USD 148,106.00

Social exclusion has powerful negative consequences and harmful costs affecting
mental and emotional well being. This research project advances understanding of
social exclusion by examining the patterns of brain activation present during
social interactions that lead to exclusion in combination with self-reported
emotions measured after exclusion has occurred. In order to accomplish this, the
current project will vary the nature of exclusionary social interactions by
altering: how frequently participants are included, how long the periods of
exclusion last in each interaction, and when exclusion takes place during the
social interactions. In addition, participants' social exposure to exclusion is
varied prior to their own interactions by having them witness others' social
exclusion. After witnessing others' social exclusion, participants engage in a
social interaction with those who were previously excluded in the observed
interaction or they interact with the people who caused the observed exclusion.
Ultimately, this research examines the effects of the degree of exclusion and
the subsequent amount of social re-inclusion on patterns of brain activation and
measures of participants' feelings to learn more about how people recover from
being socially excluded by others. By investigating how exclusion develops,
these researchers will be able to understand and eventually predict the subtle
cues or changes in social interactions that lead to perceptions of exclusion as
well as the negative consequences of those perceptions over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research will benefit the larger
scientific community and society, and will also enhance the training and
learning of the undergraduate students who are involved in the research by
exposing them to opportunities to present the data, field questions, and explain
the impact of the findings. Because Illinois Wesleyan University is a four-year
liberal arts school, undergraduates will carry out all of the proposed research
projects. At least half of these students have been women and this contributes
to gender diversity in neuroscientific research. This proposal will increase
awareness of the psychological impact of social exclusion as well as increase
enthusiasm for graduate school and careers in science among students. These
findings will be disseminated broadly through the preparation of manuscripts,
abstracts, and conference presentations.