* 1147406
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous Cores, Memory-Hierarchy and Communication Architectures for Future CMPs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Luca Carloni, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

Computing has enabled immense innovations in many fields and
social&lt;br/&gt;life due to continued performance, power, and cost
improvements&lt;br/&gt;enabled by technology scaling. Unfortunately, two key
trends threaten&lt;br/&gt;performance and cost improvement of computers going
into the&lt;br/&gt;future. First, technology scaling is at jeopardy, leading to
major&lt;br/&gt;challenges in power consumption, reliability, and performance.
Second,&lt;br/&gt;power and energy consumption has become a key constraint, yet
existing&lt;br/&gt;systems are mostly designed in a one-size-fits-all way
agnostic to the&lt;br/&gt;needs of different applications. To overcome both
problems, this&lt;br/&gt;research investigates novel uses of heterogeneous
technologies in&lt;br/&gt;three key components of a computing system: cores,
interconnect, and&lt;br/&gt;memory. The approach taken is an application-driven
approach that aims&lt;br/&gt;to seamlessly integrate heterogeneity in the three
components. Major&lt;br/&gt;expected contributions of the research include: (1)
an initial study&lt;br/&gt;of first-principles based and application-driven
design of cores, (2)&lt;br/&gt;new mechanisms for enabling phase-change memory
based heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;main memory, (3) exploration of tradeoffs in the
design of&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional optical interconnects, (4) initial exploration
of the&lt;br/&gt;interaction of heterogeneous components in cores, interconnect,
and&lt;br/&gt;memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has the
potential to transform the design and&lt;br/&gt;architecture of future multi-
core systems, which are already a part of&lt;br/&gt;the entire IT sector and our
daily lives. It can enable overcoming key&lt;br/&gt;challenges that impediment
higher-performance and lower-power&lt;br/&gt;lower-cost computing, which has
traditionally enabled new applications&lt;br/&gt;and discoveries. Enabling
fundamentally efficient heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;multi-core systems can largely
reduce energy and technology-scaling&lt;br/&gt;costs of computing, and improve
dependability and performance. Direct&lt;br/&gt;transfer of many ideas to
industry are expected through extensive&lt;br/&gt;collaborations with platform
and chip design industries.