* 1147912
* SI2-SSI: The Language Application Grid: A Framework for Rapid Adaptation and Reuse
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,764,929.00

The need for robust language processing capabilities across academic
disciplines, education, and industry is without question of vital importance to
national security, infrastructure development, and the competitiveness of
American business. However, at this time a robust, interoperable software
infrastructure to support natural language processing (NLP) research and
development does not exist. To fill this gap, this project establishes an large
international collaborative effort involving key international players to
develop an open, web-based infrastructure through which massive and distributed
language resources can be easily accessed, in whole or in part, and within which
tailored language services can be efficiently composed, disseminated and
consumed by researchers, developers, and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to build a comprehensive network of web services and
resources within the NLP community. This requires four specific activities: (1)
Design, develop and promote a service-oriented architecture for NLP development
that defines atomic and composite web services, along with support for service
discovery, testing and reuse; (2) Construct a Language Application Grid (LAPPS
Grid) based on Service Grid Software developed in Japan; (3) Provide an open
advancement (OA) framework for component- and application-based evaluation that
enables rapid identification of frequent error categories within modules, thus
contributing to more effective investment of resources; (4) Actively promote
adoption, use, and community involvement with the LAPPS Grid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing access to cloud-based services and support
for locally-run services, the LAPPS Grid will lead to the development of a
massive global network of language data and processing capabilities that can be
used by scientists and engineers from diverse disciplines, providing components
that require no expertise in language processing to use. Research in sociology,
psychology, economics, education, linguistics, digital media, and the humanities
will be impacted by the ability to easily manipulate and process diverse
language data sources in multiple languages.