* 1147172
* Multimodal Intergration in a Decision-Making Neuron
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Thomas Preuss, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2016
* USD 380,000.00

Most animals take advantage of multiple information sources to form a coherent
percept of the world for adaptive behavioral decisions. These processes occur in
complex neural networks embedded in the central nervous system that are
typically difficult to identify and to study at the cellular level. Accordingly,
a full understanding of the principles underlying multimodal information
processing and decision-making has lagged behind. This project aims to
significantly extend our understanding of single neurons and their roles in
central computation. Specifically, it will address a common yet little
understood sensorimotor integration phenomenon: how neurons process multimodal
sensory inputs with different temporal characteristics, for example, gradual
visual motion stimuli and abrupt sounds. For this purpose, the networks that
mediate the fish startle-escape behavior will be used. These networks are
unique, because they involve definable decision-making neurons, the Mauthner
cells, which receive multimodal inputs and can be studied with
electrophysiological and behavioral techniques. A guiding idea for the proposal
is that the timing and balance of neural excitation and inhibition play a
significant role in information processing and the expression of behavior. These
characteristics are directly relevant to nervous system disorders in which this
balance is impaired. The multidisciplinary components of this project allow the
involvement of students at different levels of training and experience and thus
will provide outstanding educational and outreach opportunities. The generation
of preliminary results already has involved high school, undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multimodal integration
enhances our perception when the signal from a single sense organ is weak or
deprived. Elucidating the principles and mechanisms by which different senses
interact will be very useful in designing/optimizing the sensory environment of
people or machines performing perceptually demanding tasks.