* 1147047
* The Role of MicroRNAs in Vertebrate Ectodermal Specification
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Amy Sater, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2015
* USD 518,625.00

During the development of vertebrate embryos, ectoderm cells choose between two
developmental pathways: one leads to the formation of the nervous system, while
the other produces the epidermis. This study investigates the role of microRNAs,
small RNA molecules that can inhibit the expression of other genes, in the
process by which these cells become committed to neural or epidermal fates.
MicroRNAs are thought to play important roles in the control of gene expression
both in embryonic development and the normal functions of adult tissues; they
have been implicated in the differentiation of stem cells into specific cell
types, as well as in many forms of cancer and other human diseases. Their
specific functions in the initiation of neural development, however, are
unknown. These experiments test hypotheses on the role of a specific microRNA
known to restrict expression of a gene critical to epidermal commitment and on
how the expression of microRNAs may differ between newly committed neural or
epidermal ectoderm. In addition, these studies will identify genes that are
regulated by microRNAs in newly committed neural ectoderm and epidermal
ectoderm; computational methods will be used to identify candidate microRNAs
that target these genes. These results will reveal molecular mechanisms that
underlie the formation of the central nervous system, and establish new roles
for microRNAs in embryonic development. They will also contribute to the
development of stem cell-based therapies for neurological disease or injury. In
addition, these studies will provide opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to receive research training in molecular biology and
bioinformatics, as well as vertebrate developmental biology.