* 1147431
* Collaborative Research: Topographically Bound Balanced Motions
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Scott Fulton, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2016
* USD 298,715.00

This project examines the fundamental dynamics of persistent low-level
atmospheric flows which are found along the slopes of mountain ranges and other
topographic features. Important examples include the Great Plains low-level jet,
the South American low-level jet on the east side of the Andes, and the low-
level jet found along the coast of Chile and Peru. The central hypothesis of the
project is that topographic low-level jets form due to the elevated solar
heating that occurs along the topographic features. More specifically, an
inversion technique will be developed to determine the wind and atmospheric mass
fields in the vicinity of topography through inversion of the potential
vorticity anomalies generated by solar heating. The technique is developed in
isentropic coordinates and accounts for the intersection of the topography and
the isentropic surfaces, which bend downward toward the topography due to solar
heating. The method will be used to understand features of the low-level jets
including speed and elevation, and to provide a dynamical framework for
interpreting the results of complex state-of-the-art numerical simulations. The
analysis will be applied to a number of low-level topographic jets, and to other
problems including the onset of the Asian monsoon and its relationship to
elevated heating on the Tibetan plateau, the Caribbean low-level jet, and flows
near ice sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance due to the
importance of low-level jets for regional climate. For example, the Great Plains
low-level jet is responsible for a substantial portion of the moisture transport
into the eastern half United States which sustains agriculture. In addition, the
project will support and train two graduate students, thereby developing the
future scientific workforce in this research area. Finally, the inversion
methods developed in this project will be made available to researchers in
atmospheric dynamics through software codes, so that they can be applied to a
wide array of scientific problems.