* 1147089
* ABI Development: Ecosynth: An Advanced Open-Source 3D Toolkit for Forest Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Erle Ellis, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2018
* USD 879,800.00

The University of Maryland Baltimore County is awarded a grant to develop
Ecosynth, an open-source 3D toolkit for scanning woodland ecosystems based on
recent innovations in computer-vision technologies coupled with an online
community system for browsing, sharing, visualizing, tagging and analyzing 3D
scans of terrestrial ecosystems. Three dimensional (3D) scanning technologies
are enabling fundamental advances in scientific understanding of ecosystem
structure and function in woodlands (forests and shrublands) while providing new
tools for rapid assessment of biodiversity and carbon storage across landscapes.
Existing 3D scanning technologies are based on precision laser scanning systems,
which remain prohibitively expensive and technically challenging to deploy,
limiting their application to a relatively small number of field sites,
investigators and time periods. This project aims to transform the practice of
field ecology in woodlands by enabling the routine and frequent acquisition,
use, and sharing of 3D scanning data by both ecologists and citizen scientists.
This will enable remote sensing and advanced 3D analytics to become a "user-
driven" rather than "expert-driven" technology. Ecosynth 3D scanning technology
applies Structure from Motion algorithms to images acquired in the field using
ordinary consumer-grade digital cameras, including camera-equipped cell phones,
deployed in computer-optimized patterns on the ground or from the air by
hobbyist remote controlled aircraft. The Ecosynth toolkit developed by this
project will be offered as an open-source development resource on the community
website (http://ecotope.org/projects/ecosynth/), and to potential users as a set
of tools enabling the following capabilities: 1) computer assisted optimal image
acquisition for 3D scanning (ground and aerial), 2) rapid generation of high-
spatial resolution georeferenced 3D scans (multispectral point clouds), 3) an
online browser-based system for sharing and visualizing 3D scans of terrestrial
ecosystems that will enable expert and other users to identify, tag and make
other spatially explicit markups of ecological objects in a 3D virtual
environment. Development and extension of these capabilities will bring the
cutting edge of ecological observations and informatics into the hands of those
with the most field experience, potentially enabling the "crowd-sourcing" of
landscape ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Woodlands are currently targeted for
carbon and biodiversity conservation by REDD+ and other international agreements
and are therefore key areas for expanded scientific research and monitoring-
Ecosynth tools will aid in these efforts. Enabling regular inexpensive use of 3D
imaging tools by field ecologists and citizen scientists will expand forest
observation capabilities to a much wider pool of observers, thereby assisting in
global forest conservation efforts and even urban forestry. The project is built
upon engaging students in interdisciplinary teams across multiple stages in
their careers, from high school students (field testing), undergraduates
(Ecology, Geography, Math, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, and Information Systems), graduate students (Geography &amp;
Environmental Systems, Computer Science &amp; Engineering), and postdoctoral
researchers. Work will also engage the public, guided by an advisory panel
including both disciplinary experts (ecology, computer science) and conservation
organizations with citizen science programs. Ultimately the Ecosynth project
aims to spark the development of an open source 3D ecology community dedicated
to developing, sharing and investigating the ecology of woodlands based on the
results of 3D scanning using computer vision.