* 1147436
* Analysis of the Shallow Slip Deficit Using Sub-Pixel Image Correlation: Implications for Fault Evolution, Slip Rates, and Seismic Hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* James Dolan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2016
* USD 424,999.00

This research project is focused on understanding the distribution of fault slip
near the Earth's surface during earthquakes through the use of a powerful new
technology (COSI-corr sub-pixel image correlation), which facilitates tracking
of the location and amount of surface deformation along and around faults in
much more detail than was possible using previously available methods. Previous
studies suggest that the slip that occurs along faults during earthquakes is
larger at depth than near the surface, leading to what has been termed a surface
slip deficit. Determining the cause(s) of this surface slip deficit provides the
basic rationale for this research. Using the COSI-corr image correlation
technique, scientists from the University of Southern California and Caltech
will examine the distribution of slip near the surface along more than a dozen
large-magnitude earthquakes that occurred during the past few decades. The
results will facilitate the mapping of on-fault versus off-fault deformation
patterns in earthquakes, allowing correlation of these observations with basic
features of the fault zone, such as the amount of total slip a fault has
accommodated in its lifetime, which may prove to be good predictors of the
percentage of slip that will occur on faults during future
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research have basic
implications for the understanding of the seismic hazards posed by major fault
systems. Currently, forecasts of the probability of the future occurrence of
earthquakes are based largely on the slip rate of the fault, that is, the rate
at which the blocks on either side of the fault slide past each other over the
course of many earthquakes. Such rates are mainly derived from the analysis of
offset surface features, and usually do not include any deformation that might
be distributed around the main fault trace. Thus, significant off-fault
deformation may yield underestimates of the rate of movements on faults, and
thus on seismic hazard. In addition, these data will allow the researcher to
test models of possible preferred propagation direction of seismic ruptures,
which will be of profound importance for determining in advance the regional
distribution of strong ground motions. The anticipated results will also allow
assessment of models for the likelihood that seismic ruptures will (or will not)
propagate through structural complexities along the fault, an issue of basic
importance for estimating in advance the sizes of future earthquakes. The
results will thus provide the basis for the development of statistical measures
of on-fault versus off-fault slip and rupture behavior that will be used in
next-generation hazard assessment strategies to provide more accurate estimates
of future seismic hazard.