* 1148459
* Collaborative Research: Nitrate Reduction by Redox-modified Fe-bearing Clay Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Joseph Stucki, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2016
* USD 280,000.00

Nitrate contamination in soils, sediments, and surface and ground water poses
significant risks to human health and global environments. Even though much is
known about nitrate degradation in soils, especially via microbiological
pathways, a complete solution to this problem has been elusive. One missing
piece to the puzzle which could be highly significant is the role played by
iron-bearing soil clay minerals in promoting nitrate degradation. The long-term
purpose of this project is to devise strategies for on-site or in-stream nitrate
remediation using common clay minerals as the catalyst. Because the iron largely
remains in the clay mineral it stays in place during the nitrate reaction and
can, thus, be regenerated or cycled between its oxidized and reduced states to
continue the nitrate reduction process.

Clay minerals are everywhere in nature. They make up a significant fraction of
soils and of lake, river, and ocean sediments. Virtually all of these minerals
contain iron, the electrical charge of which can be decreased (called
'reduction') by bacteria growing in and around them or increased (called
'oxidation') by atmospheric oxygen under well drained and well aerated
conditions. This susceptibility to changes in electrical charge, which is known
as an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction, allows iron in the clay minerals to
react with other chemical species which have a similar susceptibility to charge
alteration. Nitrogen is one such element which, like iron, is susceptible to
reduction or oxidation. Nitrate is a very common form of nitrogen and can be
degraded or removed by redox reaction, which transform it into nitrite,
atmospheric nitrogen, or ammonium, among other forms. A redox reaction between
iron in the clay minerals and nitrate should be possible, but has never been
investigated to any great extent. The purpose of this project is to test the
hypothesis that clay minerals containing reduced iron can degrade nitrate to
convert it to less harmful forms, include ammonium and atmospheric nitrogen. In
this study, the clay minerals with be prepared by reacting them first with
chemicals and bacteria to reduce the iron; then they will be treated chemically
to make them more attractive for nitrate adsorption and reaction with the iron.
The nitrogen species produced will be measured by an accelerated diffusion
method, then the amount of nitrate changed to other species will be compared
with the amount of oxidized and reduced iron before and after the reaction with
nitrate.

Results will be presented at scientific conferences, published in scientific
journals, and reported to NSF.