* 1148461
* SI2-SSE: Supporting Generic Programming in C++ for Modular and Reliable Large-Scale Software
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Gabriel Dos Reis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,999.00

Generic programming has the potential of an effective methodology for building
large-scale, reliable, maintainable, and efficient software artifacts. It is
supported by the C++ programming language through the "template" mechanism. In
the hands of experts, C++ templates are formidable abstraction tools, key to the
success of libraries such as the Standard Template Library, and many freely
available and commercial software libraries and products. Unfortunately, the
practice of template-based structured generic programming remains restricted to
relatively few highly trained individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary
objective of this project is to investigate and develop software tools and
programming models that support scalable and modular generic libraries. Bringing
structured generic programming methodology to mainstream at the scale done for
object-oriented programming entails the invention of new programming language
constructs and compiler construction techniques that go beyond conventional
technologies. In particular, the apparent complexities of templates and arcane
technical details must be concealed; code generation has to surpass C++'s
current successful applications of templates both in quality and compile time
for industrial scale programs. At the core of this project is the investigation
of a direct linguistic support for requirements on template arguments
("concepts"), and their implementations in an open source compiler and libraries
made freely available to the public, the research and education community.