* 1148168
* SI2-SSE: Development of a GPU Accelerated Gibbs Ensemble Monte Carlo Simulation Engine
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Loren Schwiebert, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2016
* USD 336,000.00

This award supports the development of a general purpose Gibbs Ensemble Monte
Carlo (GEMC) simulation engine that uses low-cost graphics processing units
(GPU) for acceleration. The primary objectives of this work are to develop and
implement: 1) GPU accelerated configurational-bias methods, 2) efficient
algorithms for the computation of Ewald sums on the GPU and 3) automated tuning
of the code for different GPUs. This work builds on the PIs? existing particle-
based GPU-GEMC engine and will introduce functionality that enables the
simulation of biological processes and adsorption in porous materials. The code
will be written to maintain compatibility with the file formats used by the
software packages NAMD and VMD, simplifying simulation setup and data analysis.
The resulting simulation engine will be released under the GNU General Public
License v3 (GPLv3) and made available to users via the Internet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software tools developed with support from this award
will enable high throughput computational screening of materials for CO2
sequestration, improved materials for the stabilization of drug dispersions, and
provide molecular level insight to fundamental biological processes such as
membrane fusion. The use of graphics processors for the bulk of the
computational effort is expected to provide one to two orders of magnitude
reduction in computational time compared to traditional serial, CPU bound code,
which will allow for the simulation of systems of greater size and complexity
than with existing tools. The development of the proposed GPU-accelerated Monte
Carlo simulation engine will enhance the cyber-infrastructure of the biology
chemistry, chemical engineering, materials science and physics communities. The
GPU-GEMC simulation engine will be promoted through conference presentations at
national and international meetings, via a dedicated website, and through
publication in peer-reviewed literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
enhance education at the graduate and undergraduate levels. Research topics from
this work will be integrated into existing courses on GPU computing and
molecular simulation. Graduate and undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to work as part of a multidisciplinary team composed of engineers
and computer scientists. Students will be recruited from groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields.