* 1148346
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: A Glass Box Approach to Enabling Open, Deep Interactions in the HPC Toolchain
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Allen Malony, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2016
* USD 926,667.00

Parallel computing has entered the mainstream with increasingly large multicore
processors and powerful accelerator devices. These compute engines, coupled with
tighter integration of faster interconnection fabrics, are drivers for the next-
generation high end computing (HEC) machines. However, the computing potential
of HEC machines is delivered only through productive parallel program
development and efficient parallel execution. This project enables application
developers to improve performance on future HEC machines for their scientific
and engineering processes. This project challenges the current model for
parallel application development via "black box" tools and services. Instead,
the project offers an open, transparent software infrastructure -- a Glass Box
system -- for creating and tuning large-scale, parallel applications. `Opening
up' the tools and services used to create and evaluate peta- and exa-scale codes
involves developing interfaces and methods that make tool-internal information
and available for new performance management services that improve developer
productivity and code efficiency.

The project will explore the information that can be shared 'across the software
stack'. Methods will be developed for analyzing program information, performance
data and tool knowledge. The resulting Glass Box system will allow developers to
better assess the performance of their parallel codes. Tool creators can use the
performance data to create new analysis and optimization techniques. System
developers can also better manage multicore and machine resources at runtime,
using JIT compilation and binary code editing to exploit the evolving hardware.
Working with the `Keeneland' NSF Track II machine and our industry partners, the
project will create new performance monitoring tools, compiler methods and
system-level resource management techniques. The effort is driven by the large-
scale codes running on today's petascale machines. Its broader impact is derived
from the interactions with technology developers and application scientists as
well as from its base in three universities with diverse student populations.