* 1148638
* Can Behavioral Data Underlying Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Analysis Support Complex Theories of Perception and Memory?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Rouder, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2016
* USD 376,316.00

One of the primary tools in the investigation of perception and memory is the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC), which is a plot of hits ('yes'
responses on target trials) vs. false alarms ('yes' responses on non-target
trials). Researchers commonly claim that the details of these curves provide
insight into cognitive phenomena of interest. It is not clear, however, that
ROCs are sufficiently rich so as to allow differentiation of processes. The
basic idea to be explored is whether ROCs collected across disparate domains
have the same pattern, that is, can all be explained by common processing, or
have different patterns, that is, can support rich theories of processing. Based
on our observations, we will develop flexible, nonparametric, model-free tests
of ROC pattern equivalence. These tests will allow us to assess whether ROCs can
be used to make detailed inferences about
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding human memory has many practical
consequences in education, professional training, health delivery, and even in
legal settings. Memory researchers have posited many two-process models to
account for their results, including 'remember-know', 'automatic-controlled',
and 'unconscious-conscious'. Unfortunately, direct tests of these models have
often lacked rigor, because they have used statistical tests such as ROCs in a
confirmatory mode. This project will allow perception and memory researchers to
understand how to use ROCs in a more principled way.