* 1148836
* CAREER: Amyloid-Inspired Self-Assembled Hydrogel Materials for Cell Culture Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Bradley Nilsson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to University of Rochester is to study the noncovalent self-assembly of
amino acid derivatives into polymer-like fibrils that can induce hydrogelation
of the aqueous medium in the bulk state. The relationship between self-assembly
and hydrogelation phenomena of amino acid-derived fibrils is poorly understood.
The research objective of this proposal is to elucidate the fundamental
structural and functional basis for the self-assembly and hydrogelation of low
molecular weight amino acid derivatives in order to facilitate the rational
design of next-generation biomimetic materials. Current hydrogel development
relies on empirical approaches and serendipitous discovery. Fundamental first
principles will be applied to the creation of novel biocompatible, scaffolds for
the growth of cells. The use of these materials as next-generation, three-
dimensional media for regenerative medicine will be explored. The integrated
educational goals of this proposal will focus on providing advanced instruction
in both teaching and research laboratory environments at the interface of
chemistry, materials, and biological sciences. Specifically, laboratory
experiments that provide instruction in state-of-the-art rheological analysis of
bulk materials will be developed for laboratory courses in chemistry and
chemical engineering. Research experiences for undergraduate and high school
students will also be provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogels are an important
class of material for applications in regenerative medicine. Healthy cells can
be grown outside the body in three-dimensional hydrogel scaffolds and then
implanted to wound sites to facilitate healing. Hydrogels that are created by
the spontaneous self-assembly of simple molecules dissolved in water without any
chemical or physical intervention represent exciting next-generation materials.
The development of these types of hydrogels has been hindered by a lack of
understanding concerning the fundamental principles that explain both self-
assembly and hydrogelation. The purpose of this research is to elucidate the
underlying physical principles that lead to hydrogel formation by simple,
inexpensive molecules so that next-generation materials can be developed. This
work promises to have far-reaching impacts in materials science that will enable
the creation of sophisticated materials for biomedicine, justifying public
support. Outreach and education efforts will broaden participation of groups
currently underrepresented in science. These efforts will include summer
research experiences for undergraduate students and participation as a faculty
representative for a new program, the University of Rochester Summer Research
Experience program that provides research experiences for high school students.