* 1148597
* Metal-Oxo and Metal-Peroxo Intermediates in Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* John Groves, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2015
* USD 610,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports Professor John T. Groves of Princeton University for studies
of oxidative catalysis. Hydrocarbon transformations will continue to play
central roles in the global energy economy into the foreseeable future. Alkane
oxygenations, water splitting reactions and the deoxygenation of carbon dioxide
all can be envisioned to involve oxygen atom transfers. It is the central thesis
of this program that recent conceptual advances in oxidative catalysis offer an
unprecedented opportunity to develop abundant first-row transition metals as
catalysts of these processes. The research will combine knowledge of the huge
reservoir of hydrocarbon chemistry currently being practiced by aerobic and
anaerobic organisms with insights derived from synthetic, biomimetic systems to
find new catalysts. Broad application of this chemistry could have tremendous
impact on the nation's and the world's chemical economy. The goal of this
program is to understand and harness the breadth of high-valent transition metal
chemistry involving metal oxo systems. Success in this endeavor could offer new
methods of late-stage drug diversification and metabolite identification, new
opportunities for energy transduction with hydrocarbons, new concepts for the
development of fuel cells and new processes for disinfecting bioterrorism
agents. The approach involves direct kinetic and spectroscopic methods to
characterize reactive metal-oxo intermediates under conditions of active, fast
catalysis. An important goal is to reveal the range of these new catalytic
systems that employ recently-discovered entries into oxo- and dioxo-metal
complexes, including new C-H halogenation protocols, with a focus on first-row
transition metal based systems that have real prospects of being implemented on
a massive scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discoveries from this research will help
understand the basic principles of how chemical catalysis operates, and will use
such insights to drive the invention of the next generation of catalysts and to
train the personnel that are necessary for the nation to achieve technological
advances in industry. Students and postdoctoral research associates from a
variety of backgrounds and including underrepresented minority chemists as well
as a number of undergraduates will be trained in the laboratory. Chemical
catalysis is central to the economic health of the nation and the world with
about 30% of the GNP of the United States and at least 80% of the chemical
industry dependent upon catalytic processes. As a result the chemical industry
is a major employer of US trained scientists. Human health is impacted by the
selectivity of chemical and biochemical catalysis that is necessary for the
pharmaceutical industry to produce new and pure drugs efficiently. Four patents
have been filed over the past three years and a new company has been founded to
commercialize advances from this and related projects, especially in the area of
drug discovery. New technologies are also needed to allow the world economy to
capture the vast resources of methane, for example, which are now largely
wasted, and to give high value added to petroleum feedstock. New discoveries in
oxidative catalysis in particular, which is the core activity of the proposed
research described herein, are necessary to address these scientific,
technological and environmental challenges.