* 1148968
* CAREER:  The Metabolism of Prenylated Benzoquinones through the Lens of Plant-Prokaryote Phylogenomics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Gilles Basset, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 02/29/2016
* USD 620,758.00

Scientific merit: This project aims to elucidate the architecture and evolution
of the biosynthetic networks of terpenoid quinones. Far from being anecdotal
compounds, prenylated quinone conjugates are key cofactors for the electron and
proton transfer chains that are at the core of the bio-energy production systems
on our planet. This includes photosynthesis, respiration, and chemosynthesis,
just to name a few. But because quinones are present in trace quantities and in
most organisms their cognate biosynthetic mutants are lethal, quinones are
difficult to study and some of the most important branches of quinone metabolism
are still uncharted. Where conventional biochemical and genetic approaches have
hit a wall, this research makes use of a system biology alternative that
combines comparative genomic inferences with in silico metabolic
reconstructions, so candidate genes can be identified and experimentally tested
by means of reverse genetics, enzymological studies and targeted metabolite
profiling. Plants are particularly well suited for this type of integrative
approach, for their genomes have been 'enriched', via numerous events of lateral
gene transfer, in genes of direct bacterial and archaeal
origin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will establish an on-
line resource for both students and instructors in order to promote the learning
of bioinformatics data mining nationwide. Based on active learning methods,
personal assignments, and continuous evaluation, the project will teach students
to get the full benefit of phylogenomics methods for their current and future
research. The project will also raise awareness of vitamins nutrition through an
educational package aimed at children of middle school age, for whom it
highlights the importance of plant micronutrients and good dietary habits. The
project will also contribute to the training of two undergraduate research
assistants, one PhD student, and one postdoctoral associate in the laboratory of
the PI.