* 1148870
* CAREER: Estimation Methods for Image Registration
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Marc Niethammer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

One of the most central operations in biomedical image analysis is image
alignment: image registration. Substantial efforts over the last decades have
produced sophisticated registration approaches for applications ranging from
microscopy imaging at the nanometer scale to organ-scale imaging. However,
neither the underlying assumptions regarding transformation models have been
substantially challenged nor have practical methods to quantify uncertainties
for deformable registration results been developed. For example, the existing
methods are not appropriately designed for many inter-subject registrations or
for registrations involving pathologies which are core requirements for many
imaging studies. The goal of this research program is to devise advanced
estimation methods for image registration, motivated from a dynamical systems
point of view which (1) improve estimation of image deformations, (2) improve
image similarity measures to account for image changes (such as tissue growth or
degeneration), (3) model subject-specific deformations and population-based
deformations jointly, (4) allow for the estimation&lt;br/&gt;of registration
uncertainties, (5) provide appropriate validation strategies, and (6) to present
the methods in an intuitive way understandable for the non-expert. Better image
registration methods will improve image analysis results and hence will help
clinical studies and ultimately patient care. Application areas include the
study of traumatic brain injury, radiation treatment planning, assessment of
tumor progression or population studies of osteoarthritis, normal brain
development, Alzheimer?s or Huntington?s disease, to name but a few. We will
focus on neuroimaging and the capturing of lung motions to highlight distinct
characteristics of image registration
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The proposed research will
significantly advance the state-of-the art, because it will provide much needed
ways of using domain knowledge when formulating estimation problems in image
registration. The hypothesis is that by adding such information, estimations of
space deformations will be improved, hence improving the quality of the analysis
results which critically depend on image registration. In particular, the
developed methods will address the highly relevant problems of how to deal with
images subject to a pathology, how to perform population-based analysis while
capturing data-trends, and how to assess estimation uncertainty in registration.
The research will have immediate impact on current imaging studies and will form
the basis for future applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact While the
research will focus on applications in neuroimaging and lung motion analysis,
the developed methods will be generally applicable to any image analysis problem
requiring an estimate of spatial correspondence ranging from biology, to
animation, to object tracking, and to neuroimaging. In particular, since the
methods will explicitly address changes on the subject level (including changes
caused by pathology or aging) and the population level, they will lead to better
estimates of disease progression, will be able to provide patient-specific
information, and are expected to improve results for population-based imaging
studies (for example for clinical drug testing). To allow others to create
customized image analysis solutions all developed methods will be made available
to the community in open-source form.&lt;br/&gt;1