* 1148011
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research:  A Computational Materials Data and Design Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Dane Morgan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,050,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Office of Cyberinfrastructure, Division of Materials
Research, and Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award made on a
proposal to the Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation solicitation.
This award supports development of new theory and tools to enable rapid and
efficient calculation of atomic level material properties. The incredible
advances in computing power and tools of atomic scale simulation have now made
it possible to predict critical properties for existing and new materials
without experimental input. However, present simulation approaches typically
require researchers to perform many steps by hand, which is both slow and error
prone compared to what a computer can do. Through computer codes that automate
the tasks in first principles modeling human bottlenecks can be removed and
predictive capabilities of first principles simulation techniques can be
accelerated by orders of magnitude. Such a high-throughput computing approach
will enable generation of critical materials data on an unprecedented scale and
open new doors for material science.

The team will develop tools for the specific challenges of predicting point
defect properties, atomic diffusion, and surface stability, with a focus on
automating steps to enable computations on a massive scale. The PIs will use
state-of-the-art first principles quantum mechanical methods. Best practices for
treating the multiple issues of charged defect calculations, for example
convergence with cell size and band gap errors, will be refined and automated
for rapid execution. Similarly, tools to identify diffusion pathways and
determine their barriers will be streamlined to allow users to quickly identify
transport properties of new systems. New theoretical approaches to modeling
charged surfaces will be developed to enable simulation of surfaces in more
realistic environments. This award will support prediction of properties that
play a critical role in advancing a wide range of technologies, from improving
semiconductors for next generation computers to better fuel cells for more
efficient energy conversion. Software tools and data produced by this effort
will enable researchers to predict properties for thousands of materials with
almost no human effort, accelerating the pace at which researchers can develop
new materials technologies.

Software and data developed from this award will be shared with academic and
industrial researchers through modules on the web, scientific journals and
presentations at national and international conferences. This award supports two
workshops to educate researchers about the latest opportunities to use high-
throughput computing of atomic scale properties for materials development.
Students will be trained to work at the critical interface of the computer and
physical sciences, supporting a generation of scientists who use modern
computers to their fullest potential to develop new understanding and
technology.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Office of Cyberinfrastructure, Division of Materials
Research, and Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award made on a
proposal to the Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation solicitation.
This award supports development of new theory and tools to enable rapid and
efficient calculation of atomic level material properties. The incredible
advances in computing power and tools of atomic scale simulation have now made
it possible to predict critical properties for existing and new materials
without experimental input. However, present simulation approaches typically
require researchers to perform many steps by hand, which is both slow and error
prone compared to what a computer can do. Through computer codes that automate
the tasks in first-principles modeling human bottlenecks can be removed and
predictive capabilities of first principles simulation techniques can be
accelerated by orders of magnitude. Such a high-throughput computing approach
will enable generation of critical materials data on an unprecedented scale and
open new doors for material science.

The team will develop tools for the specific challenges of predicting point
defect properties, atomic diffusion, and surface stability, with a focus on
automating steps to enable computations on a massive scale. These properties
play a critical role in advancing a wide range of technologies, from improving
semiconductors for next generation computers to better fuel cells for more
efficient energy conversion. Software tools and data produced by this effort
will enable researchers to predict properties for thousands of materials with
almost no human effort, accelerating the pace at which researchers can develop
new materials technologies.

Software and data developed from this award will be shared with academic and
industrial researchers through modules on the web, scientific journals and
presentations at national and international conferences. In particular, this
award will support two workshops to educate researchers about the latest
opportunities to use high-throughput computing of atomic scale properties for
materials development. This award will train students to work at the critical
interface of the computer and physical sciences, supporting a generation of
scientists who use modern computers to their fullest potential to develop new
understanding and technology.