* 1148655
* Support for the International Institute for Applied Systems Anaysis (IIASA)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Detlof von Winterfeldt, Internationales Institut fur angewandte Systemanalyse
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 05/31/2018
* USD 14,225,000.00

von Winterfeldt&lt;br/&gt;1148655&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides the
U.S. membership contribution toward core support for the International Institute
for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) for calendar years 2011-2015. IIASA is an
independent, non-governmental, multilateral research institution devoted to
interdisciplinary, policy-oriented research. It is supported by 18 member
countries in the Americas, Europe, Asia, Africa and the Middle East,
representing more than 50 percent of the world population. IIASA is located in
Laxenburg, Austria, near Vienna. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIASA's ten-year strategy
for 2011 to 2020 focuses on three global problem areas: Energy and Climate
Change, Food and Water, and Poverty and Equity. IIASA's Research Plan for 2011
to 2015 describes nine research programs that develop and apply the Institute's
systems analysis approaches to advancing understanding and contributing to
solutions to the three global problem areas. These research programs include
Energy, Mitigation of Air Pollution and Greenhouse Gases, Ecosystems Services
and Management, Water, Ecology and Evolution, Risk Policy and Vulnerability,
Population, Technology, and Advanced Systems Analysis. In addition, a Policy
Forum facilitates interaction between IIASA's researchers and policy-makers
worldwide; and Exploratory Projects offer flexibility to respond to changing
global conditions. IIASA investigators combine methods and models from the
natural and social sciences as well as applied mathematics and engineering to
identify science-based policy solutions to global problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIASA's budget for 2010 was approximately 16 million EURO,
of which 50 percent was provided by membership payments from member countries.
The other half comes from contracts and grants. The budget is highly leveraged
through international scientific networks of researchers and research
institutions that contribute their skills, resources and specific local
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of
IIASA's research activities lies in its innovative use of quantitative modeling
and computational technologies to explore possible futures. The high quality of
IIASA's work is demonstrated through its publication record in peer-reviewed
journals; the worldwide interest in collaboration with IIASA's research
programs; unparalleled datasets on land use, forests, energy technologies and
population multi-state projections, and the recruitment of IIASA scientists to
contribute to international scientific partnerships such as the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and other United Nations Energy,
Food, Development, and Population advisory bodies, as well as the Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment, World Wildlife Fund forestry evaluations and National
Academy of Sciences studies. The research quality is maintained through a system
of Council oversight, external reviews and strategic assessments by an external
Science Advisory Committee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The IIASA
research agenda addresses many of the most difficult issues facing the world in
the 21st Century. Every program is interdisciplinary and charged to support
problem focused and solution oriented research, and includes components for
dissemination and application of the results. IIASA works to incorporate U.S.
input and interests in the research program, and to ensure that its research
results are known and utilized in appropriate research and policy fora in the
United States. IIASA's capacity building program will be significantly enhanced
in the next five years, building on the highly successful Young Scientists
Summer Program (YSSP), which each summer offers 50-60 graduate students from
around the world the opportunity to explore the policy implications of their
research in an international setting. In addition, IIASA has a post-doctoral
program and is developing activities to strengthen systems analysis networks in
member countries through teaching, workshops and collaborative projects.