* 1148523
* SI2-SSI: Next-Generation Volunteer Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2015
* David Anderson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,100,000.00

By 2015, the global consumer digital infrastructure will include two resource
pools of importance to scientific computing: a billion GPU-equipped desktop and
laptop computers with a capability of roughly 100 ExaFLOPS, and 10 billion
mobile devices with a capacity of about 20 ExaFLOPS and energy efficiency about
20 times better than larger devices. Volunteer computing is a proven approach by
which these resources can be used for scientific computing. BOINC (Berkeley Open
Infrastructure for Network Computing) is the dominant middleware for volunteer
computing. This project will extend BOINC to create the technology for the next
generation of volunteer computing, focusing on the following areas:

1) Computing on mobile devices: support for scientific computing on smart phones
and other mobile devices based on Android;

2) Virtual-machine applications: support for applications that run in virtual
machines. This reduces heterogeneity issues and, by providing a strong form of
sandboxing, allows untrusted applications to be run on volunteer computers;

3) Multi-user projects: server-side features that allow the resources of a
BOINC-based project to be shared fairly among many scientists. This will allow
BOINC to be used effectively by science portals.

In addition we will add other new capabilities to BOINC, and will add support
for new operating system versions, GPU types and models, and language systems
such as OpenCL.

By providing scientists with access to huge and essentially free computing
power, this will enable new research in fields such as nanotechnology,
proteomics, genomics, climate modeling, epidemiology, cancer care, bio-fuels,
battery technology for electric vehicles, earthquake engineering, volcanic
activity, pharmaceutical engineering, microelectromechanical systems, and
modeling of biological ecosystems, to name a few. In addition, by attracting
millions of ?citizen scientists? who volunteer their computing resources, we
will increase public awareness of and interest in science, and will expand the
public outreach and education channel provided by volunteer computing