* 1148295
* CAREER: I. Organocatalyzed cascade reactions as sustainable synthetic methods and II. Sustaining students' interest in science with the help of "WISE" students
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Stacey Brenner-Moyer, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 10/31/2014
* USD 462,244.00

With this CAREER award sponsored by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Brenner-Moyer of the Department of Chemistry at
the City University of New York at Brooklyn College will investigate the
development of new cascade reactions catalyzed by organocatalysts, which are
environmentally benign alternatives to traditional Lewis acid- and transition
metal catalysts. The proposed cascade reactions represent new approaches to two
persistent problems in organic synthesis: 1) how to rapidly build molecular
complexity, and 2) how to achieve efficient, asymmetric conjugate additions of
simple alcohols. The proposed cascade reactions will also provide direct access
to useful synthetic intermediates that are currently accessed using multiple
step syntheses, expensive chiral starting materials, and/or hazardous
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of efficient organocatalytic methods to
produce useful synthetic intermediates will have positive implications for the
synthesis of natural products and medicinal compounds by increasing the
availability of catalysts in greener laboratories and reducing waste streams and
also lowering costs. These activities will benefit society, from research
chemists to communities that house academic institutions and industrial plants.
In addition, the research activities will help train undergraduate, graduate,
and post-doctoral student researchers and will aim at increasing retention of
females in the sciences through participation in the program Women In Science
and Engineering (WISE). The principal investigator will 1) coordinate peer
mentoring for students struggling in the sciences, and explore careers in green
chemistry and other green sciences, via a WISE-sponsored seminar series and
research fair, as an alternative to careers in medicine for students who are
excelling in the sciences.