* 1148778
* CAREER: Maximum-Information Memory System: Theory, Implementation and Application
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Xin Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

On-chip embedded memory is a critical component in today?s large-scale
integrated systems. This project aims to develop a completely new memory design
methodology that is referred to as Maximum-Information Memory System (MIMS). The
key idea is to maximize the information density (i.e., the number of information
bits per unit area) or information efficiency (i.e., the number of information
bits per unit power). Towards this goal, a radically new information theoretical
framework will be developed with three critical components: (1) an analytical
information model to quantitatively measure the number of information bits
stored in a given memory system, (2) a number of different circuit
implementation options to achieve maximum-information storage, and (3) a
comprehensive study of high-level performance metrics (e.g., signal-to-noise
ratio) to demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed MIMS system in real-life
signal processing applications. The combination of these research efforts would
provide a fundamental infrastructure that facilitates next-generation memory
design for nanoscale IC technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
offers a fundamentally new view of memory design based on information theory. It
is expected to yield significant performance improvement for on-chip memory
circuits over a broad range of applications, from consumer electronics (e.g.,
smart phones) to medical instruments (e.g., implantable medical devices). Hence,
successful development of the proposed MIMS framework will have both short-term
and long-term impacts on U.S. industry and improve U.S. competitiveness in
science and technology. In addition, given its broad coverage of multiple
science and engineering fields such as statistics, circuits, etc., the proposed
project offers a number of unique education and training opportunities for both
university students and industrial engineers. It will substantially improve the
education infrastructure and generate high-quality researchers and engineers in
related fields.