* 1148679
* CAREER:    Colonization, dispersal, and foraging ecology of native bees in human-altered landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Shalene Jha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 723,048.00

Given widespread declines in managed and native pollinators and increasing
global reliance on pollinator-dependent crops, there is an acute need to develop
a mechanistic understanding of pollinator population dynamics. The proposed
research utilizes population genetics, foraging ecology, and geospatial tools to
develop the first spatially and temporally explicit population model for native
pollinators. This is the type of fundamental research that will increase our
understanding of ecosystem services provided by pollinators. Specifically, the
research objectives of this project are: 1) measurement of land-use impacts on
the nesting dynamics and effective population sizes of four critical pollinator
species, 2) calculation of exact dispersal distances made by reproductive
pollinators and resulting gene flow, 3) computation of maximum and average
foraging range of pollinator species across time periods and resource
distributions, and 4) creation of a spatially and temporally explicit pollinator
population model. A diverse suite of tools will be utilized in the proposed
research, including genetic-based and pollen-based foraging reconstruction,
yielding one of the first methodologically comparative estimates of resource use
and movement dynamics for pollinators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research provides a unique opportunity to build a highly relevant public
outreach and education program in the heart of a rapidly urbanizing and
agriculturally-dependent region in central Texas. The program will be carried
out through a synergistic integration of research and teaching activities,
including enhanced undergraduate involvement in the lab and field, collaboration
with K-12 teachers, and development of a graduate-level course in landscape
genetics. The proposed outreach efforts are oriented towards developing long-
term connections between the university and community members, and include a
Pollinator Biology public seminar series and a Citizen Science Pollinator
Monitoring Workshop. The Principal Investigator of this award has experience in
Citizen Science and will use the Monitoring Workshop as an opportunity to build
science literacy within local urban and agricultural communities that are
typically underrepresented in the STEM fields. The broader restoration-
orientation application of this research is the development of mechanistically-
informed land management strategies for improved conservation of pollinators and
their critical role as ecosystem service providers.