* 1148951
* CAREER:  Budget and Impacts of Atmospheric Organic Acids from Ground and Space-based Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Dylan Millet, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2018
* USD 727,436.00

Formic and acetic acids are the dominant carboxylic acids in the atmosphere.
They exert an important influence on atmospheric aqueous chemistry through their
effect on precipitation acidity, aqueous hydroxyl radical concentrations, and
possibly secondary organic aerosol formation. This CAREER award focuses on
understanding seasonal sources of organic acids and their atmospheric impacts.
The research will be guided by the following key questions: What is the global
importance of direct emissions versus secondary production from biogenic,
biomass burning, and anthropogenic sources? Is there a significant source of
formic and acetic acids during aging of organic aerosols? What is the role of
formic and acetic acids in governing the acidity of precipitation and clouds
around the world? How does this vary geographically and seasonally? The
experimental approach combines new process-oriented measurements with new global
observations from space, interpreted in the framework of an atmospheric model.
Specific steps will include carrying out new field and laboratory measurements
to quantify key controls on organic acid abundance in the atmosphere, applying
new satellite retrievals of formic acid from the Tropospheric Emission
Spectrometer and the Infrared Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer in targeted
process studies on the global scale, and using the GEOS-Chem chemical transport
model to interpret the new space-borne and in situ measurements in terms of
quantitative constraints on global sources and chemical impacts organic acids in
the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work will
include: 1) Enhanced learning in air pollution and Earth Science for local
public elementary students; 2) Training graduate and postdoctoral researchers in
cutting-edge atmospheric chemistry measurement and modeling tools; 3) Building
the research and education capacity of the new Land and Atmospheric Science
program at the University of Minnesota; 4) Better understanding of organic acid
sources and impacts for more accurate air quality and climate predictions; 5)
Active dissemination of scientific findings through scientific presentations and
publications. Finalized measurement data, satellite retrievals, and model code
will be made public and readily available online.