* 1148088
* Collaborative Research:  Geophysical Investigation of the Mid-Continent Rift System
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Seth Stein, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 206,585.00

Geophysical Investigation of the Mid-Continent Rift System
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surprisingly, the Central U.S. is an ideal place to study
one of the more important processes shaping our planet - the breaking apart of
continents to form new oceans. Throughout earth's history, continents have split
along rifts, long zones of volcanism and stretching, which become spreading
centers along which new ocean basins form and can grow to the size of the
Atlantic and Pacific. It even looks like similar rifting may have happened on
other planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how rifting works is important
for both science and society, because rifting provides conditions for the
deposition of hydrocarbons and other mineral resources. The problem is that when
rifting succeeds in forming a new ocean, not much remains from its early stages
so it's hard to see what happened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To get around this,
researchers are studying a spectacular rift that failed, the Mid-Continent Rift
System. This system evolved around 1.1 billion years ago, when North America
nearly split. However, the rift failed, leaving a 2000 km long belt of volcanic
and sedimentary rocks left from the early rifting stage. This fossil rift, which
is similar in length to the present East African and Baikal rifts, has two major
arms meeting in the Lake Superior region. One extends southwestward at least as
far as Kansas, and the other extends southeastward through Michigan. These arms
are identified using the large gravity and magnetic anomalies resulting from
dense and highly magnetic igneous rocks. They are largely covered by younger
sediments but outcrop near Lake Superior and can be followed further south in
drill cores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study combines seismic and
magnetotelluric data being acquired by NSF's EarthScope program with gravity and
magnetic data to develop an integrated three-dimensional image of the rift
system and constrain its evolution. One of its goals is to learn whether the
rift formed as a response to melting in the underlying mantle, as commonly
proposed for the East African Rift, or because of stresses transmitted within
the lithosphere, as appears to be the case for Asia's Baikal Rift.