* 1148771
* MCTP: Mathematics Mentoring Partnership Between Arizona State University and the Maricopa County Community College District
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Mark Jacobs, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,099,808.00

This project will develop a recruitment network for mathematically talented
students in community colleges in Maricopa County, Arizona, to help facilitate
their successful transitions to baccalaureate programs in the mathematical
sciences at Arizona State University (ASU). This project, in addition to serving
students in the Phoenix area, will serve as a model for universities elsewhere
hoping to implement a successful transition program for community college
students in the mathematical sciences. Summer enrichment programs will be
offered at Scottsdale Community College that will introduce students to topics
in set theory and proofs, mathematical finance and biology, and computer
graphics. An 8-week summer research experience will be offered at ASU to
qualified mathematical science majors, including alumni from the summer program
at Scottsdale, to provide pre-professional experience to make them competitive
for careers and selective graduate programs and associated fellowships in the
mathematical sciences. In addition, ASU mathematics faculty will develop
"project seminar" courses, to be offered during the academic year, on
mathematical problems related to weather prediction and atmospheric dynamics;
image processing and Fourier analysis; network dynamics and graph theory; and
mathematical models of cancer (especially brain and prostate cancer). This award
is designed to provide opportunities to undergraduate mathematics majors to work
as part of a team on an interdisciplinary problem; read journal articles to gain
some background on a new subject quickly; analyze open-ended problems using
computer simulation as a discovery tool; and present a talk or poster on their
work at an appropriate workshop or research
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University has one of the largest
undergraduate mathematics programs in the United States. This 5-year pilot
project will engage approximately 38 mathematically talented students in the
Maricopa County community colleges and 12 mathematics majors at ASU each year.
It seeks to provide a national model for other partnerships between community
colleges and 4-year institutions to increase the number of undergraduate
students with advanced training in mathematics and scientific computation.
Special efforts will be made to recruit students who are first-generation
college students as well as students who are female and/or members of
underrepresented groups in the mathematical sciences. All student participants
will be U.S. citizens or permanent residents.