* 1148982
* CAREER: Deciphering the Tectonic History of the Transantarctic Mountains and the Wilkes Subglacial Basin
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2019
* Samantha Hansen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 714,584.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;To understand Antarctica's geodynamic
development, origin of the Transantarctic Mountains (TAMs) and the Wilkes
Subglacial Basin (WSB) must be determined. Current constraints on the crustal
thickness and seismic velocity structure beneath the TAMs and the WSB are
limited, leading to uncertainties over competing geologic models that have been
suggested to explain their formation. The PI proposes to broaden the
investigation of this region with a new seismic deployment, the Transantarctic
Mountains Northern Network (TAMNNET), a 15-station array across the northern
TAMs and the WSB that will fill a major gap in seismic coverage. Data from
TAMNNET will be combined with that from other previous and ongoing seismic
initiatives and will be analyzed using proven modeling techniques to generate a
detailed image of the seismic structure beneath the TAMs and the WSB. These data
will be used to test three fundamental hypotheses: the TAMs are underlain by
thickened crust, the WSB is characterized by thin crust and thick sedimentary
layers, and slow seismic velocities are prevalent along strike beneath the TAMs.
Results from the proposed study will provide new information about the nature
and formation of the Antarctic continent and will help to advance our
understanding of important global processes, such as mountain building and basin
formation. The proposed research also has important implications for other
fields of Antarctic science. Constraints on the origin of the TAMs uplift are
critical for climate and ice sheet models, and new information acquired about
variations in the thermal and lithospheric structure beneath the TAMs and the
WSB will be used to estimate critical ice sheet boundary conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project incorporates
three educational strategies to promote the integration of teaching and
research. Graduate students will be trained in Antarctic tectonics and seismic
processing through hands-on fieldwork and data analysis techniques. Through
NSF's PolarTREC program, the PI will work with K-12 educators. The PI will
develop a three-week summer field program for recent high school graduates and
early-career undergraduate students from Minority-Serving Institutions in
Alabama. Teaching materials and participant experiences will be shared with
individuals outside the program via a course website. Following the summer
program, participants who were particularly engaged will be offered internship
opportunities to analyze TAMNNET data. In successive years, the students could
assist with fieldwork and could be recruited into the graduate program under the
PI's supervision. Ultimately, this program would not only serve to educate
undergraduates but would also generate a pipeline of underrepresented students
into the geosciences.