* 1148719
* CAREER: Carbon-Carbon Single Bond Activation - Mechanistic Comparisons and Reaction Development
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Johnson, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

In this CAREER award funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jeffrey B. Johnson of the Department of Chemistry at Hope
College will pursue a mechanistic understanding of the process of carbon-carbon
single bond activation by transition metal catalysts. The proposed research will
begin with the detailed mechanistic analysis of three known transition metal-
catalyzed C-C bond activation reactions. Data compiled from these studies will
provide insight into factors that influence the activation of C-C single bonds,
reveal mechanistic pathways and catalytic intermediates, and subsequently guide
the development of more general and powerful reaction methodologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although C-C single bonds are ubiquitous within organic
chemistry, this chemical moiety is generally considered inert - few reactions
selectively cleave and functionalize C-C bonds. New methods hold the promise of
a new paradigm that may have profound implication for the construction of
biologically active molecules, natural products and pharmaceutical compounds.
Carrying out the proposed research at an undergraduate institution will involve
undergraduate students as the sole researchers on all facets of the work. These
students will have the opportunity to extend their classroom experiences and
explore new subjects such as organometallic chemistry, catalysis, and kinetic
and mechanistic studies, while also developing skills required for success in
any field. This project also supports a collaboration with the Hope College
Upward Bound Program, a program that assists at-risk high school students
prepare for college and thus promotes the improvement of diversity within STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) fields.