* 1148105
* Collaborative Research: Beryllium-10 in detrital magnetite as a new tool in erosion and weathering studies
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Darryl Granger, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2016
* USD 289,440.00

Cosmogenic Beryllium-10 (10Be) in quartz is widely used to quantify rates of
erosion and weathering in landscapes. 10Be is useful in the study of surface
processes because it is produced only near the ground surface, and thus provides
a measure of the residence time of mineral grains in soils. These residence
times can be readily interpreted in terms of erosion rates averaged over
hundreds to thousands of years, making them nearly ideal in studies of landscape
evolution and soil sustainability. There are problems with the use of quartz,
however. It is not present in all landscapes and its chemical preparation
requires the use of hazardous hydrofluoric acid, limiting the number of
laboratories that are able to process samples. This project will develop 10Be in
magnetite as a new tool for determining catchment-averaged rates of erosion and
weathering. For most purposes, erosion rates from magnetite would be just as
useful as erosion rates from quartz. Magnetite, however, is easier to separate
from other minerals and its chemical preparation is far less hazardous and
expensive. The project's contributions will include development of rapid, cost-
effective mineral separation and chemical preparation techniques. This should
open the use of 10Be to a whole new community of researchers. The project will
test the method in three landscapes where erosion and weathering rates have been
intensively studied. In addition, it will explore the coupled use of 10Be in
magnetite and quartz as a new, readily measured index of the catchment-averaged
degree of chemical weathering.

Not long ago, it was extremely difficult to measure long-term rates of erosion
and weathering, in part because the timescales of human observation are usually
short compared to the timescales of landscape erosion. Over the last 20 or so
years, cosmogenic nuclides such as 10Be in quartz have provided new tools for
measuring rates of erosion and weathering averaged over hundreds to thousands of
years. This has fueled a revolution in quantitative understanding of surface
processes. Yet measurements of erosion rates in some landscapes have remained
difficult because the preferred cosmogenic target mineral, quartz, is not
present in all rock types. Hence cosmogenic-based erosion rates have rarely been
measured in volcanic landscapes, for example. Moreover, all of the work on
cosmogenic nuclides is done in just a few dozen labs around the world because
quartz is not easy to prepare for analysis of 10Be, and costly, specialized
equipment is needed to handle the large volumes of hazardous acids that are
involved. Usage of the mineral magnetite has the potential to overcome these
difficulties. 10Be is produced within it in much the same way as it is in
quartz. It is present as a trace mineral in many rocks where quartz is absent.
Moreover, magnetite is easier to separate and dissolve than quartz. Hence,
techniques developed in this project promise to open the use of 10Be to new
landscapes where quartz is absent, and also to new researchers who lack
resources for the specialized equipment of quartz separation and dissolution.
Magnetite and quartz weather at different rates. This raises the exciting
possibility that 10Be in the mineral pair magnetite and quartz from the same
stream will yield an index of chemical weathering in soil. This research will
focus on fieldwork at two of NSF's Critical Zone Observatories (Luquillo and
Southern Sierra), thus capitalizing on existing infrastructure investment for
studying weathering processes and their relationships with geology, climate, and
ecology.