* 1148936
* EAGER: Mattressene - A 3D Carbon Nanostructure Superlattice: Experimental and Theoretical Synthesis and Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Pierre Deymier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,970.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The principal objective of this work is the
experimental fabrication of a new, technologically important, carbon-based
nanostructured material referred to as mattressene. Structurally, mattressene
consists of alternating single-layer graphene sheets connected to each other by
parallel arrays of carbon nanotubes, and this regular, periodic arrangement of
graphene and nanotubes enables mattressene to exhibit remarkable electronic,
thermal and mechanical properties, making it applicable as a (i) high-speed,
high-density semiconductor chip device, (ii) high-efficiency thermoelectric
material capable of converting waste heat to electricity, (iii) thermal
interface material for efficient and swift removal of heat in electronic devices
and (iv) high-capacity reversible hydrogen storage in hydrogen fuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The experimental ability to
synthesize a new, ordered, carbon-based nano-metamaterial- mattressene is being
explored in this project. Mattressene consists of parallel sheets of graphene
connected to each other by ordered, parallel arrays of same-length single-walled
carbon nanotubes oriented orthogonal to the graphene sheets. The key elements of
the chemical synthesis strategy, appropriately informed by high-accuracy density
functional theory (DFT) calculations, consists of assembling a layered structure
comprised of alternating graphene and functionalized-fullerene layers, followed
by chemical attachment between graphene and fullerenes and conversion of the
fullerenes to carbon nanotubes via cycloaddition reactions. The building blocks
of mattressene consist of graphene and nanotubes, and that in combination with a
3-D periodic arrangement which can be suitably varied by adopting the layer by
layer synthesis approach, enables mattressene to exhibit tunable electronic,
thermal and thermoelectric properties. This tunability makes mattresene highly
desirable and ideally suited for technological applications as semiconducting
devices, efficient thermal transport materials and thermoelectric materials.
Another significant impact of this project is the rigorous training of a
graduate student in a multi-disciplinary environment spanning across many fields
of science and engineering as well as allowing the student to get familiarized
with advanced, cutting-edge experimental and theoretical research tools and
techniques that are adopted in this work. A post-doctoral scholar and several
undergraduate students are also engaged in this project.