* 1148502
* SI2-SSE: Developing and Deploying Path-Integral Quantum Simulation Tools for a Broad Research Community
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* John Shumway, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2014
* USD 160,896.00

This award supports research and education activities that will make path
integral Monte Carlo codes for simulation of atomic and molecular systems, and
materials at the quantum mechanical level accessible to students and non-
experts. This will stimulate new researchers to contribute fresh ideas and help
build a larger base of users. The PI will pursue a strategy based on three
principles: (i) On-going development of open-source software following software
engineering practices must emphasize features that have a timely impact on
science, encourage intuitive understanding, and assist non-expert users. (ii)
Education and outreach in the form of tutorials, documentation, and workshops
must dramatically lower the barrier for the use of path integral Monte Carlo by
non-specialists. (iii) Development and execution of a set of high-impact
projects -- in warm, dense matter, cold atoms, nano-electronics, and quantum
chemistry -- by a network of collaborators which will demonstrate the research
capabilities of the open-source path integral Monte Carlo
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The code under development already embodies many
software design principles, including object oriented design, XML input, HDF5
output, GNU GPL open-source distribution, and code management in subversion.
Under this project the PI will: (i) complete documentation, including tutorials
with explanations of the scientific concepts; (ii) develop a set of benchmarks
and unit tests, to document standard applications and verify proper execution of
the code; (iii) coordinate a set of high-impact projects across a network of
collaborators, (iv) develop a timeline and milestones for formal releases, with
executables for UNIX, Macintosh, and Windows, including the pyQt4 graphical user
interface; and (v) integrate these improvements into existing nanoHUB port and
other software infrastructures. New computer code will be distributed under the
General Public License, and analysis tools will use open-source python
libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education
activities to develop well engineered computer codes for the high accuracy
simulation of electrons in materials and tiny structures made of a small number
of atoms, and systems of atoms at the level of quantum mechanics. Developed
computer codes will be made available to the broader research community through
existing software centers, such as nanoHUB in a well documented form. This will
enable students and non-experts to access and use the codes to perform
simulations using path-integral techniques and to generate fresh ideas to
advance the computational method. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Path-integral methods
have been applied so far to various problems where quantum mechanics is
important, including electronic systems and devices on the nanoscale, cold atoms
trapped by lasers, and some atoms and small molecules. The technique has high
accuracy and has advantages over existing methods, but it has so far not been
adequately developed. It also has great pedagogical value for teaching the
principles of quantum mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and junior
scientists will be trained in the application of advanced computational methods
to problems in nanotechnology.