* 1148284
* RTG: Integrating Dynamics and Stochastics (IDyaS)
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Paul Dupuis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,138,943.00

Dynamics and stochastics, both interpreted in their broadest sense, are
important mathematical areas that have made many contributions to applications.
There are many natural links between these two areas that lead to a better
appreciation of techniques and methods used in either field. In addition, an
approach that combines stochastic modelling with a dynamical-systems analysis
often has the best chances of tackling a problem successfully: three examples
are nonlinear optics, where noise from various sources plays an important role
in laser and fiber dynamics; stochastic networks, where stability of the network
can, in many cases, be determined by the analysis of a related fluid limit that
is characterized by an ordinary or partial differential equation; and cell
physiology, where stochastic models of ion channel gates often provide better
agreement with experiments. A similar trend occurs on the theoretical level:
probabilistic methods are an important tool that aids in the analysis of PDEs,
for instance in the derivation and validation of scaling laws and the dynamics
of fronts in heterogeneous media; conversely, dynamical-systems methods provide
insight into the behavior of PDEs with noise. The goal of this project is to
broaden and enhance the scope and quality of the educational and research
training provided to graduate students and postdoctoral fellows by integrating
research and education in the fields of dynamics, stochastics, and their
applications and to involve more undergraduate students in courses and research
experiences in applied mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems and
stochastic processes are highly active and exciting fields of research that make
important contributions to many applications in economics and the natural and
social sciences, whilst also being of intrinsic mathematical interest.
Dynamical-systems theory is concerned with time-dependent processes, while
stochastics deals with nondeterministic, random processes. Examples where the
interplay between these two fields is important are noise fluctuations in the
design of high-power lasers, the long-time behavior of random interacting
systems such as consensus formation in social networks, self-assembly of micro-
and nanostructures for drug delivery, random fluctuations in biological cell
processes, and importance sampling of rare events in finance. Providing more
systematic and integrated training in dynamics and stochastics for graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows will prepare these groups better for careers
in academia and industry. It will also lead to an increase in the number of US
mathematicians trained in stochastic systems, and therefore make the US better
able to compete with Europe, which has a larger community in this area. The
initiatives for undergraduate students will increase the number of students who
are exposed to applied mathematics and are engaged in summer research
experiences.