* 1148049
* Asymmetries in Infant Face Processing - The Role of Individual Differences and Stimulus Characteristics
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Jennifer Rennels, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 05/31/2016
* USD 399,999.00

Infants' early experience with faces shapes how they perceive and process faces.
On average, infants show greater expertise (e.g., better facial recognition)
when processing familiar face types (e.g., females and same-race faces) compared
to less familiar face types (e.g., males and other-race faces). Given that such
expertise impacts every face-to-face social interaction throughout development,
it is critical to understand why some infants show this expertise, whereas
others do not. Moreover, it is important to determine if the neutral expressions
of the faces typically used to test this expertise produce results different
from those found with smiling faces, an expression most infants more commonly
experience and prefer. Such expertise is evident via how infants scan faces,
what faces they prefer to look at, and how well they recognize faces, but no one
has assessed if and how these abilities are related. This expertise becomes
particularly evident between 6 and 9 months of age, but it is unclear why or how
it emerges. There is also a need to better understand how this early expertise
manifests later in development. To address these issues, this research will
examine how 6-10-month-olds' recent facial experience, emotional state,
temperament, and motor skills affect their scanning, visual preferences for, and
recognition of female/male faces or familiar/unfamiliar race faces with smiling
or neutral expressions. It will also assess the relationships between perception
(scanning) and processing (preferences/recognition) abilities. The investigator
will also examine how this expertise emerges, and presumably stabilizes, in a
small sample of infants that will participate every two weeks between 6 to 10
months of age. Participants will be retested at 3.5 years of age to examine how
infant face processing abilities and individual characteristics predict
preschoolers' face processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this
research is that it should provide a more comprehensive understanding of why and
how face processing expertise develops. It should also demonstrate how
individual differences in face processing expertise and other characteristics
(e.g., temperament) contribute to the development of concepts about familiar and
unfamiliar social groups. For example, infants' emotional responses to a certain
sex or race may represent the first concepts associated with that social group.
Such concepts can be positive or negative and have noteworthy consequences for
how perceivers judge and treat a target person and how that target behaves,
impacting the target's relationships, health, and academic and occupational
success. Gaining knowledge of individual differences in the origins of how
individuals perceive, process, and acquire concepts about members of various
social groups is critical to understanding the social factors that affect
people's well being.