* 1148683
* CAREER: Novel temperature diagnostics for advanced combustion utilizing nanoparticle thermographic phosphors
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* David Rothamer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 01/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

1148633 Rothamer

Intellectual Merit

The interaction of flow turbulence and chemical reactions is at the heart of
understanding and predicting turbulent combustion. This interaction is critical
to the operation of almost all practical combustion devices including: gas
turbines used in jet engines and power plants, burners used in manufacturing and
heating applications, and internal combustion engines found in everything from
automobiles to large construction equipment. A key parameter that results from
the turbulence-chemistry interaction, and can be used to help control the
combustion process, is the distribution of temperature in the combusting flow.
The primary objective of the proposed work is to develop and implement a new
temperature imaging technique for combusting flows. The technique utilizes the
laser-induced emission from nanoparticle phosphors whose emission is highly
temperature dependent. The nanometer sized phosphors act as microscopic
temperature sensors embedded in the flow. The measurement technique will fill a
significant gap in current temperature imaging capabilities. It enables
measurements in the temperature range from 700 to 1800 K which is of critical
importance for designing the next generation of clean, efficient, combustion
technologies. The technique will be capable of measurements where current
diagnostics are intractable, making simultaneous temperature imaging
measurements of both the reactants and products in practical combustion devices
a reality.

The proposed measurement technique will be optimized for the temperature range
of interest by studying the fundamental temperature dependence of the phosphor
luminescence. This knowledge will be applied to develop a robust technique for
temperature measurements in practical devices. In collaborations with
researchers at Universities and National Laboratories we will apply this
technique to study fundamentals of turbulence-chemistry interactions and low-
temperature combustion strategies in piston IC engines.

Broader Impacts

The proposed work addresses one of the key challenges for our society; Energy.
It does this by providing a new diagnostic tool to combustion researchers, which
will greatly enhance the understanding of advanced combustion strategies in real
devices, and by impacting energy education at the K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate levels. Knowledge gained using the technique will enable significant
improvements in the efficiency and emissions from real combustion devices, such
as gas turbines and piston IC engines. Collaborations included as part of the
work will provide rapid dissemination of the technique to several research
groups. Publications resulting from those collaborations will rapidly inform the
combustion community regarding the promise and methods associated with the new
diagnostic.

Knowledge transfer to K-12 teachers and students will be accomplished through a
summer program which brings K-12 teachers into the lab to directly experience
combustion research. The expertise gained from that experience will be
disseminated to their students throughout the school year. Undergraduates will
be directly involved in the research through an existing undergraduate
fellowship program. Graduate students will hone their teaching skills and gain
new understanding through their involvement with K-12 teachers and
undergraduates, and through a new course focused on instrumentation for
combustion research. The combined impact of the work will be improved energy
education at all levels along with a new diagnostic tool that provides critical
information to combustion researchers, enabling the development of vastly
improved combustion devices.