* 1148823
* CAREER:   Image information extraction from heterogeneous populations of co-cultured cells
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Anne Carpenter, Broad Institute, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 02/28/2017
* USD 850,352.00

An award is made to the Broad Institute to identify and validate automated image
analysis approaches to extract information from fluorescence microscopy images
of co-cultured cell systems, while educating students, scientists, and the
public about the theory, practice, and societal impact of biological image
analysis. Biologists increasingly use co-culture systems, where two or more cell
types are grown together in order to more accurately model their native
environment. In order to use these powerful co-culture systems to tackle a wide
range of basic biological research questions, the remaining challenge is to
accurately extract quantitative measurements from each cell in microscopy images
of such co-cultures, given that cell types with diverse morphologies are
present. In close collaboration with researchers using co-culture systems, and
building on the PI?s successful work in biological image analysis, this CAREER
project integrates image analysis research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will give the scientific community a
validated, open-source software toolbox of image processing and machine learning
algorithms readily usable by biologists. The education and outreach efforts of
the project will produce validated, engaging educational materials that can be
freely implemented by high school teachers around the world. More information
about the project can be found at:
http://www.broadinstitute.org/~anne/Carpenter_NSF_CAREER.html