* 1148867
* CAREER:   Scientific Computing for a New Generation of Ecologists
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Stefano Allesina, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,244.00

Ecology is about to face the data deluge that other biological disciplines have
already experienced. With ecological data increasing rapidly in quality and
size, new methods are needed to extract the most relevant biological information
from massive data-sets. The objective of this project is to develop new
mathematical, computational and statistical tools for the analysis of three
ecological problems. First, when a species goes extinct, the impact reverberates
through the ecological network, possibly causing the extinction of other
species. A new method to predict such "secondary extinctions" will be developed.
Second, the number and size of published ecological networks is increasing
rapidly, making it possible to answer one of the oldest questions in ecology:
how many species traits (e.g., body size, swimming speed, metabolic rate) does
one need to measure to predict whether two species will interact? A new
computational method, coupled with a large dataset will attempt to answer this
question. Knowing which are the critical traits determining the possibility of
interactions could find application in the study of invasive species. Third, the
spatial structure of ecosystems mediates many ecological processes. A new method
will be developed to measure the impact of spatial heterogeneity on the
structure of ecological networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of these
new tools require sophisticated methods, which are not typically included in the
curriculum of biologists. The educational goal of the project is to train
ecologists in the computational methods that will be needed to advance the
discipline in the decades to come. Graduate students will learn how to automate
the analysis of biological data, distribute computation over large computer
clusters, organize data into relational databases, program in different
languages, collaborate on data, code and manuscripts, automatically managing
versions and conflicts, and pick the right tool for each task. Outreach
activities will be provided through lectures and media interviews and with
activities carried out in collaboration with local elementary schools and the
Museum of Science and Industry.