* 1148783
* CAREER:  Interface Engineered Multiferroics and Nanoscale Phase Modulation in Complex Oxide Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Xia Hong, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, the PI uses two
strategies to study multiferroic behavior and phase separation phenomenon in
complex oxide nanostructures and interfaces. In the first project, the PI will
investigate epitaxial nanostructures composed of a magnetic host material and an
embedded array of ferroelectric nanopillars, exploring charge and strain-
engineered interface magnetoelectric coupling. The second project aims at
examining the size confinements and ferroelectric field effect modulation
induced nanoscale phase structures in correlated oxide thin films. The materials
of interest include the colossal magnetoresistance oxides and Mott insulators,
which are intrinsically phase separated at the nanoscale. A successful
implementation of the program can advance the fundamental understanding of
magnetoelectric coupling and correlated behavior at the nanoscale and
interfaces, and lead to novel oxide-based electronic and spintronic devices.
These projects provide exciting research opportunities for students at the
graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels. In addition, the PI will devise
an easily accessible cartoon girl character as a role model, upon which a series
of daily life stories will be used to convey basic physics concepts. The stories
will be disseminated to the public through a Web-based interface to attract
young people, in particular young women, to be more interested and involved in
physics and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This research program focuses on the study of novel
coupling between electronic and magnetic states and local control of phase
structures in artificially designed complex oxide nanostructures and interfaces.
The aim of the first project is to fabricate artificial oxide nanostructures,
where an array of ferroelectric pillars are embedded in a magnetic host material
with the interface registered with atomic precision (epitaxy), and investigate
the coupling mechanism between the magnetic and electric states. The goal of the
second project is to create and study nanoscale phase structures in correlated
oxide thin films through size confinements or ferroelectric field effect
modulation. The long term goal is that understanding achieved through this
research will lead to novel oxide-based electronic and spintronic (solid state)
devices that can transcend the performance limits of the devices utilized in
current information technology. Students involved in these projects will be
exposed to frontier research at condensed matter physics, receiving training in
advanced experimental techniques. The educational goal is to engage students,
especially women, to be interested and involved in physics studies at an early
age. The PI will create a series of cartoon stories center on an easily
accessible girl character, utilizing the proximity effect to attract the women
audience. In these carton stories, the PI will present a beginner's perspective
of basic physics problems and explore how physics can be approached outside the
classroom. The stories will be disseminated to the public through a Web-based
interface.