* 1148677
* GEO REU Workshop 2011: Developing an REU Community and Best Practices Through Networking; San Jose, CA, October 26-27, 2011
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Valerie Sloan, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2012
* USD 89,657.00

This award will support a workshop for managers of sites that provide research
experiences for undergraduates (REU) in Geosciences. The goals of the workshop
include sharing of best practices and challenges of running REU sites; and
identification of tools needed for effective communication, recruitment, and
evaluation. During the workshop, there will be opportunities for un-structure
conversations (e.g. poster sessions and round tables), break-out group
discussions on selected topics, and listening to invited keynote speakers.
Summaries of the discussions will be captured and archived electronically. In
addition, a GEO REU website will be set up to capture REU managers' ideas and
expectations for the workshop. The organizers of the workshop will learn about
the effectiveness of the meeting through an online form that will be filled by
the workshop attendees. The workshop is being lead by the UANVCO's Director of
RESESS (Research Experiences in Solid Earth Science for Students) and an
organizing committee constituted of REU PIs. The meeting will be held in San
Jose, CA, October 26-27, 2011. The selection of the location and timing of the
workshop were done to coincide with the National SACNAS Conference; where REU
managers will have the opportunity of interacting with students and mentors,
expanding their network for recruiting participants to their REU sites.