* 1148558
* CAREER: Contribution of Hemodynamic Shear Stress Abnormalities to Calcific Bicuspid Aortic Valve Disease
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Philippe Sucosky, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to implement an integrative approach to investigate the role played by
hemodynamic forces in the development of calcific bicuspid aortic valve disease.
The bicuspid aortic valve is a congenital heart valve defect characterized by
the presence of two leaflets instead of three and is frequently associated with
calcific aortic valve disease, a condition marked by the accumulation of calcium
on the leaflets and progressive heart failure. While the disease has been
historically linked to genetic and atherogenic origins, hemodynamics has
recently emerged as a potential alternate etiology. Studies conducted under this
award will combine: 1) state-of-the-art flow diagnostic techniques to
characterize the degree of blood flow abnormality in the bicuspid valve; 2)
innovative tissue conditioning methods to elucidate the mechanisms of
calcification secondary to those flow abnormalities; and 3) sophisticated fluid-
based mechanobiological models to predict disease
progression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental knowledge gained from these
studies will bring a new perspective on the mechanisms of calcific aortic valve
disease. The elucidation of the signaling mechanisms triggered by blood flow
abnormalities will provide new insights into the potential to manipulate flow-
sensitive molecules to slow disease progression, while the mechanobiological
models will lay the foundations for a predictive tool capable of estimating the
valvular calcific potential. The educational plan focuses on promoting
interdisciplinary engineering approaches across graduate and undergraduate
programs, and inspiring K-12 students and underrepresented groups to explore
careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. Those objectives
will be achieved in the context of outreach activities and mechanical
engineering curriculum development activities aimed at increasing student
understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of engineering and enhancing
student ability to describe medical problems from an engineering perspective.