* 1148276
* Collaborative Research SI2-SSE:Sustained Innovation in Acceleration of Molecular Dynamics on Future Computational Environments: Power to the People in the Cloud and on Accelerators
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Ross Walker, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2016
* USD 320,833.00

This collaborative project between the San Diego Supercomputer Center at the
University of California San Diego, the Quantum Theory Project at the University
of Florida and industrial partners NVIDIA, Intel and Amazon is focused on
developing innovative, comprehensive open source software element libraries for
accelerating condensed phase Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations of biomolecules
using next generation accelerator hardware including Intel's MIC system and
Graphics Processing Units (GPU). It will extend support to include all major MD
techniques and develop open source accelerated analysis libraries. A priority is
enhanced sampling techniques including Thermodynamic Integration, constant pH
algorithms, Multi-Dimensional Hamiltonian Replica Exchange and Metadynamics.
These elements will then be combined, in collaboration with Amazon to support MD
as-a-service through easily accessible web front ends to cloud services,
including Amazon's EC2 GPU hardware. Transitioning large scale MD workflows from
requiring access to large supercomputer hardware to being accessible to all on
desktop and cloud resources provides the critical software infrastructure to
support transformative research in the fields of chemistry, life science,
materials science, environmental and renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
software elements created through this project have an extremely broad impact.
The integration of comprehensive support for next generation hardware
acceleration into the AMBER software alone benefits a very large user base. With
over 10,000 downloads of the latest AMBER Tools package from unique IPs and
&gt;800 sites using the AMBER MD engines testify to the scope of the community
of researchers this work impacts. The development of simple web based front ends
for use of elastically scalable cloud resources makes simulations routine for
all researchers. Meanwhile education and outreach efforts train the next
generation of scientists not just in how to use the MD acceleration libraries
and advanced MD simulation techniques developed here but also gets them thinking
about how their approach can be transformed given that performance that was
previously restricted to large scale supercomputers is now available on
individual desktops.