* 1148359
* Collaborative Research SI2 SSE: Pipeline Framework for Ensemble Runs on Clouds
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Beth Plale, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 292,863.00

Cloud computing is an attractive computational resource for e-Science because of
the ease with which cores can be accessed on demand, and because the virtual
machine implementation that underlies cloud computing reduces the cost of
porting a numeric or analysis code to a new platform. It is difficult to use
cloud computing resources for large-scale, high throughput ensemble jobs
however. Additionally, the computationally oriented researcher is increasingly
encouraged to make data sets available to the broader community. For the latter
to be achieved, using capture tools during experimentation to harvest metadata
and provenance reduces the manual burden of marking up results. Better automatic
capture of metadata and provenance is the only means by which sharing of
scientific data can scale to meet the burgeoning explosion of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a pipeline framework for
running ensemble simulations on the cloud; the framework has two key components:
ensemble deployment and metadata harvest. Regarding the former, on commercial
cloud platforms typically a much smaller number of jobs than desired can be
started at any one time. An ensemble run will need to be pipelined to a cloud
resource, that is, executed in well-controlled batches over a period of time. We
will use platform features of Azure, and employ machine learning techniques to
continuously refine the pipeline submission strategy and workflow strategies for
ensemble parameter specification, pipelined deployment, and metadata capture.
Regarding the latter key component, we expect to reduce the burden of sharing
scientific datasets resulting from the use of cloud resources through automatic
metadata and provenance capture and representation that aligns the metadata with
emerging best practices in data sharing and discovery. Ensemble simulations
result in complex data sets, whose reuse could be increased by expressive,
granule and collection level metadata, including the lineage of the resulting
products, to contribute towards trust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project we
focus on a compelling and timely application from climate research: One of the
more immediate and dangerous impacts of climate change could be a change in the
strength of storms that form over the oceans. In addition, as sea level rises
due to global warming and melting of the polar ice caps, coastal communities
will become increasingly vulnerable to storm surge. There have already been
indications that even modest changes in ocean surface temperature can have a
disproportionate effect on hurricane strength and the damage inflicted by these
storms. In an effort to understand these impacts, modelers turn to predictions
generated by hydrodynamic coastal ocean models such as the Sea, Lake and
Overland Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) model. The proposed research advances
the knowledge and understanding of probabilistic storm surge products by
enhancements to the SLOSH model itself and through mechanisms that take
advantage of commercial cloud resources. This knowledge is expected to have
application in research, the classroom, and in operational
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of the project is
several-fold. Cloud computing is an important economic driver but it remains
difficult for use in computationally driven scientific research. This project
lowers the barriers to conducting e-Science research that utilizes cloud
resources, specifically Azure. It will contribute tools to help researchers
share, preserve, and publicize the scientific data sets that result from their
research. Because we focus on and improve an application that predicts storm
surge in response to sea level changes and severe storms, our work contributes
to societal responses and adaptations to climate change, including planning and
building the sustainable, hazard-resilient coastal communities of the future.