* 1148331
* SI2-SSE: Interdisciplinary Software Infrastructure for Differential Geometry, Lie Theory and their Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Charles Torre, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2016
* USD 360,845.00

The goal of this proposal is to further develop symbolic software for the field
of differential geometry and those areas of mathematics, physics and engineering
where &lt;br/&gt;differential geometry plays an essential role. The proposed
work will: provide new functionalities requested by the user community, complete
packages currently under &lt;br/&gt;development, redesign critical components
for improved computational efficiency, develop upgrades of existing algorithms
and code whose performance does not support the demands of research. Specific
objectives include [1] the development of a new coordinate-free computational
environment for work with abstract differential forms and for tensor analysis on
homogeneous spaces; [2] software for the structure theory of real/complex Lie
algebras and their representations; [3] implementation of the theory of Young
tableaux for tensors with symmetry to address resource and performance problems
arising in large tensor computations; [4] new programs for symbolic computations
for sub-manifold theory in Riemannian geometry, complex manifolds and Kahler
geometry, and symplectic geometry; [5] a comprehensive new package for exterior
differential systems; and [6] expansion of various data-bases of Lie algebras,
differential equations, and exact solutions in general
relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of all the core disciplines in mathematics,
differential geometry is unique in that it interfaces with so many other
subjects in pure mathematics, applied mathematics, physics, engineering, and
even computer science. The PI's DifferentialGeometry (DG) software package has
laid the foundation for a single, unified symbolic computational environment for
research and teaching in differential geometry and its many application areas.
The goal of this proposal is to add new computational environments to address
specific application needs, to add basic functionalities that will bring various
sub-packages to maturity, to upgrade routines with performance limitation, and
significantly extend the DG data-bases of Lie algebras, group actions,
integrable systems, and solutions of the Einstein equations. Earlier versions of
this software have established a significant user community. Community feedback
has dictated much of the specific program agenda in this proposal. A unique
partnership between Utah State University and Maplesoft insures that the DG
software meets the high standards of reliability, ease of use, documentation and
support, and longevity that a extended user community (with diverse levels of
symbolic computational experience) demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
originially designed as a research tool, DG also provides an innovative approach
to teaching differential geometry and its applications in the classroom. All
developments in DG are implemented with this in mind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will host a workshop at Utah State University entitled: Symbolic Methods in
Differential Geometry, Lie Theory and Applications. This workshop will consist
of &lt;br/&gt;hands-on training sessions, and lectures on applications of
symbolic methods to problems in differential geometry. This workshop will also
provide an ideal &lt;br/&gt;venue to survey participant research interests to
drive future code development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student involvement at the
undergraduate and graduate levels is an important component of this project. The
experience gained in working with computer algebra systems in general, and
differential geometry in particular, is valuable to the student for future
educational activities and/or future employment.