* 1148957
* CAREER: Non-Equilibrium Coherent Many-Body Dynamics with Cold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Andrew Daley, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 157,732.00

In this project, non-equilibrium dynamics in systems of cold atoms and molecules
is being explored, as motivated by the unique properties of those systems. The
goals are (i) to obtain a better understanding of non-equilibrium dynamics in
strongly interacting systems, and (ii) to use non-equilibrium dynamics as a
benchmark for characterizing where quantum simulators can be used to explore
physics beyond what is possible with classical simulations. In the first part of
the project we are studying (a) paradigms of transport dynamics, including the
engineering and measurement of currents by coupling the system to a reservoir
gas or a cavity mode, as well as purely coherent propagation of excitations
engineered in the system; and (b) dynamics in the presence of dipolar
interactions, as motivated by recent experimental developments with polar
molecules, including the time-dependence of phase transition processes and
thermalization of excitations. In each case, the dynamics are bein explored
using a combination of analytical techniques and numerical methods, including
time-dependent Density Matrix Renormalisation Group methods for 1D systems.
Extensions of these methods to the treatment of dynamics with long range
interactions will also be investigated. In the second part of the project, we
explore possibilities to measure entanglement entropies in experiments, and use
these measurements to gain a deeper understanding of many-body dynamics in these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the non-equilibrium dynamics of
microscopic many-particle systems is crucial to the description of very
fundamental phenomena occurring in nature, including how a gas of particles
reaches thermal equilibrium, and how moving conduction electrons in solids
behave in quantum transport processes. Recent developments in experiments with
ultracold gases of atoms and molecules have made it possible to explore such
non-equilibrium dynamics in highly controllable systems, which can be
manipulated and measured by well-understood processes in laser fields. In the
research part of this project, we investigate how the unique properties of these
systems, which are now available in the laboratory can be used to gain insight
into fundamental aspects of non-equilibrium dynamics, including transport
processes and thermalization. We will look to gain a deeper understanding of
these process through our calculations, and to set a roadmap for the exploration
of these phenomena in potential future experiments. We will also investigate
means to measure the quantum mechanical entanglement in these experiments, which
could be used both to gain further insight into the dynamics, and to demonstrate
regimes where a quantum mechanical experiment realizes dynamics that go beyond
what is computable with state-of-the-art numerical methods. The broader impacts
of the supported work will also be enhanced by the education part of this
project, where we will run a series of workshops in which basic concepts in
quantum mechanics are explained to high-school teachers based on illustrative
examples from current technologies, as well as from the research in this
project. With the teachers we will explore possibilities and develop tools to
communicate basic concepts in modern physics research to high school students.