* 1148247
* Collaborative Research: Continuous vs. episodic fluviodeltaic sedimentation - Implications for carbon sequestration and coastal restoration
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Wonsuck Kim, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2015
* USD 51,836.00

Collaborative Research: Continuous vs. episodic fluviodeltaic sedimentation:
Implications for carbon sequestration and coastal
restoration&lt;br/&gt;by&lt;br/&gt;Zhixiong Shen, EAR-1148005, Tulane
University&lt;br/&gt;Wonsuck Kim, EAR-1148247, Univ. Texas,
Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PIs will investigate patterns and
rates of late Holocene fluviodeltaic sedimentation with the aid of optically
stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating, and explore the potential of land building
and organic carbon (OC) sequestration using field data collected from one of the
largest clastic depocenters: the Mississippi Delta. This research is not only
important scientifically, but also for coastal restoration in the Mississippi
Delta that suffers continuous wetland loss.&lt;br/&gt;PIs will collect
stratigraphic and geochronologic data from overbank deposits along a recently
abandoned major distributary of the Mississippi River to test the hypothesis
that the clastic stratigraphic record in fluviodeltaic settings consists of a
patchwork of discrete sediment bodies that accumulate in an episodic fashion
over relatively short time periods. This hypothesis is rooted in a long-standing
geological debate that traces back to the early 19th century, centering on the
question whether the Earth's stratigraphic record primarily reflects gradual
deposition or catastrophic events. This debate is important because
understanding the nature of the preserved sedimentary record is critical to
interpret changes in the Earth system over geological timescales. Furthermore,
they will measure the content and age spectra of OC within fluviodeltaic
deposits. The OC content will be used, in combination with the chronologic data,
to calculate rates of OC sequestration to test the hypothesis that rates of OC
sequestration by clastic overbank deposition can equal or exceed those by swamp
peat accretion. Consequently, floodplains and delta plains may constitute an
important OC pool that is to date poorly quantified and commonly ignored. The
age spectra of the OC will be compared with the OSL dating results to
investigate the effect of human activity on OC transport by large rivers.
Finally, stratigraphic data will be used to estimate the sediment trapping
efficiency of crevasse-splay deposition, a natural analog to artificial river
diversions that are currently proposed for coastal restoration. Studying
sediment trapping efficiency in the Mississippi Delta, in concert with numerical
modeling, will provide critical information to assist in the better estimation
of land-building potential by Mississippi River diversions. In addition, the OC
sequestration data will provide new insights about potential ecosystem services
of restored wetlands.