* 1148230
* RTG: Research Training in Mathematical and Computational Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2020
* Sean Lawley, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,496,299.00

This RTG program will continue the development of a comprehensive program of
cross-disciplinary research and training in Mathematical and Computational
Biology, housed within the Department of Mathematics at the University of Utah.
The training component will give students a high level of mathematical training,
substantial exposure to biological problems and techniques, and extensive
experience in communication and collaboration with experimental life scientists.
The research component will develop and use mathematical and computational
methods to study complex biological processes, organized around four major
research themes of biofluids, ecology and evolutionary biology, neuroscience and
physiology. The training of students in this program will include traditional
and non-traditional coursework, journal clubs, seminars, laboratory rotations,
extramural research experiences, research group meetings, mentoring, consulting
and teaching experiences, as well as a variety of professional development
experiences. Students will receive research mentoring by mathematicians and
experimentalists in a highly interactive setting in which they learn the
necessary biology and develop the ability to do non-traditional, cross-
disciplinary, cutting edge research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will
train fully integrated, collaborative researchers, scholars and educators in
mathematical and computational biology, thus bringing to bear the power of
mathematics on the challenging problems of modern biology. Many collaborative
research projects will be initiated as a result of our research training
paradigm, as students become engaged with other students and faculty in other
departments and institutions. By placing quantitatively trained individuals in
an environment where medical and biological problems are at the forefront, the
possibilities for new insights and discoveries are truly outstanding. The long
term effect of this program will be a new generation of applied mathematical
scientists who can work effectively to build bridges between traditional
disciplines and among academia, industry and the public sector.