* 1148493
* SI2-SSI:  A Sustainable Community Software Framework for Petascale Earthquake Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jacobo Bielak, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2016
* USD 2,522,784.00

Earthquakes have major economic and societal consequences as can be seen from
the aftermath of the recent large earthquakes in Japan, Chile, and New Zealand.
This multidisciplinary project, which includes both geoscientists, computer
scientists, and structural engineers, integrates high-level and middle-level
scientific software elements developed by the Southern California Earthquake
Center (SCEC) into a software environment for integrated seismic modeling that
can be used for seismic hazard analysis. The framework includes integration of
community velocity models, codes for dynamic and pseudo-dynamic rupture
generation, deterministic and stochastic earthquake engines, and the
applications necessary to employ forward simulations in two types of inverse
problems: seismic source imaging and full 3D tomography. Modifications to
already existing software packages slated to be significantly enhanced in the
course of the workflow will allow simulations to be run on petascale machines
and allow the better managing of scientific workflows. The work also focuses on
software lifecycle issues such as model formation, verification, prediction, and
validation and support the use of petascale computers by earthquake scientists.
The goal of the project is to facilitate the incorporation of better theory and
data into computationally intensive modeling of earthquake processes. Software
will be designed to interface smoothly with OpenSHA, as well as OpenSEES, PEER,
and NEES. Project partners will also develop and test two computational
platforms, one that will have a user-friendly interface for calculating
seismographs and the other will generate large suites of simulations for a
layered earthquake hazard model. Models will be validated against datasets for
13 well-recorded historic California earthquakes of magnitude 6.0 or higher. The
initial API will take advantage of the asynchronous IO features of Fortran 2003
with plans for adding C/C++ and Python interfaces. All codes developed will be
open-source and publicly available and software distribution will be accompanied
by sample input datasets and example forecast results. Broader impacts include
the development of a new generation of time-dependent earthquake forecasts to
produce ground-shake hazard maps, partnership with a federal agency and the
private sector. It also includes a component of student and postdoctoral
training and outreach to user communities. Undergraduate interns, many of whom
have historically been from groups under-represented in STEM fields, will be
trained in use of the software during an 8-week summer training course.