* 1148975
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Floodplain Sedimentation from an Extreme Event: The 2011 Lower Mississippi River Flood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Paul Hudson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,088.00

This rapid-response research project will examine the impact of extreme events
on the geomorphology of large river floodplains by analyzing overbank deposits
associated with the 2011 flood in the lowermost reaches of the Mississippi River
alluvial valley in Louisiana and Mississippi. The investigators will draw on and
seek to contribute to two bodies of knowledge in physical geography, fluvial
geomorphology, and sedimentology: (1) the role of extreme events on
sedimentation processes and floodplain construction of large lowland, embanked,
meandering rivers and (2) the modern geomorphic adjustment of the Lower
Mississippi River in response to flood control. They will gather materials and
date to examine possible answers to the following research questions: How do
sediment thicknesses and textural characteristics of overbank deposits derived
from the 2011 flood directly compare with a previous, large-scale flood (1973)
in the study area? Do overbank sedimentation thicknesses differ for floodplain
transects of various embanked (leveed) widths? Do advective (longitudinal) or
diffusive (lateral) sedimentation mechanisms control overbank deposition along
embanked floodplains? They will engage in field work, laboratory analyses of
overbank sediments, geographic information system-based evaluations of LiDAR-
derived floodplain elevations, and quantitative analyses. They will determine
overbank sediment thickness at locations identical to a published study
documenting the 1973 flood. They will infer overbank flow direction from
preserved sedimentary structures, quantify sediment texture, associate
sedimentary characteristics with floodplain elevation and distance from the
channel, and compare the 2011 data with data from the 1973 flood. Their work
will focus on a reach of the Lower Mississippi that is the only location to
receive drainage from all tributaries and has the highest discharge within the
Mississippi River basin, thereby sampling flood deposits associated with record
flood stages from one of the largest recorded discharge events in North America.
The field study design will permit a direct examination of the impact of flood-
control levees on sedimentation. In contrast to the western side of the river,
the eastern floodplain reach is not embanked, which permits unimpeded overbank
sediment transport from the river to the valley wall. The study area is upstream
from the most important flood-control structure in North America, the Old River
Control Structure, whose function is partially dependent on stage-discharge
relations that adjust with floodplain elevation. Furthermore, the study reach
has been shown to have increasingly high stages for a given flood discharge
since the 1980s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is rare to have an opportunity to
sample overbank deposits from large floods on large rivers, it is unprecedented
to have the opportunity to sample overbank deposits from two large floods within
the same reach, this project will resample the exact locations from one of the
most cited studies in the flood sedimentation literature (Kesel et al, 1974).
The results of this project therefore are expected to have broader relevance for
environmental scientists, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineers, physical
geographers, riparian biologists, geologists, and instream-flow specialists. The
project will provide field-, lab-, and computationally based education and
training experiences for graduate and undergraduate students, and it will
provide valuable information and insights to floodplain managers and policy
makers.