* 1148453
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: An Interactive Software Infrastructure for Sustaining Collaborative Community Innovation in the Hydrologic Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Jennifer Arrigo, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,401,939.00

Water, its quality, quantity, accessibility, and management, is crucial to
society. However, our ability to model and quantitatively understand the complex
interwoven environmental processes that control water and its availability is
severely hampered by inadequate tools related to hydrologic data discovery,
systems integration, modeling/ simulation, and education. This project develops
sustainable cyberinfrastructure for better access to water-related data and
models in the hydrologic sciences, enabling hydrologists and other associated
communities to collaborate and combine data and models from multiple sources. It
will provide new ways in which hydrologic knowledge is created and applied to
better understand water availability, quality, and dynamics. It will also help
to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the interactions between
natural and engineered aspects of the water cycle. These goals will be achieved
through the development of interoperable cyberinfrastructure tools and the
creation of an online collaborative environment, called HydroShare, which
enables scientists to easily discover and access hydrologic and related data and
models, retrieve them to their desktop, and perform analyses in a high
performance computing environment. The software to be developed will take
advantage of existing NSF cyberinfrastructure (iRODS, HUBzero, CSDMS, CUAHSI
HIS) and be created as open source code. Its development will be end user-
driven. In terms of broader impacts, the project builds essential infrastructure
for science by developing software tools and computing environments to allow
better understanding of the impacts of climate change (i.e., floods, droughts,
biofuels, etc.) and to allow improved water resource development and the
management of freshwater resources both above and below ground. Resulting
software will be made publicly available and provides a strong student and
workforce training/education component. In addition, the project supports an
institution in an EPSCoR state and engages, as a PI, a person who is from a
group under-represented in the sciences and engineering.