* 1148443
* SI2-SSE: Enhancement and Support of Swift Parallel Scripting
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Michael Wilde, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 03/31/2015
* USD 499,135.00

The Swift parallel scripting language enables scientists, engineers, and data
analysts to express and coordinate parallel invocations of application programs
on distributed and parallel computing platforms: one of the dominant modes of
performing computation in science and engineering. Swift runs on a variety of
HPC clusters and clouds, and enables users to move their application scripts
between computing environments with relative ease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Swift
comprises a programming model, scripting language, and runtime engine. Its
implicitly parallel programming model allows users with minimal programming
expertise to transparently utilize parallel and distributed systems. The
scripting language is simple, minimal and standalone; the programming model has
also been embedded into the Python and R languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Swift
is employed in many diverse domains, including biochemistry, neuroscience,
climate model analysis, earthquake simulation, hydrology, energy forecasting,
economics modeling, mass media analysis, materials science, and
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes usability and programmatic
expressiveness enhancements to Swift, broadens its utility library, performs the
testing and hardening needed to serve a large-scale national and global
community, and extends existing documentation and training material in a manner
that will create and serve a broad user base. It also develops enhancements in
configuration, script debugging, exception handling, parallel collection
processing, and data typing and mapping to make Swift increasingly
productive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Swift enables users with little or no
experience in parallel programming to leverage parallel and distributed
computing environments ranging in scale from desktops to petascale
supercomputers. It opens up powerful cyberinfrastructure like XSEDE, Open
Science Grid, FutureGrid, and Blue Waters to a wide range and scale of
scientific user communities, thus broadening participation in high performance
computing.