* 1148600
* EAGER: Resource Containers: Addressing Resource Heterogeneity for Cloud4Home Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Ada Gavrilovska, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2014
* USD 175,000.00

The focus of this project is on cloud computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Cloud4Home project strives to enhance services and service delivery by moving
from the current "in the cloud" vs. "at the edge" model of cloud computing to a
hybrid model in which services can easily leverage both types of resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concurrent with the rapid gains in popularity of cloud
computing facilities and infrastructure is an even more impressive continued
increase in the capabilities of the end devices used in the Internet's
periphery. In fact, major hardware manufacturers are releasing new end devices
as frequently as every six months, whereas server systems typically experience a
multi-year replacement cycle. This raise the interesting challenge of how to
best combine cloud-provided services, like those offered commercially, with
services that can efficiently run on consumer devices like smartphones, iPads or
netbooks, laptops and desktops nodes, and game consoles. In particular, purely
end-point based solutions cannot take advantage of the large storage and
computational capacities present in large scale datacenters. Conversely, current
"thin client" models in which end devices "simply access the Internet" can
suffer from high and variable delays in accessing and using remote resources.
Preferable to either extreme would be a solution that (1) can leverage the lower
costs of using local resources and exploiting locally available state and avoid
potential issues with data privacy or security for cloud-based operation, while
at the same time (2) utilize Internet resources when those are not encumbered by
undue costs like high latency or undue communication
overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific technical requirements for such
enhanced services include:&lt;br/&gt; -jointly using remote cloud platforms with
local, nearby resources available in the home, office or other "private"
environment; &lt;br/&gt; -decoupling the physical location of state and service
execution from the applications that interface with such services/state, and
&lt;br/&gt; -exposing higher-level "properties" of the diverse capabilities of
the aggregate resources and then use this heterogeneity to better meeting
application requirements and satisfy service policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, this project introduces the system-level abstraction of
resource containers, which represent pools of resources in the Cloud4Home
environment tagged with specific properties or features. Resource containers
will be realized for and evaluated with representative @home and server systems
and with services that combine computational with storage needs. If successful,
the Cloud4Home prototype can be a valuable vehicle to explore the myriad of
other challenges in these environments - from dynamic resource discovery to
security and privacy.