* 1148741
* RAPID: Revolution's Refugees: Displaced Libyans in Tunisia and the Formation of Transnational Amazigh (Berber) Consciousness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Katherine Hoffman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 27,691.00

Dr. Katherine E. Hoffman (Northwestern University) will undertake
anthropological field research on the role of ethnicity in the integration of
populations displaced by political violence into the country of first asylum,
and the ways in which transnational ethnic identity may facilitate refugee
assimilation in refugee situations. This project considers the effects of the
Arab Spring revolutions on minority populations, taking as a case study the
Amazigh (Berber) populations of Libya and Tunisia. The urgency associated with
this RAPID proposal results from the immediacy of the displacement of the Libyan
Berbers and the unknowns about how soon the situation may change. The project
focuses on the women and the elderly who are central, albeit overlooked, actors
in the construction and maintenance of local and transnational ethnic
identities. The informal settlement of Libyan refugees into Tunisia - in rural
community-volunteered housing and private Tunisian homes - means that laypeople
rather than aid workers are managing much of the integration of this displaced
population. Refugees from western Libya and their southern Tunisian hosts are
Imazighen (Berbers), speaking the Tamazight language and sharing both customs
and longstanding discrimination by their respective states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whereas scholarship on indigenous people such as North
Africa's Imazighen has long focused on their rootedness in ancestral lands, this
project asks instead how indigenous groups transform in contexts of
displacement. The research will focus on the everyday material and discursive
practices in the work and socializing of women and the elderly. Data collection
in southern Tunisia will include life histories, participant observation,
interviews, and discourse analysis to document over time the shifts in
strategies used by refugees to organize their economic and social lives in exile
and to mark similarity with and distinctiveness from their hosts. This
qualitative study of individuals and families will be complemented by data
collection from the UNHCR and relief agencies and will be useful to relief
organizations, policymakers, and scholars.