* 1148976
* CAREER: Parameterization and Tessellation for Computer Graphics
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Scott Schaefer, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2018
* USD 477,995.00

The digital age with its widespread availability of cheap computing power has
transformed the way we search for information, distribute content and even
navigate cities. Computation has also transformed the way we design shapes.
Whereas in the past engineers and artists often sculpted objects from clay,
today most shapes are designed virtually with computers. Computer-aided design
of curves, surfaces and volumetric functions has applications in diverse fields
such as industrial design, the entertainment industry and even architectural
design. However, in all of these applications the designer is limited by the
capabilities of the representations employed. The quality and geometric
properties of parametric surface representations such as NURBS and subdivision
surfaces are strongly dependent on their parameterization. Yet this is a degree
of freedom that few designers use or understand. Furthermore, the connection
between parameterization and the geometric properties of these shapes is not
well understood. We currently have only rudimentary tools for controlling the
parameterization of higher dimensional shapes such as surfaces or volumes. The
inability to control this parameterization leads to poor quality shapes and more
effort on the part of designers to alleviate these artifacts. In this project,
the PI will explore new representations of surfaces and volumes that allow for
more geometric freedom in creating the underlying shapes. He will investigate
the fundamental connection between parameterization and surface shape/quality
for parametric curves, surfaces and volumes. He will expand upon the concept of
non-uniform parameterization of surfaces to show that knot spacing (edge
lengths) is not sufficient to completely control the parameterization of
surfaces or volumes. And he will design new representations that allow the user
to control or automatically adapt the parameterization of these shapes during
the design process, and incorporate methods of non-uniform parameterization that
are currently not possible. As part of this process, he will develop new higher
order barycentric coordinates specifically adapted to this problem. Finally, he
will investigate the effect and manipulation of parameterization for the
purposes of tessellation and rendering of these parametric surfaces, and develop
high quality GPU tessellation algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Project outcomes will significantly advance the state of the art not only in
computer graphics and geometric modeling, but also in other areas of applied
mathematics and computer science where the representation and precise control of
smooth freeform shapes play a key role. Approximation theory, architectural
design, the entertainment industry and industrial manufacturing will all benefit
from the results of this research.