* 1148515
* SI2-SSI: Distributed Workflow Management Research and Software in Support of Science
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Miron Livny, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 03/31/2018
* USD 2,153,597.00

This award funds the enhancement of state-of-the-art workflow technologies and
their promotion within a broad range of scientific domains. The overarching goal
is to advance scientific discovery by providing scientists with tools that can
manage computations on national cyberinfrastructure in a way that is reliable
and scalable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technology supported by this award
is the Pegasus Workflow Management System (Pegasus). This program of work
includes the development, support, and maintenance of Pegasus. Pegasus allows
users to declaratively describe their workflow, then makes a plan that maps this
description onto the available execution resources and executes the plan. This
approach is scalable, reliable, and supports applications running on campus
resources, clouds, and national cyberinfrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work conducted under this award will 1) enhance the sustainability of the
Pegasus software through the expanded adoption of sound software engineering
practices and improved usability, 2) enhance core capabilities, especially in
the area of data management, to meet user requirements and make Pegasus easier
to integrate into end-to-end scientific environments, 3) promote the adoption of
workflow management technologies within domain and computer sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Pegasus WMS brings innovative and
powerful frameworks to the desk of the scientist. Through close collaboration
with a broad community of engaged users, experimentation in large-scale
distributed computing is made possible. This experimentation supports the
development of new scientific workflow management concepts, frameworks and
technologies. The proposed work also supports scientific reproducibility by
providing a workflow management system that integrates and automates data,
metadata, and provenance management functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Pegasus WMS has been adopted by scientists from different domains and
has been integrated into end-user environments such as workflow composition
tools and portals. The program of outreach and education facilitated by this
award will expand the impact of Pegasus through tutorials, workshops, meetings
with potential users, and online materials. The proposed interface enhancements
will allow more end-user environments to leverage Pegasus? capabilities and will
extend the impact of Pegasus to a broader spectrum of users.