* 1148066
* RUI-Collaborative Research: Reduction in riverine silica transport due to human-induced vegetation change to riparian vegetation
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Karin Kettenring, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/29/2016
* USD 21,746.00

This project will evaluate the role of riparian (riverbank) vegetation in the
transfer of bioavailable forms of silica (Si) from land to sea via rivers.
Plants absorb dissolved silica (DSi) from water and transform it into amorphous
particles (ASi) that accumulate in soils. Therefore, one factor that can alter
the flux of Si in rivers is a change in vegetation cover in the active riverbed.
Changes in riparian vegetation may cause significant reductions in riverine Si
transport for two reasons. First, plants sequester Si by transforming DSi into
ASi. Second, vegetation leads to reduced river flow velocity and increased
deposition of suspended sediment, including ASi. Two highly-impacted rivers, the
Platte River in Nebraska and the Green River in Utah, will serve as case studies
to quantify the effect that riparian vegetation in general, and the invasive
species of grass Phragmites australis in particular, have on Si transport to the
ocean. Measurement of three pools of ASi ? in riparian sediment, riparian
vegetation, and suspended sediment in the river ? and DSi in the river will be
used to determine the magnitude of the vegetation effect. This project will
consider silicon geochemistry, plant identification and characterization, and
particle transport and deposition to develop a holistic understanding of the
physical-biological-biogeochemical interactions controlling riverine Si
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rivers are the primary source of silicon to
coastal ocean ecosystems, where it is often a limiting nutrient for important
groups of phytoplankton. An array of human activities has decreased the delivery
of Si from land to sea, which is a significant concern for marine ecosystems
already under pressure from a variety of environmental changes. Human
modifications to river flows may lead to conditions favoring the expansion of
riparian vegetation, which may reduce Si transported by the river. Our research
will be the first isolate the effects of riparian vegetation on Si transported
by rivers, and to measure the total Si flux in two typical western U.S. rivers.
Therefore, the work will improve our understanding of the land-river-sea
continuum, and may inform policy decisions regarding rivers and coastal ocean
resource management. This collaborative project brings together the expertise of
the PI and six undergraduate researchers from Gustavus Adolphus College, a
primarily undergraduate institution, and the co-PIs from Utah State University
and the University of Aix-Marseille. The undergraduate researchers will be
involved in all aspects of the project, ultimately including dissemination of
results via publications, conference presentations and development of a college
museum exhibit.