* 1148473
* SI2-SSE: Fingerprinting Scientific Codes to Verify and Create Compatible System Software Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Philip Papadopoulos, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 03/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Every computational science application requires supporting software (code
libraries, data files, other programs) to run properly. However, the computer
systems that complex scientific applications run on are continuously updated by
administrators to add new capabilities, fix bugs, and plug security holes. These
are necessary changes, but a user needs to know if "something changed in the
system that will break his/her code". A similar question arises when running a
code on a different computer from which it was compiled or developed: "does the
new system have all the necessary support software to run my applications?" This
proposal describes a plan for developing the software capability to both
statically and dynamically "fingerprint" a scientific application to answer
those two questions and therefore test for compatibility of new system or
determine if a new update could have deleterious effects. Our proposed software
system will have five major components: fingerprint format, static analysis of
an application to create one type of fingerprint, a system verifier that checks
if a system satisfies the needs defined in a fingerprint, dynamic analysis to
find applications dependencies only detectable at run time, and a composer
capability to automatically define a Rocks cluster managed system that will
fulfill the requirements of a specific fingerprint. All software developed will
be open-source and freely available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly every person
who uses a computer has seen messages similar to "new updates have been
installed, you must restart your computer." Sometimes, applications break
because of these updates. This proposal's broader impact is that, for a wide
variety of scientific applications, we will be able to determine if a new system
or an existing system is compatible by verifying the code's fingerprint. Since,
scientific applications can be very sensitive to underlying software changes, it
will be possible to detect incompatibility before wasting time and energy to run
a large-scale application on an production systems. When these applications are
used as the basis of scientific discovery, it becomes even more imperative that
we view the computing environment and application together as an experimental
apparatus whose configuration we need to better understand. We believe that the
composer capability of this proposal can have the transformational impact by
developing fully- descriptive catalogs of what an application needs to function
properly. In the era in which simulation output is being used to drive policy,
this kind of scientific reproducibility has impact well beyond the notions of
academic completeness.