* 1148298
* EAGER: Integrative Computational Model for Mechanosensing and Subcellular Remodeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Seungik Baek, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 12/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

1148298/ Baek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award funded by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in the CBET Division of NSF will be
used to develop a computational framework to model subcellular remodeling that
will take into account the active cellular mechanosensing, turn over of
cytoskeletal constituents, and kinetics of key molecules associated with cell-
substrate and cell-cell interactions. This computational framework will enable
researchers to explore the biological complexity associated with mechanosensing
and how biophysical cues from the cellular enviroment modulate cellular
processes and cell phenotype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Previous
researchers have investigated mechanosensitive cellular behavior by focusing on
the effects of mechanical states (stress, strain, stiffness) which are
independent of the cell. In contrast, in this work a more active mechanism will
be examined by which the cell feels the physical environment, i.e., the cell
actively applies traction and senses the response of the substrate. The
computational model developed in this work will use a constrained mixture
approach to account for the pre-stress and turnover of subcellular components
and their interactions with key molecules in the cell-substrate and cell-cell
interfaces. The computational model will also include substratum in the
computational domain such that interactions between the cytoskeletal remodeling
and the deformation of the substrate are taken into account.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. If successful, the computational tool will
enable researchers to integrate quantitative measurements from experiments into
the computational model to elucidate the cellular processes modulated by various
mechanical and soluble cues. This study will also impact the tissue engineering
and clinical communities by providing a predictive model that can be used in the
design of engineered tissues and development of pharmaceutical treatment of
diseases. From an educational standpoint, the project will provide a broad
exposure to the students with an opportunity to integrate knowledge bases from
vastly different fields. The PI has supported both (female and minority)
undergraduate students and high school teachers from an existing NSF RET site
program. The PI has been and will be actively engaged in K-12 education, RET,
and public outreach programs such as Grandparents University. The outcomes of
the research will be incorporated into these activities and the computational
biomechanics course that the PI will be developing. The computational model and
outcomes of this proposal will be disseminated through the web, in addition to
traditional modes, such as journal publications and presentations at scientific
meetings.