* 1148428
* Collaborative Research:  SI2-SSE: Correctness Verification Tools for Extreme Scale Hybrid Concurrency
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Rajeev Thakur, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 05/31/2014
* USD 44,346.00

High Performance Computing is strategically important to national
competitiveness. Advances in computational capabilities involve the use of
unprecedented levels of parallelism: programming methods that involve billions
of concurrent activities. Multiple styles of concurrency involving shared and
distributed memory programming (?hybrid?) are necessary. Unfortunately, such
programs are very difficult to debug using existing methods. This project
develops formal (mathematically based) verification tools that can debug hybrid
concurrent programs with very high certainty of bug elimination, while consuming
only modest computational resources for verification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project develops execution-based tools that eliminate search over semantically
equivalent alternative schedules as well as solver-based techniques that
eliminate classes of bugs over single runs. Scalable methods based on non-
determinism classification and heuristic execution-space reduction are also
being developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected results include: (1) development
of tools based on formal algorithmic techniques that verify large-scale hybrid
programs; (2) amalgamation of incisive bug-hunting methods developed at other
research organizations within formally based tools developed in our group; (3)
incorporation of our verification tools and techniques within popular tool-
integration frameworks; (4) large-scale case studies handled using our tools;
and (5) training of undergraduate and graduate students on these advanced
verification methods, building the talent pool vital to continued progress in
high performance computing with applications to science and engineering,
energy/sustainability, and homeland security.