* 1148116
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Open Source Support for Massively Parallel, Generic Finite Element Methods
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Yassin Hassan, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,311,834.00

Partial differential equations are used in a wide variety of applications
as&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models. Their numerical solution is, consequently, of
prime&lt;br/&gt;importance for the accurate simulation and optimization of
processes in the&lt;br/&gt;sciences, engineering, and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;The last
decade saw the emergence of large and successful libraries
that&lt;br/&gt;support such applications. While these libraries provide most of
what such&lt;br/&gt;codes need for small-scale computations, many realistic
applications yield&lt;br/&gt;problems of hundreds of millions or billions of
unknowns and require clusters&lt;br/&gt;with thousands of processor cores, but
there is currently little generic&lt;br/&gt;support for such problems, limiting
access to the many large publicly&lt;br/&gt;supported computing facilities to
experts in computational science and&lt;br/&gt;excluding scientists from many
fields for whom computational simulation would&lt;br/&gt;be a useful tool. This
project intends to build the software infrastructure that will allow
a&lt;br/&gt;wide cross section of scientists to utilize these large
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to support the
software infrastructure for the&lt;br/&gt;large-scale solution of partial
differential equations on massively parallel&lt;br/&gt;computational resources
in a generic way. It will build on two of the most&lt;br/&gt;successful
libraries for scientific computing, the finite element
library&lt;br/&gt;deal.II, and Trilinos that provides the parallel linear
algebra capabilities&lt;br/&gt;for the former. Specifically, we will: (i) Make
support for massively parallel&lt;br/&gt;computations ubiquitous in deal.II;
(ii) Research and develop seamless support&lt;br/&gt;for problems with billions
of unknowns in both libraries and improve the&lt;br/&gt;interaction between the
two; (iii) Exploit intra-node parallelism on today's&lt;br/&gt;clusters; (iv)
Ensure the applicability of our work on a broad basis by&lt;br/&gt;implementing
two real-world applications. &lt;br/&gt;Both deal.II and Trilinos have large,
active and diverse developer and user&lt;br/&gt;communities, and this project
will actively engage these communities through&lt;br/&gt;user meetings, short
courses, regularly taught classes, mailing lists, and&lt;br/&gt;direct contact
in focused projects.