* 1148698
* THE OPEN SCIENCE GRID  The Next Five Years: Distributed High Throughput Computing for the Nation's Scientists, Researchers, Educators, and Students
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2022
* Miron Livny, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2022
* USD 24,378,518.00

The basic idea of Grid Computing is to utilize available CPU cycles and storage
of many computer systems across a worldwide network so that they can function as
a flexible, pervasive, and inexpensive accessible pool that could be harnessed
by an individual, accredited user, similar to the way power companies and their
users share the electrical grid. Grid computing can be viewed as a service for
sharing computer power and data storage capacity over the Internet, simply and
transparently, without having to consider where the computational facilities are
located.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments at major centralized experimental
facilities such as the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) require large amounts of
computation and storage and involve hundreds of experimenters using
computational facilities all over the world. These features are well suited to
the capabilities of grid computing. Grid computing developments occurred in
parallel to the development of the LHC experiments. The Open Science Grid (OSG)
is the major facilitator of Grid Computing in the U.S. Researchers subsequently
developed these ideas in many other exciting ways, producing for example, in
addition to OSG, large-scale federated systems (TeraGrid, EGEE, Earth System
Grid) that provide not just computing power, but also data and software on
demand. Standards organizations then developed relevant standards that led to
possible interoperability of Grids. Grids define and provide a set of standard
protocols, middleware, toolkits, and services built on top of these protocols.
Interoperability and security are the primary concerns for the Grid
infrastructure as resources may come from different administrative domains,
which have both global and local usage policies, different hardware and software
configurations and platforms, and vary in availability and
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Open Science Grid is a distributed computing
infrastructure for large-scale scientific research. The OSG contributes to the
Worldwide LHC Computing Grid as the shared distributed computing facility used
by the US ATLAS and US CMS experiments. The OSG is built and operated by a
consortium of 90 U.S. universities, national laboratories, scientific
collaborations and software developers. It is supported by the National Science
Foundation and the US Department of Energy Office of Science. The OSG supports
not only physics experiments but also researchers from other fields, including
astrophysics, bioinformatics and computer science. Currently the OSG has more
than 60 sites in the US and five sites in Brazil, Taiwan and Mexico, supported
by the host countries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;All LHC computing and storage sites
in the US are members of the OSG and allow other scientific collaborations using
the OSG to opportunistically use available resources. The OSG collaborates with
the Enabling Grids for E-sciencE project in Europe to provide interoperating
federated infrastructures which can be used transparently by the LHC
experiments' software. The Large Hadron Collider, located 330 feet below the
border of SwitzerÂ¬land and France, is the world's most powerful particle
accelerator. Its very-high-energy particle collisions may yield extraordinary
discoveries about the nature of the physical universe. Beyond revealing a new
world of unknown particles, the LHC experiments could explain why those
particles exist and behave as they do. The LHC experiments could uncover the
origins of mass, shed light on dark matter, expose hidden symmetries of the
universe, and possibly find extra dimensions of space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
LHC accelerates hair-thin beams of particles to a whisker below the speed of
light. Thousands of powerful superconducting magnets steer the beams around the
LHC's 16.5-mile-long ring. At four points the particles collide in the hearts of
the main experiments, known by their acronyms: ALICE, ATLAS, CMS and LHCb. In
the data from these high-energy collisions scientists search for the tracks of
particles whose existence could transform our understanding of the universe.
More than 10,000 scientists, engineers and students from almost 60 nations on
six continents contribute to the LHC, which is headquartered at the CERN
laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. About 1,700 come from universities and
laboratories in the United States. Federal funding for US contributions to the
LHC is provided by the US Department of Energy's Office of Science and the
National Science Foundation.