* 1148291
* SI2-SSE: A GPU-Enabled Toolbox for Solving Hamilton-Jacobi and Level Set Equations on Unstructured Meshes
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Ross Whitaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2016
* USD 531,999.00

A variety of application domains from geophysics to biomedicine employ some form
of Hamilton-Jacobi (H-J) mathematical models. These models are a natural way to
express conservation properties, and the two most prevalent H-J models seen in
the literature are the Eikonal equation (a static H-J model based upon Fermat's
Principle for determining minimal paths) and the Level-Set equations (a time-
dependent H-J model used for addressing moving interface problems). The goal of
this&lt;br/&gt;effort is to develop, test, document and distribute a collection
of software tools for efficiently solving several classes of equations of H-J
type -- in particular, Eikonal (minimal path) equations and Level-set equations
-- on unstructured (triangular and tetrahedral) meshes using commodity streaming
architectures. The PIs have previously demonstrated the feasibility of
efficiently solving H-J equations on GPUs; this effort seeks to both scientific
extend previous work as well as solidify the software into a publicly available
tool suite.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort is the
development of efficient algorithmic strategies for mapping numerical methods
for solving H-J equations on unstructured meshes to commodity streaming
architectures. The proposed work will tackle several important technical
challenges. One challenge is maintaining sufficient computational density on the
parallel computational units (blocks), especially as we move to 3D unstructured
meshes. A second technical challenge is the loss in efficiency that comes with
communication between blocks. The solutions to these challenges will allow us to
exploit currently available commodity streaming architectures that promising to
provide teraflop performance on the desktop, which will be a boon for a variety
of communities that rely on computationally expensive, simulation-based
experiments. By overcoming the tedious and non-trivial step of developing and
distributing software for solving H-J equations on unstructured meshes using
commodity streaming architectures, the impact of this work has both longevity
and ubiquity in a wide range of applications in diverse fields such as basic
science, medicine, and engineering.