* 1148919
* CAREER: Flexoelectric Effect in Ferroelectric Nanowires for High-Performance Nanogenerators
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Xudong Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2018
* USD 400,263.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to gain fundamental understanding of the flexoelectric effect (polarization
induced by inhomogeneous strain) in single-crystalline ferroelectric nanowires
(NWs). The theoretical prediction of a gigantic flexoelectric enhancement of the
polarization on the nanometer scale will also be tested. If true, it would make
possible highly efficient nanogenerators for nanoscale mechanical energy
harvesting. The research will focus mainly on BaTiO3 NWs because bulk
polycrystalline BaTiO3 has the highest reported flexoelectric coefficient. Other
perovskite ferroelectric NWs, such as PbTiO3 and Pb(ZrxTi1-x)O3 (PZT), will also
be studied to reveal the cation contribution to flexoelectricity. The bulk of
the research is to use these well-characterized NWs as a basis for state-of-the-
art scanning probe microscopy studies, which will quantify the intrinsic
flexoelectric coefficients and testing the prediction of flexoelectric
enhancement and establish the phase and domain contributions to the
flexoelectric effect. In addition, supported by experimental measurements, the
nanoscale intrinsic flexoelectric coefficients and the mechanical-to-electric
energy conversion efficiencies will be theoretically predicted.

This research will provide an in-depth, experimentally grounded understanding of
the flexoelectric effect at the nanometer scale, which is expected to generate
transformative knowledge for directing the design of nanogenerators with
dramatically improved mechanical-to-electric energy conversion capability and,
more generally, will establish a materials science basis for reduction in size
and enhancement in performance of conventional piezoelectric and ferroelectric
devices. This project will be integrated into university-wide programs to reach
out to high-school students and K-12 teachers and attract students from
underrepresented minorities (URM) to science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics disciplines. A long-term stepwise education program will be
established for instructing, mentoring, and training URM students from high
school students, to college freshmen, to senior undergraduate students. This
effort aims at improving the diversity of students at UW-Madison. Collaboration
with the campus Research Experience for Teachers program will allow us to
outreach to high school teachers who are interested in advanced nanoscience and
nanotechnology and to help them create or improve science courses in their own
schools. A set of comprehensive lecture notes for nanotechnology education based
on the PI's new nanotechnology course will be developed and distributed online.