* 1148541
* EAGER:   A New Molecular Dynamic Model for Motor Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Alan Bowling, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2014
* USD 299,999.00

Intellectual merit. This investigation will result in a new molecular dynamic
model for nanosized motor proteins. This new model addresses an issue with the
most commonly used models that omit the mass and acceleration terms that appear
in Newton's second law. The most common approach assumes that mass and inertia
have negligible effects on the dynamics of nano-sized objects moving through a
fluid environment. This practice is paradoxical because the motion predicted by
this massless model may not actually satisfy the theory from which it was
derived, Newton's second law. The effort in this research is to develop a model
which is consistent with Newton's second law by retaining the mass and
acceleration terms. The method of multiple scales, when applied in this
research, provides insights into how to obtain the desired model. Preliminary
work with this approach has yielded motion of the motor protein myosin V, which
appears more realistic. The goal here is the continued refinement of this model
along with experimental validation of its predictions using advanced laser
microscopic techniques. The use of this highly intense light source allows
capture of the motor protein's movements at a rate fast enough, and at a length
scale small enough, to discern whether the motor protein exhibits the behaviors
predicted by the model. These measurements are difficult to perform using
conventional microscopy techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
Involvement in this research will facilitate the training of two graduate
students in the dynamics of nano-scale systems and provide learning experiences
for undergraduate students in this project. These students will be involved in
developing the proposed theory, performing single molecule experiments, and
disseminating the results through journal publications and presentations at
conferences, which will provide training for future careers in academia or
industry. Both investigators are currently involved in training minority
students in order to increase the pool of individuals qualified for academic and
industrial careers. Because the proposed research is far reaching in terms of
its general applicability to the study of phenomena occurring at small scales,
especially particle dynamics in low Reynolds number flow regimes, training in
this area will equip the students with tools that they can use to launch their
post-graduate careers in many directions beyond the study of motor proteins.