* 1148895
* EAGER:  Automatic Reconstruction of Typed Input from Compromising Reflections
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Jan-Michael Frahm, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 151,749.00

This project explores computer vision techniques aimed at exploiting
compromising reflections associated with data input in mobile electronic devices
such as smart phones. The ubiquity of these personal communication devices and
their growing roles in data manipulation tasks, make unintended visual
emanations an exploitable liability to data security. Nevertheless, there is
still a gap in understanding of both the limitations of these techniques as well
as the availability of effective mitigation mechanisms. It is the goal of this
work to contribute to filling this conceptual gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study builds upon recent state of the art techniques for automatic
reconstruction of typed input from compromising reflections, comprising of
robust keystroke event detection and classification mechanisms coupled to
natural language processing modules. Such paradigm is both effective and
amenable to low cost implementation in commodity devices. Based on these new
developments, threat scenarios are no longer restricted to controlled scenarios
using specialized equipment, but rather consist of highly flexible and possibly
impromptu attacks. The project develops advanced cross-platform data input
transcription prototypes used within a threat validation framework. This
framework provides a characterization of both threat scenario operational
limitations (e.g., imaging resolution, scene illumination, computational
requirements) as well as the performance characteristics (e.g., robustness,
accuracy) of the different vulnerability exploitation mechanisms. Moreover, the
results of the analysis of diverse threat scenarios are being used to identify
and develop appropriate mitigation mechanisms when possible.