* 1148673
* Workshop on Nanoscale Science and Technology for Forensics. To be Held at the Polytechnic Institute of New York University (NYU-POLY) Brooklyn, NY   August, 28-29,2011.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Harold Grubin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal requests funds to support a national workshop on Nanoscale Science
and Technology for Forensics which will be held in Brooklyn, NY on August 28-29,
2011. The funds are for travel and subsistence for students and leading experts
to participate in the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will assemble will bring together key experts from
nanotechnology areas (optoelectronics, materials, fabrication, engineering and
medicine) to focus on applications in forensic science. This multidisciplinary
meeting will advance identification of future research needs and will promote
new collaborations. The workshop goals are to determine: (i) the primary
forensic sensing and characterization requirements; (ii) the most difficult
science and engineering challenges to be overcome; and, (iii) the potential
advantages that nanotechnology offers. The organization of this workshop
leverages the expertise of researchers from universities, government agencies,
and industry across the U.S. and the international
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
provide a special forum for leading experts to review the most important
breakthroughs in nanotechnology and the potential impact in forensics. It will
help to establish future programs for training graduate and undergraduate
students to become the next generation of forensic scientists and engineers. The
workshop includes a special program to increase the participation of student and
postdoctoral researchers from the area of forensic sciences. A special effort
has been made to include student attendees from underrepresented groups as well
as minority institutions. This combined forensic science and nanotechnology
meeting will build new bridges in areas related to sensing and characterization.