* 1148458
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Empowering the Scientific Community with Streaming Data Middleware: Software Integration into Complex Science Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Tony Fountain, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,455,429.00

This project will catalyze a new generation of sensor-based streaming data
applications by building on the foundation of the Open Source DataTurbine (OSDT)
middleware (www.dataturbine.org). This will involve strategic software
development, systems integration and testing, science experiments, and education
and outreach. The software developments will include (A) tools for configuring,
testing, and controlling distributed sensor systems, (B) software interfaces
that are compliant with the Open Geospatial Consortium Sensor Web Enablement
standards, (C) a new OSDT-Matlab interface, and (D) OSDT cybersecurity
enhancements. These software products will be integrated into the production
research infrastructures at Purdue, the University of Connecticut, the North
Temperate Lake LTER Network site, and the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research
Institute. The software will be professionally developed and managed as
community resources. The intellectual merit of this project will be advances in
software engineering, interoperability standards, and systems management for
complex real-time sensor systems as well as advances on important open questions
in civil engineering, marine science, and ecology. This project will yield
broader impacts by enabling new science applications, enhancing productivity,
and accelerating innovation across NSF directorates. To ensure that these
broader impacts are realized, the team will provide student research
opportunities, develop curriculum materials and training courses, and cultivate
a community of software users.