* 1148835
* Supporting International Cooperation on Biodiversity Issues: U.S. National Committee for DIVERSITAS
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Margaret Collins, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 127,565.00

This award provides support for the U.S. National Academy of Sciences to carry
out its responsibilities as the adhering body for the United States to
DIVERSITAS, an international program of biodiversity science. The Board on
International Organizations (BISO) of the National Research Council (NRC)
executes these responsibilities through the U.S. National Committee for
DIVERSITAS (USNC). The overarching goal of the USNC is to contribute
constructively to the two DIVERSITAS goals: 1) understanding biodiversity and
its importance, and 2) managing biodiversity and ecosystem services in a
sustainable way. DIVERSITAS will establish a US National Committee of academics,
government scientists, NGOs and policy makers to will contribute to the science-
policy interface related to biodiversity and ecosystem services issues and
emerging international assessments. Through national committee meetings and
participation in national professional society meetings and international
meetings, DIVERSITAS will be a liaison, bringing together the disparate elements
of the broad U.S. community of academics, government scientists, NGOs and policy
makers concerned with issues related to biodiversity and ecosystem services, and
linking them with their counterparts around the world through the DIVERSITAS
networks. Funds will provide support for the National Committee, organizational
support for DIVERSITAS, and travel to national and international meetings.