* 1148194
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms, Modeling, and Geochemical Consequences of Electron Flow in Acid Mine Drainage-Induced Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,03/31/2017
* Alper Buldum, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2017
* USD 221,186.00

The transfer of material and energetic substrates for microbial metabolism has
historically been viewed as strongly dependent on the diffusion of chemical
species within the physicochemical milieu in which the microbial community is
active. Ideas that individual organisms and microbial communities may mediate
redox reactions despite spatial separation of energetic substrates have now
begun to challenge this view. Microbial communities that are electrically
integrated in a network of conductive extracellular structures (e.g. microbial
nanowires) and redox-active mineral phases may facilitate and exploit the
movement of electrons over scales (mm- to cm-scale) far exceeding those of the
individual cells (micrometer to meter-scale), referred to as "far-afield
extracellular electron transport (EET)." An important implication of farafield
EET is that biogeochemical redox reactions may occur despite the spatial
separation of reductant, oxidant, and even individual microorganisms themselves.
The work proposed here will use an acid mine drainage (AMD)-impacted system to
examine the dynamics of electron flow in a "natural" setting. In several
settings, when Fe(II)-rich AMD reaches the terrestrial surface aerobic,
acidophilic bacteria oxidize Fe(II) to Fe(III). The Fe(III) (hydr)oxides that
result from these microbial activities accumulate as 'iron mounds,' which are
composed almost exclusively of Fe(III) phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
hypothesized that integrated, conductive networks composed of mineral phases,
microbial nanowires, and other conductive cellular material facilitate EET and
the transfer of electrons through the iron mound, supporting microbiological
oxidation of Fe(II) at depths within the iron mound that could not be sustained
simply by diffusion of O2 into the mound. Field-based fine-scale geochemical
site characterizations coupled with measurements of geo- and electro-chemical
changes and detailed characterizations of electrically conductive microbial
structures in laboratory-scale sediment incubations will be used to elucidate
the rates, scales, and extents of electron transfer processes mediated by iron
mound-associated microbial communities. Multiscale physical modeling of electron
transfer processes will be used to support and supplement experimental
examinations of electron transfer within this system, and will include modeling
of electron flow in simulated microbial nanowires, 'biogeobatteries,' and in
larger scale systems like that encountered in an iron mound.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this work will enhance understanding of
microbially mediated geochemical processes in iron mounds and AMD treatment
approaches. A non-profit AMD treatment company will serve as an unfunded
collaborator on this project to facilitate knowledge transfer to AMD treatment
practitioners. Funds from this project will aid in the interdisciplinary
training of a post-doctoral researcher, graduate, and undergraduate students,
while facilitating a strong collaboration between a public university (The
University of Akron) and private university (The University of Southern
California). Graduate and undergraduate students will be recruited from UA's
McNair Scholars program. The iron mound field site will also serve as a field
classroom for formal courses at UA and a local school district.