* 1148111
* SI2:SSE-Collaborative Research: Advanced Software Infrastructure for Biomechanical Inverse Problems
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Christopher Carothers, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2016
* USD 290,301.00

Biomechanical imaging refers to the remote measurement of the mechanical
properties of tissues, in-situ and in-vivo. Images of the tissue can be thus
created by visualizing the mechanical property distributions. This technique
relies on imaging tissue while it is deformed by a set of externally applied
forces. Through image processing, the displacement field everywhere in the
region of interest is inferred. An inverse problem for the relevant mechanical
properties is then solved, given the measured displacement fields, an assumed
form of the tissue's constitutive equation, and the law of conservation of
momentum. Images of reconstructed parameters find applications in the detection,
diagnosis and treatment monitoring of disease, and in designing patient specific
models for surgical training and planning. Over the last decade we have
developed a software package (NLACE) to solve this inverse problem eciently in
different application domains. Through this award we will make enhancements to
NLACE that will make it easier to utilize and modify, and extend its user base
to a wider community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific tasks for enhancing
NLACE can be divided into two categories: (a) Steps to transition from a working
prototype of NLACE to a software resource for the community. These include
establishing an Input/Output standard for NLACE, creation of a GUI for input
data and for monitoring the progress of the solution, hosting NLACE
distributions, and creating sets of test data and documentation for its release.
(b) Tasks that would enhance the functional capability of NLACE. These include
the creation of a user-defined hyperelastic material model module to address a
large class of tissue and material types, parallelization of NLACE on
distributed memory, shared memory and GPU platforms, and quantifying uncertainty
in the spatial distribution of the reconstructed parameters. We will measure our
progress through user-feedback obtained during annual validation tests performed
by a committed focus user-group that will test all aspects of the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed improvements to NLACE will further
its application in the detection, diagnosis and treatment monitoring of
diseases, generation of patient-specic models for surgical planning and image-
guidance applications, and studies in biomechanics and mechanobiology. The
parallel and uncertainty quantification strategies developed for NLACE can be
applied to a broad class of inverse problem with PDE constraints, including
acoustic and electromagnetic scattering, seismic inversion, diffuse optical
tomography, aquifer permeability and thermometry. Our outreach plans ensure the
dissemination of NLACE to our focus group and to a broader community through
hosting on the Simtk NIH center website. Finally, two graduate students will be
trained in the elds of computational science and mathematics and biomechanics,
and results from the proposed research will be presented at conferences on
computational and biomedical science and engineering.