* 1148268
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Mid-Miocene-to-Recent Paleo-Erosion Rates in the Eastern Andes, Northern Argentina
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Douglas Burbank, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2016
* USD 143,370.00

Both climatic conditions and tectonic deformation are known to influence rates
of erosion, although the response of erosion rates to changes in these
controling mechanisms over time is still poorly understood. This question has
been difficult to address due to a lack of reliable proxy data that can define
past erosion rates that record rate changes over timescales comparable to
significant changes in climate and tectonics. For example, when modern rates are
assessed using the concentrations of cosmogenic nuclides in eroded sediments,
those rates typically reflect erosion on millennial timescales, whereas erosion
of mountain belts rates is typically assessed at million-year time scales that
average across many climate cycles. By developing a ~10-million-year-long record
of paleo-erosion rates in the Eastern Andes of Argentina, we will explore the
trade-offs between climate and deformation as they modulate erosion. We will
measure three different cosmogenic isotopes (10Be, 21Ne, and 26Al) in ancient
river sediments that were deposited in the Andean foothills. This study will
capitalize on a unique exposure that was inadvertently created by humans who, in
about 1900, diverted part of a river into an irrigation ditch and triggered a
massive erosional event that has cut a channel over 100 m deep and 10 km long in
the past 100 years. In the midst of the jungle, this incision has revealed a
pristine exposure of a ~7-km thickness sediments eroded from the Andes over the
past 10 million years. Importantly, this exposure is ideal for cosmogenic
studies of past erosion rates, and it offers superb age control via its already
establish record of reversals of Earth?s magnetic field and volcanic ashes that
can be precisely dated. Using three isotopes with different half-lives and
cosmogenic production rates will allow significant reduction of uncertainties
associated with sediment storage, recycling, and syn-depositional exposure, and
will underpin a more robust history of erosion rates. The multi-isotope
approach, paired with detrital zircon analyses, may also provide an opportunity
to establish a stratigraphic record of sediment burial and remobilization within
the catchment. When paired with regional records of climate and tectonic uplift,
the resulting erosion and sediment transport records should provide valuable
constraints for numerical models of landscape evolution. The project will also
broaden the scope of applications for stable 21Ne and serve as an exploration of
its ability to reliably record erosion rates beyond the limits imposed by
natural decay of 10Be.

The relationship between rates erosion in mountain belts and the external
factors that drive this erosion is key to our understanding of both modern and
ancient geologic systems. For example, predicting climate-induced changes in
erosion rates from mountain ranges can inform societal preparedness for the
effects of global climate change. Likewise, studies of the long-term linkage
between climate and erosion can help geologists understand the fate of ancient
mountain belts and their role in Earth history. This project will represent a
novel application of cosmogenic isotope dating: a technique that computes the
residence time of rocks near the Earth?s surface by measuring rare isotopes
produced when cosmic rays collide with rocks and minerals at the Earth?s
surface. Success in addressing the many challenges associated with applying this
type of dating to ancient sediments will help lay the foundation for asking
similar questions in even older sediments, which record poorly understood
periods of Earth?s much older history. The project will help to train the next
generation of scientists by exposing them to cutting-edge isotope geochemistry
techniques and by developing the skills necessary to interpret Earth?s
sedimentary record. By pairing a senior PI with junior investigators, as well as
graduate students with undergraduates in an international setting, the project
will promote a continuum of training across a variety of skill sets and
experience levels.