* 1148485
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: A Linear Algebra Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation in Computational Chemistry and other Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Jeff Hammond, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2015
* USD 104,710.00

Linear algebra is a branch of mathematics that provides the foundation for a
significant fraction of computations in science and engineering. Historically,
the importance of linear algebra is such that highly specialized codes written
by computer scientists have been used by the community of scientific programmers
as a vital part of their application programs. With the rapid changes in
computer architecture during the last several years, it would seem that
corresponding modifications in linear algebra routines would be warranted.
However, such progress is not in evidence; the development of such routines has
been just incremental, involving successive rewrites of routines that had their
genesis in the last quarter of the last century. Correspondingly, there is
something of a disconnect between the current "state-of-the-art" linear algebra
libraries, modern computer architectures, and applications that utilize the
libraries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new project will create a new, vertically
integrated framework and implementation that revisits every layer of software,
from low-level kernels to higher level functionality. The vertical integration
is completed with a new generation of software for computational chemistry
applications, guaranteeing that the developed software, to be freely available
to the public, supports sustained innovation in that domain and other sciences.
The development builds on the FLAME project, which has been funded by NSF and
industry for more than a decade.