* 1148494
* Natural solar cells and their geochemical implications
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Carrick Eggleston, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 03/31/2015
* USD 140,776.00

Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The role of photoelectrochemical processes in
Earth?s early history is not well understood. Many common oxide and sulfide
minerals are photoactive and capable of driving natural photoredox processes.
The proposal discusses several major events in Earth history, such as banded
iron formations and the rise of oxygen, to which such photochemically active
minerals might have contributed. The project focuses in particular on a new
concept in natural photoelectrochemistry: coupled-mineral systems.&lt;br/&gt;In
solar energy research, there is a great deal of interest in photochemical water
splitting ? the formation of O2 and H2 using sunlight and water. Such processes
are usually quite inefficient, but engineered ?tandem cells? have been
constructed in which two semiconductors, each absorbing a different light
wavelength, greatly improve the efficiency of the overall photocatalytic
process. The photochemical current densities that we measured in initial
experiments with hematite-pyrite tandem cell (which can be expected to form in
nature as the simple consequence of incipient pyrite oxidation) are surprisingly
comparable to the deposition rates of iron in banded iron formations and the
rate of water loss from Mars over time. The time seems ripe, therefore, to study
a few likely naturally-occurring mineral tandem cell systems in order to
quantify the extent to which mineral-based photochemistry might have driven
important early-Earth and planetary processes.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
investigate the behavior and properties of such natural photo-electrochemical
cells. We intend to understand the rates at which water can be oxidized and
hydrogen produced, the rates at which other common aqueous solutes can be
oxidized or reduced, the mineral properties needed for such processes, assess a
small set of mineral systems that could have been important on early Earth, and
investigate the effects of variable pO2, light intensity, pH, temperature, and
both aqueous and solid compositions on the overall photoelectrochemical process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical explanation:&lt;br/&gt;While the role of
semiconducting minerals in natural processes of the Earth is of geological
interest, the fundamental properties of mineral semiconductors as photocatalysts
are probably of greatest significance in the development of solar energy
technology. If a solar photocatalytic system can be developed that produces
fuels (chemically stored energy) reasonably efficiently, such technology ? if it
is to truly impact the global energy picture in the long run ? must be
constructed of Earth-abundant materials. Iron and manganese oxides and sulfides
are common, whereas there is simply not enough platinum on Earth to be used as
electrodes/catalyst for such systems. From the point of view of medium- to long-
term energy security (not to mention climate change), such fuel-generating
technologies as described in this proposal need to be better studied, improved,
and implemented. The PI has experience both in fundamental geochemistry research
as well as with scientists working on solar energy, and the improved
understanding of the tandem-cell mineral systems in this proposal has
applications equally in geochemistry and solar energy technology.