* 1148996
* Research Collaboration Network for Managing Collaborative Research Centers
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Nicholas Berente, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 09/30/2017
* USD 498,129.00

In this project the Principal Investigators will build a cross-disciplinary
community of scholars and practitioners interested in studying and improving the
management of collaborative, distributed scientific research centers. Such
centers are foundational to an increasing portion of contemporary science,
growing in size and diversifying in scope, but there is a dearth of systematic
exploration into the management practices that enable centers to operate
effectively and innovate consistently. Collaborative research centers are
different than other organizations and subject to a variety of unique pressures,
including those associated with infrastructural innovation, distributed software
development, and virtual organizing. Although there is an extensive evidence
base available to guide different forms of organizational management, it is as
yet unclear which elements of management research and practice apply to this
particular form of organization and there is an absence of venues for center
managers to share and learn how to be more efficient and effective. Through a
series of topical workshops, the project will allow center managers to share
what works and to get ideas for managing their centers more effectively; in turn
organizational scholars will investigate how elements of organizational
scholarship can apply to the management of such centers. Further, we will
determine how to best disseminate relevant training, best practices,
benchmarking, and actionable research associated with center management and
explore how such a community can be sustained over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide practical support for the
directors of collaborative scientific research centers in the form of
benchmarking, sharing best practices, guidance and education on managerial
issues. Many center managers receive their training within particular scientific
disciplines and gain experience managing projects only within those disciplines,
but managing such smaller-scale disciplinary projects is fundamentally different
from managing larger, cross-disciplinary, distributed research centers. The
workshops, materials and networking provided by this project will improve center
performance by equipping center managers with the management tools needed to
enable scientific advances that address societal needs. Further, the network
will enable coordination of scholars from the wide range of disciplines that
study issues important to the management of such centers, deepen their
engagement with the scientific endeavor and improve the relevance of research
results to the effective and efficient management of collaborative research
centers. This research collaboration network has the potential to transform
cyber-enabled grand challenge communities, radically improve their success, and
guide future development of appropriate cyberinfrastructure tools.