* 1148818
* Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences: Investigator-initiated research projects (MCB)
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Joseph Loparo, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 04/30/2017
* USD 624,338.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria typically store their genetic information
in a single circular chromosome that is several million DNA bases long. In order
to maintain and duplicate this chromosome, called the nucleoid, bacteria must
accomplish two major feats of structural engineering: First, a giant 1.5
millimeter-long DNA molecule must be packaged into a bacterial cell that is over
a thousand times shorter. Second, newly replicated sister chromosomes must be
disentangled and separated in preparation for cell division. Work over the last
several decades has identified a number of nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs)
that play essential roles in these processes, yet it remains unclear how various
NAP-DNA interactions collectively regulate nucleoid architecture. Using single-
molecule biochemical assays, this project aims to investigate the molecular
mechanisms by which nucleoid-associated proteins from the model bacterium
Bacillus subtilis organize and segregate the bacterial chromosome. This study
will focus on five key NAPs (Spo0J, HBsu, SASP, Rok and SMC) selected due to
their essential functions throughout different parts of the B. subtilis life
cycle. To develop a mechanistic understanding of how these NAPs function, a
novel single-molecule assay will be employed that correlates NAP-DNA binding
with changes in the elastic properties of individual DNA molecules. These
techniques will be applied to address the following aims: (1) To determine how
each of the individual NAPs associates with DNA and modulates its mechanical
properties. (2) To establish how HBsu, the major non-specific NAP in B.
subtilis, facilitates or antagonizes the interactions of Spo0J, SASP and Rok
with DNA. (3) To characterize the SMC complex and establish if DNA compaction is
driven by intra- or intermolecular SMC interactions. These studies will take the
first steps toward reconstituting and ultimately dissecting the complexity of
the chromosome by investigating cooperativity between NAPs, while the techniques
developed will be broadly applicable to other studies of protein-DNA
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The single-molecule
methods employed in this project provide a quantitative description of the
dynamics of proteins and biological macromolecules, such as DNA and RNA, yet
they have not gained popularity in the classroom because they are regarded as
too difficult and expensive. In order to increase accessibility, an inexpensive
single-molecule microscope will be designed that can be used in the
undergraduate and high school teaching laboratory. A suite of experiments will
be developed for this microscope to introduce biophysical concepts such as
Brownian motion, DNA polymer dynamics and the principles of molecular motors.
These experiments will be piloted in an undergraduate laboratory course and
introduced to high school teachers and students through summer workshops in
which the PI will participate.