* 1148586
* Chemical Communities: Explaining Variation in Citizen Effects on Policy-Relevant Science and Industrial Transformation in Three Nations
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Barbara Allen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 148,346.00

Chemical Communities: Explaining Variation in Citizen Effects on Policy-Relevant
Science and Industrial Transformation in Three
Nations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Citizen participation in the governance of science-
based industries can improve the quality of policy and science by providing
insights that are not always seen or understood by policymakers or scientists.
Such participation is especially important in the governance of industries with
significant actual and potential effects on the environment, such as nuclear
power and chemical production. Yet much of what is understood about the forms
and outcomes of citizen participation is based on single case studies. We also
know very little about how scientists' professional cultures, and the
materiality of science-based industries, including their layout and their
environmental effects, mediate between citizen participation and the governance
of the environmental effects of science-based industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses theories and evidence from Science and
Technology Studies to carry out a comparative study of citizen participation in
the governance of chemical industries in three major chemical regions:
Ludwigshafen, Germany; Porto Marghera, Italy; and the chemical corridor in
Louisiana, USA. The research will demonstrate how national-level variation in
regulatory and legal structures, in national and professional science cultures,
and the material structures and practices of each site shape citizen effects on
policy-relevant environmental knowledge. New knowledge about how scientists
understand their role as mediators between policymakers and citizens will be
developed. A second major contribution of the project is that it will show how
variation in material factors, including environmental conditions and the
structure of the industrial sites themselves, shape citizen participation.
Research will be carried out through analysis of relevant documents, interviews,
and ethnographic fieldwork. Results of this study will contribute to theories of
citizen participation in policy relevant science, of environmental governance,
and of how scientific cultures shape citizen participation in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts lie in the development of theories of
governance that is likely to be of value to policymakers, scientists, citizen
groups, and those involved in the governance of chemical industries. The
comparative approach used here will provide new knowledge about how and why
citizen involvement in the governance of industries with significant
environmental impacts works more effectively in some places than in others.