* 1148181
* South American Megafauna Extinction: A Test of Synergistic Effects of Climate Change and Human Population Growth in Magnifying Extinction Intensity
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Anthony Barnosky, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 05/31/2016
* USD 320,623.00

EAR 1148181

SOUTH AMERICAN MEGAFAUNA EXTINCTION: A TEST OF SYNERGISTIC EFFECTS OF CLIMATE
CHANGE AND HUMAN POPULATION GROWTH IN MAGNIFYING EXTINCTION INTENSITY

A three-year project will study the effects of feedbacks between climate change
and increasing human impacts as an intensifier of extinction. The rich record of
fossil mammals from South America will be used to develop a refined chronology
of Quaternary megafaunal extinction (QME) with respect to the timing of
significant human presence and abrupt climate change in different regions of the
continent. The work will involve an international team of North American and
Latin American Quaternary scientists, with research specialties in Quaternary
paleobiology, archaeology, paleoclimatology, and radiocarbon dating, to obtain,
evaluate, and interpret the meaning of approximately 150 radiocarbon dates on
some 52 genera of extinct large-bodied mammal species. Statistical approaches
will be employed to assess how closely the youngest radiocarbon dates reflect
the true time of extinction and to compare extinction intensity with rates and
magnitudes of climate change and growing human presence on the landscape. In
essence, South America will be treated as a replicate natural experiment (the
others are similar, already-available chronological data from North America,
Europe, and Australia) to test, through a new quantitatively-based approach,
current ideas that synergy between different faunal stressors greatly enhances
magnitude and rapidity of extinction. South America is the appropriate place to
do this because, although the extinction chronology is less well-known than on
other continents, it had the greatest number large-bodied mammal genera go
extinct, has adequate paleontological, archaeological, and paleoenvironmental
data, and has the earliest accepted record of Homo sapiens in the Americas.

The project is important in understanding how combinations of different causal
agents can intensify extinction of species, which is a major global problem
today. Results of this research will be used to inform the general public and
conservation and policy communities about how best to conserve biodiversity
under current conditions of unusually intense and rapid global change. It will
contribute educational resources for high school and undergraduate students.
Peer-reviewed results will be communicated through media that will be accessible
to general audiences and policy makers. The project will develop human resources
and contribute to science and engineering literacy by training Ph.D. students,
building international research networks, and contributing fundamental data that
will be of use in future research and biodiversity monitoring efforts.