* 1148973
* EAGER: Noise and strong analog error-correcting codes in neural computation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Ila Fiete, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 175,000.00

This project aims to uncover the existence of a qualitatively better class of
analog error-correcting codes than previously known in the brain, show how such
codes can be used and decoded, and develop the theory for quantifying the
performance of such codes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information theory was
introduced into neuroscience relatively early, and the theory of efficient
(source) coding has been widely embraced in the sensory neurosciences. However,
the second branch of information theory, which deals with the maximally
parsimonious addition of redundancy to recover signal from noise, has curiously
not made inroads in neuroscience. Shannon's channel coding theorem revealed the
existence of codes that make possible error correction at efficiencies
previously thought impossible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's central
hypothesis is that the brain routinely employs such error correcting codes and
the machinery required to decode and work with them. The hypothesis is motivated
by a recent analysis of the grid cell code for animal location by the
investigator and colleagues, showing it has unprecedented error-correction
properties compared to known population codes in the brain (Sreenivasan &amp;
Fiete, 2011). The investigator proposes to: 1) Develop definitions and
constraints for analog neural codes, to apply the channel coding framework to
neural codes and thus characterize their "goodness" on error-correction. 2)
Identify high-level coding properties that enable strong error-correction, and
search for these properties in observed but poorly understood neural codes. At
the same time, explore strong theoretical error-correcting codes that the brain
may plausibly implement. 3) Model plausible neural mechanisms for decoding such
codes. Decoding is inference, so this question can be more generally thought of
as exploring neural mechanisms for hierarchical inference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is computational and theoretical, and also
involves close collaboration with neurophysiologists, to apply quantification
techniques to neural data and work with experiments to inform the theories and
test predictions.