* 1148684
* CAREER: Site-specific dual-labeling of a protein through two genetically incorporated noncanonical amino acids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Wenshe Liu, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 09/30/2017
* USD 575,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program funds Professor Wenshe Liu of Texas A
&amp; M University for a CAREER award to carry out research entitled "Site-
specific dual-labeling of a protein through two genetically incorporated
noncanonical amino acids." Studies of protein structural rearrangement and
folding/unfolding processes are of great importance for our understanding of
protein functions and a lot of human diseases that are caused by the
accumulation of misfolded proteins. A general method for protein structural
rearrangement and folding/unfolding studies is to analyze fluorescent resonance
energy transfer (FRET) between a pair of donor and acceptor dyes that are
selectively attached to the protein of interest. However, a major difficulty
lies in achieving dually fluorescent labeling of a protein site-specifically.
The research goal of this proposal is to develop simple and reliable methods for
site-selective dual labeling of a protein with a FRET pair. The proposed methods
are based on the genetic incorporation of two different noncanonical amino acids
into a protein followed by their selective modifications with a FRET pair
afterward. We aim to optimize the dual labeling conditions and develop
biosensors for small molecules and enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intrinsic
merit of site-selective dual labeling methods is their simplicity. They require
only the conventional and readily accessible recombinant DNA techniques and
simple organic synthesis. This feature is expected to promote rapid adoption of
the proposed methods by other research groups and accelerate related studies.
The education goal of this proposal is to integrate the proposed research into
the undergraduate chemistry curriculum by providing training in modern research
skills and stimulating critical thinking and creativity. The proposed
interdisciplinary research will involve graduate students, undergraduate
students and postdoctoral scholars, with particular emphasis on including women
and members of underrepresented minorities. A summer research program for
undergraduate students from four-year colleges and chemistry lab kits for high
school students are expected to help encourage college and high school students
to pursue studies and academic careers in STEM areas.