* 1148682
* New Directions in Environmental Ethics: Interdisciplinary and Public Engagement with Emerging Contaminants and Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,10/31/2012
* Phil Brown, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2012
* USD 557,532.00

This award funds an interdisciplinary training program for doctoral students and
postdoctoral fellows in Science, Technology, and Society that will generate and
communicate new ethics tools for handling emerging contaminants and emerging
technologies in a responsible and publicly accountable fashion. Emerging
contaminants are chemicals for which there is limited knowledge of health and
evironmental effects, yet which are prevalent in the environment. Examples
include PBDE flame retardants and bisphenol A. Emerging technologies are
designed to advance human livelihood, but have implications for human health,
the environment, or society that are often unclear. Examples include
nanotechnology, bioremediation technologies, and synthetic genomics. Because so
little is known about the effects of these products, and because these products
sometimes change as they are put into use, new forms of ethical engagement are
required. This award will generate new ethical tools to handle these types of
technologies and chemicals, and train graduate students and postdoctoral
students to use these new tools. The principal investigator will create a theory
of "reflexive research ethics" that draws on STS theories of health social
movements, public engagement in science, and ethics. Through coursework,
mentoring relationships with STS faculty, participation in a special seminar
series, and work with community groups and scientists, trainees will learn
reflexive research ethics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This theory and practice of
research ethics makes use of scholarship on how to engage publics and scientists
in varied fields in complex decisions about scientific products whose effects
are not well known but which are potentially dangerous. It also provides new
methods for addressing complex ethical issues raised by emerging scientific
products and technologies. Training and research will help strengthen cross-
disciplinary and public discussions of science ethics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this award include the generation new ethics tools that can
be used by other researchers to carry out NSF's Responsible Conduct of Research
training requirement in innovative ways; the engagement of community groups
through mutual learning between community partners and students; and the
publication of student and mentor projects.