* 1148330
* SI2-SSE: Connecting Cyberinfrastructure with the Cooperative Computing Tools
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Douglas Thain, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2016
* USD 507,020.00

This project supports the maintenance and development of the Cooperative
Computing Tools. This software package is designed to enable non-privileged
users to harness hundreds to thousands of cores from multiple clusters, clouds,
and grids simultaneously. The main components of the software package include
Parrot, a virtual file system that interfaces with multiple distributed storage
systems, and Makeflow, a workflow engine that interfaces with multiple computing
systems. This project will develop, maintain, and support the software across a
wide variety of operating systems and national scale cyberinfrastructure in
support of high impact scientific applications in fields such as bioinformatics,
biometrics, data mining, high energy physics, and molecular dynamics.

Large scale computing systems such as cluster, clouds, and grids now make it
easy for end users to purchase large amounts of computing power at the touch of
a button. However, these computing systems are difficult to harness because they
each present a different user interface, principle of operation, and programming
model. This project addresses this problem by supporting the development of the
Cooperative Computing Tools, a software package that makes it possible for
ordinary computer applications to move seamlessly between different service
providers. The software is primarily of interest to researchers in scientific
domains that require large amounts of computation. It is currently used by
researchers in the fields of bioinformatics, biometrics, data mining, high
energy physics, and molecular dynamics.