* 1148594
* Improved Understanding of Moist Atmospheric Circulations Through an Effective Static Stability Framework
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Paul O'Gorman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2017
* USD 323,043.00

This project explores the validity and implications of an effective stability
parameter that takes into account the effect of latent heat release on large-
scale eddy circulations in the atmosphere. The static stability of the
atmosphere is a key factor which influences many aspects of atmospheric
circulation, including the size and propagation speed of various kinds of
atmospheric wave motions including the baroclinic waves associated with frontal
systems, the horizontal size required for atmospheric circulation patterns to be
strongly influenced by the Coriolis force, and the strength of the atmospheric
greenhouse effect. Furthermore, much of our understanding of the dynamics of the
atmosphere is built on dry theories that do not take water vapor and latent heat
release into account. Thus the effective stability parameter, developed by the
PI in previous research, could potentially allow the dynamical theories
developed for dry atmospheres to be applied to the real-world moist atmosphere.
The research will examine the application of the effective stability parameter
to a variety of topics, including the response of atmospheric circulation to
global warming (for example, the expansion of the dry subtropical belts), and
the transition of extratropical thermal stratification from control by eddies to
control by moist convection alone.

In addition to its intellectual merit, the work has broader impacts through the
development of a better understanding of the atmospheric response to climate
change. Model simulations and recent observations show circulation changes
associated with a warming climate which could have an impact on regional climate
and water balance, and the work performed here could improve our ability to
understand and anticipate these impacts. In addition, the project will support
and train a graduate student, thereby developing the scientific workforce in
this area. Undergraduate students will also be involved in the research through
the MIT Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program.