* 1148884
* Symposium: Dispersal of Marine Organisms Symposium at the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology Meeting, Charleston, SC Jan 3-7, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Sara Lindsay, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 14,967.00

This award provides support for a symposium entitled Dispersal of Marine
Organisms at the January 2012 Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
(SICB) meeting in Charleston, SC. The world?s oceans hold a significant fraction
of the diversity of organisms on the planet. Understanding where, when and how
populations of organisms are distributed in the ocean is a central and
significant topic in marine biological research. Fundamentally, the dispersal
(movement) and distribution of marine organisms results from an integration of
both the physical and biotic environmental characteristics with organisms?
biological characteristics, such as physiology and behavior. Often, however,
research on dispersal tends to emphasize a particular discipline (e.g.,
population genetics, functional morphology, developmental biology, physiology,
biophysics), or to emphasize a particular group of organisms (e.g. fish, marine
invertebrates). This symposium assembles an interdisciplinary group of
outstanding young and established speakers to address the broad issue of
dispersal in marine environments in an integrative way. Such integration is
increasingly important to marine conservation and management efforts. The goal
of the symposium is to promote the exchange and integration of ideas and
knowledge of dispersal across disciplines, and to identify scientific
opportunities and approaches for future research that will accelerate
understanding. Participants will be encouraged to consider the common properties
that influence dispersal across different species, and to discuss what
currencies should be measured in order to predict how dispersal of marine
organisms will be influenced by environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
invited symposium speakers represent a diverse scientific perspective and
include established experts and early career scientists, men and women.
Additional researchers will present their findings in contributed sessions and
the project contributes to student training by inviting and providing financial
assistance for up to ten graduate students or postdoctoral researchers to
present in these complementary sessions.