* 1148305
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSE: Component-Based Software Architecture for Computational Landscape Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Erkan Istanbulluoglu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 180,289.00

Presently there are no widely adopted software conventions for holistic
computational landscape models. To fill this important gap this project adapts
and enhances existing landscape modeling codes by introducing a component-based
approach to software development. This project adapts and enhances an existing
model -- CHILD (Channel-Hill slope Integrated Landscape Development) -- to
provide a set of interoperable, independent modeling components that provide
flexible and modular approaches to landscape modeling which are fully compatible
with the NSF-funded Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System CSDMS)
infrastructure. In accord with the CSDMS architecture, the software to be
developed will also employ the standards and tools of the Common Component
Architecture (CCA) software architecture. Included is the design of an interface
for communication with and between the developed components. The end result will
be a set of independent, interoperable C++ software modeling modules that are
compatible with the CSDMS modeling toolkit as well as the standards and tools of
the CCA structure. The software will be tested against data on post-wildfire
erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach was selected to provide maximum
flexibility to users by allowing them to plug-and-play, seamlessly linking
together selected computing modules to enable custom combinations of components
to support modeling for a wide variety of research topics. Work will include the
development of a gridding engine to handle both regular and unstructured meshes
and an interface for space-time rainfall input, as well as a surface hydrology
component, a sediment erosion-deposition component, a vegetation component, and
a simulation driver. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful this project will
impact many branches of the Earth and environmental sciences by building a new
modeling platform and creating essential software infrastructure for science
with applications that span hydrology, soil erosion, tectonics, geomorphology,
vegetation ecology, stratigraphy, and planetary science. Broader impacts of the
work include creation of classroom modeling exercises for both undergraduate and
high schools students, and support of a PI whose gender is under-represented in
the STEM fields and who is employed at an institution in an EPSCoR state. It
also includes workforce-training in computational geoscience for graduate
students and a postdoc as well as minority undergraduates from Xavier
University, a Historically Black University in the New Orleans area.