* 1148801
* Attracting, Motivating and Preparing Mathematics students and educators in the Southwest by building an energetic community
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Michael Nakamaye, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,198,603.00

The NSF-funded MCTP project based at the University of New Mexico (UNM) has
three main goals: to provide opportunities for students to strengthen their
understanding of mathematics and its applications, to impact mathematics
education at all levels, and to build an engaging, interacting community. Led by
a dynamic group of ten UNM faculty, the MCTP program at UNM will offer an
intensive mathematics summer camp geared at advanced undergraduates from
throughout the Southwest. This will be followed by an undergraduate honors
research program at UNM in which students are closely mentored throughout the
academic year. Simultaneously, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
willstudy advanced mathematics in a Qualifying Exam Preparation Seminar which
will help both groups succeed in their graduate and post-graduate work. The
summer camp will include one week focused on mathematics at the high school
level and incorporate high school teachers. Its purpose will be to help
participants develop a profound conceptual understanding of key mathematical
ideas and on how to present them engagingly. This will provide a rich source of
professional development for and interaction between current and future
educators. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will develop a Graduate
Student Teacher Training Seminar in which they critically analyze aspects that
impact teaching and learning. An outreach program will teach undergraduates to
verbalize mathematics in simple, clear, well-organized terms, which they will
then present to high-school students. This will promote interaction between
university and high school students. Here, we will target less privileged
schools with large minority populations. Undergraduates at all levels will
interact during the Southwest Undergraduate Mathematics Research Conference
(SUnMaRC) and through Math Club activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort is
intended to provide an exciting and rich opportunity to the benefit of all
approximately 300 participants directly involved. All participants will gain
mathematical knowledge and breadth through various components such as the summer
workshop, the undergraduate research program, and the qualifying exam seminar.
The postdoctoral fellows will have excellent conditions to develop into
effective professionals. All participants will become more aware of sound
pedagogical practices which will make them better at transmitting their
knowledge and giving those they teach a solid mathematics foundation. The grant
will yield outcomes that will permit us to continue the main activities with
significantly fewer resources after it has expired. In particular, we will build
a structure that enables us to continue the outreach program, the undergraduate
research program, the teacher training and the qualifying exam preparation
courses. This program will also affect the visibility and perception of
mathematics at our university. We have a thriving Math Club whose members are
energetic and enthusiastic about mathematics, and we hope we can spread that
enthusiasm to produce a thriving, self--sustaining atmosphere of creative
enquiry.