* 1148202
* CAREER: Riboswitch-based whole-cell biosensors to detect small organic molecules: A combined educational and research plan
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,10/31/2012
* Jane Liu, Drew University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 10/31/2012
* USD 52,811.00

1148202&lt;br/&gt;Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drew
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although small organic molecules are essential
to all biological systems, there remains a need for tools that allow scientists
to measure the concentration of any given small molecule in a biologically
relevant setting. The project leader's long-term research goal is to develop a
general method to rapidly and easily monitor small molecules relevant to the
study of biology and the environment. The objective of this proposal is to
engineer riboswitch-based biosensors to monitor intracellular concentrations of
small organic molecules. Riboswitches are naturally occurring non-coding RNA
elements that act as direct sensors of diverse small molecules and can signal
molecular recognition through altered protein expression. The rationale for this
project is that the demonstrated plasticity of riboswitches coupled with the
utility of genetic selections can form the basis of a powerful method for
engineering whole-cell biosensors for small molecules. The proposed work sets
out to demonstrate the utility of riboswitch-based biosensors by using a
naturally occurring riboswitch to identify environmental factors that may
contribute to the metabolism of an important signaling molecule, cyclic
diguanylate, in Vibrio cholerae. To demonstrate how genetic selections can
modify and improve natural riboswitches for use in biosensors, the V. cholerae-
specific cyclic diguanylate riboswitch will also be re- engineered to generate a
new riboswitch that can monitor cyclic diguanylate in any bacterial species. The
potential of such a tool is immense in terms of its ability to advance the
entire field of microbiology research. Finally, to demonstrate the full range
and potential of this approach, a riboswitch-based biosensor for polychlorinated
biphenyls will be engineered through directed evolution. The successful
completion of this aim would produce a biosensor that can provide a sensitive
and inexpensive means to monitor bioavailable and bioaccessible levels of a
persistent organic pollutant. These models will define the precision with which
riboswitch-based biosensors can be generated and will speak to their broad
utility. This contribution is transformative because it is expected to provide a
system that will be able to rapidly detect and report the intracellular level of
virtually any cell permeant small molecule of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engineering of biosensors and the use of non-coding
RNAs as research tools, moreover, present an exciting frontier for a diverse
group of budding scientists. The project leader is committed to graduating
scientifically literate undergraduates and motivating students to pursue life-
long careers in science; this project directly addresses these career goals.
Over a dozen undergraduate summer research positions will be funded over the
five-year duration of the project. Students working on this project will
communicate their results to the scientific community as co-authors of journal
articles and as presenters at professional meetings. Student researchers will
also be asked to contribute to a blog which seeks to communicate to other
undergraduate and high school students what science research is and what it
produces. As part of this project, authentic research experiences will be
introduced into the curriculum for both majors and non-majors. In addition to
providing experiential learning on-campus, the project leader is also initiating
a partnership with a research-intensive institution to create off-campus
research opportunities for her undergraduate students.