* 1148652
* CAREER: Developing n-type low bandgap conjugated macromolecules based on aza-dipyrromethene
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2018
* Genevieve Sauve, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 11/30/2018
* USD 600,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Genevieve Sauve of Case Western Reserve
University will synthesize n-type, low bandgap conjugated macromolecules. The
approach is to use aza-dipyrromethene (aza-DIPY) dyes as a comonomer building
block, because aza-DIPYs are red-absorbers and have high electron affinities;
their electronic properties also should be tunable via changes in substituents
and chelation of metal ions. The aza-DIPY comonomers will be synthesized and
used to preprare alternating copolymers with aryl-bis-alkynyl or aryl-bis-
alkenyl units. The opto-electronic properties of the polymers will be
determined, and then selected conjugated polymers will be integrated into
polymer solar cells by blending them with electron-donating polymers such as
poly(3-hexylthiophene). To direct nanoscale phase separation of the blend,
poly(3-hexylthiophene) end-functionalized with aza-DIPY-based molecules will be
synthesized and used as blending agents. Film morphologies will be analyzed and
correlated with blend composition and device performance. The education plan and
broader impacts of this program include: 1) implementing active-learning
strategies in classroom and laboratory teaching assignments as well as
incorporating solar energy conversion topics into the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum; 2) mentoring and preparing undergraduate and graduate students to
undertake cutting edge multidisciplinary research; and 3) serving as a role
model and mentor for women students studying science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells made from electrically conducting
plastics are technologically promising but suffer from low conversion
efficiencies and irreproducibility in processing. This research seeks to address
some of those issues by enhancing our fundamental understanding of how to
synthesize new organic polymers to capture light and efficiently turn it into
electrical energy. The polymers might also find application in lightweight,
flexible organic electronics and display technologies.