* 1149602
* CAREER:  Transfer Learning Based Quality Improvement in Spatially-Temporally Complex Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Jing Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 01/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to develop "transfer learning" based methodologies for quality improvement of
manufacturing systems featured by a high product variety and short life cycles
(called spatially-temporally complex systems). Such systems typically exist in
semiconductor and renewable-energy manufacturing industries. The methodological
innovation - transfer learning - refers to the capability of leveraging the
knowledge gained during quality control of one process (or past generations of a
process) for quality control of other processes (or a new generation). A body of
statistically rigorous and computationally efficient transfer learning based
methods will be developed to achieve various quality control objectives such as
process modeling, monitoring, root cause diagnosis, sensor uncertainty modeling,
and sensor placement. Integrated with the research is an ambitious education
plan aiming at equipping future workforce with new science and engineering
knowledge and associated skills in quality improvement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will significantly expedite the
learning curve in quality improvement of each process in a manufacturing system
through effective knowledge transfer from other processes and past generations.
This will enable robust, real-time and even proactive quality control decision
making to keep up with rapid product proliferation and generation changes.
Through validation and application in semiconductor and solar energy
manufacturing, this research will provide breakthrough technologies to
significantly improve the quality, productivity, and cost-effectiveness of these
industries. The research methodologies are also transferrable to the study of
other systems such as health care delivery, human brain, and biological systems.
A broad array of educational activities will be pursued, including new course
development, industrial training sessions, undergraduate and minority students
involvement, and K-12 students and teachers outreach. Research and education
programs will be established through strong international collaboration to
achieve global impact.