* 1149453
* CAREER: Developmental Evolution of Limb Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2019
* Douglas Menke, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 01/31/2019
* USD 788,000.00

Animal species display tremendous diversity in body size and shape, yet
relatively little is known regarding the genetic mechanisms responsible for
these differences. The objective of this project is to examine this question by
determining whether species that exhibit similar limb lengths acquire these
comparable limb morphologies through related developmental mechanisms. Anolis
lizards are ideal for these studies since they display remarkable differences in
limb length between species. During the course of this project the pattern of
limb growth and gene expression will be compared between multiple different
long-limbed and short-limbed Anolis species. In addition, Anolis species with
naturally occurring differences in DNA sequences that control hindlimb formation
will be investigated to determine whether these sequence differences can
directly alter the function of limb genes. These developmental and molecular
analyses will reveal whether different species with similar body forms achieve a
similar final appearance through the same or different means. The proposed
studies will also generate broader impacts through the creation of new teaching
and training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
scholars, as well by providing resources that will advance Anolis lizards as a
new model system for developmental studies. Finally, the project will integrate
research and education through a research module that has been developed for an
advanced undergraduate molecular genetics laboratory course.