* 1149274
* CAREER:  Identifying Small Proteins in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2019
* Matthew Hemm, Towson University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2019
* USD 631,928.00

Little is known about the abundance or function of small proteins in any
organism. These proteins, defined as those containing fifty or fewer amino
acids, are difficult to isolate and identify using standard biochemical
techniques, and thus are commonly missed in protein identification studies. In
addition, it is difficult to identify the short genes that encode small proteins
using bioinformatics. As a result, the small proteins are significantly
underestimated. The PI's research and that of others has shown that bacteria
synthesize many more small proteins than previously thought, and the total size
of the small protein proteome in E. coli or any other organism is still unknown;
but is estimated to be in the hundreds. To identify new small proteins in E.
coli, the investigator plans to biochemically assay for protein synthesis from
candidate small open reading frames in cells grown under different growth and/or
stress conditions. This research will help to elucidate the true number of small
proteins in the E. coli proteome, as well as provide an initial characterization
of protein regulation and biochemical interactions with other proteins that will
serve as a foundation for identifying the function of these proteins in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many aspects of the small protein
identification project that make it ideal to expose undergraduate students to a
hypothesis-driven, inquiry-based molecular biology learning experience. Teams of
students will use basic bioinformatics to identify small open reading frames
that potentially encode small proteins. These students will test their
hypotheses in a follow-up molecular biology laboratory course. Ultimately,
information gained from this project on small protein abundance, growth- and
stress­-dependent accumulation and physical interactions will provide a critical
basis for offering interested Towson students additional opportunities for
conducting independent research in the PI's laboratory.