* 1149452
* CAREER: Dynamic and Intrinsic Profiling of Membrane Microdomain Composition, Function and Regulation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Susan Daniel, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 426,285.00

CBET 1149452/ Daniel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program supports a research
and education program focused on discovering the function of species that
comprise cell membrane microdomains and promoting the advancement of women in
STEM disciplines through professional development. Membrane species are
essential for regulating myriad cellular processes and vital to proper function
of bioanalytical assays and sensors that employ these species as transducer
elements. Yet our understanding of the links between protein function and the
impact of the local membrane environment of that protein on its function is
lacking. In this work, we will employ a novel microfluidic device comprised of
patterned, two-phase co-existent membranes to assess biomolecule partitioning
into different membrane phases; identify the stimuli that trigger changes in
partitioning; and quantify how partitioning impacts, and possibly regulates,
protein function. Knowing how protein function depends on the local membrane
composition is vital to understanding membrane biology and appreciating how the
membrane environment impacts drug-protein interactions is necessary for
assessing therapeutic efficacy in mitigating diseases such as Diabetes,
Alzheimer's disease, and infertility, where changes in cell membrane composition
are implicated in the disease manifestation. Thus the broader impacts of this
research are filling a technological gap in membrane proteomic research that
will be used to study how partitioning depends on membrane properties and
external stimuli (chemical, biological, environmental) to ultimately monitor
direct interactions between species in heterogeneous membranes and determine
protein activity changes after interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coincident to
the research plan, educational efforts on coaching graduate and post doctoral
women to become successful leaders and educators will be implemented through a
new multi-layered professional development program. The education plan will
build leadership skills and educational competency through peer mentoring,
teaching leadership skills through outreach programs, and career networking
workshops. The broader impacts of this education plan are filling the gap
between undergraduate advancement programs and professional development programs
for young female professionals in the STEM disciplines; creating a model for
female graduate student education that combines technical education in
engineering with leadership and management skills to yield well-rounded,
technically competent graduates; and ultimately increasing the number of women
choosing advanced technical careers after graduate school.