* 1149387
* CAREER:   How do phage drive bacterial diversity in Lake Michigan near-shore waters? A bioinformatics perspective
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Catherine Putonti, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2017
* USD 706,540.00

Loyola University of Chicago is awarded a grant to establish a multidisciplinary
team for the development and application of new tools for the synthesis of next-
generation viral metagenomic sequence data. With the advent of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) instrumentation, the throughput and cost-effectiveness of
studying entire complex environmental communities is now feasible. A critical
member of many ecological niches, the viral species which infect bacteria
(phage) play an important role in maintaining the bacterial diversity within the
community as well as nutrient cycling. Despite advances in sequencing
technology, identifying and/or classifying the viruses present in a particular
habitat is a significant challenge as relatively little genomic data is
available for this the most abundant species on earth. Classifying novel species
will be achieved by fusing existing and new tools, integrating our knowledge of
viral biosynthetic compatibility with their host. This will be conducted in
concert with a long-term study of the viral diversity present within Loyola
University Chicago's own backyard - the near-shore waters of Lake Michigan.
Utilizing novel computational methods, this research will ascertain if and how
phage are shaping the bacterial diversity and density in this environment. The
tools developed and data generated, both of which will be made freely available,
will benefit future studies of environmental viriomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has broad impacts, including the continuation of several ongoing
initiatives for the instruction of minorities and women in multidisciplinary
science. Furthermore, it will bring together undergraduate students in
computational and biological sciences to do research both in the laboratory as
well as in the classroom. Through the development of new courses and integration
into existing courses, students will be engaged in and drive active
investigation within the classroom. For instance, students drawn to the more
computational aspects would be engaged in a unique experience in the laboratory
and classroom, contributing to the development of a large project, directly
applying concepts of data structure and algorithm design. The nature of this
study will be of interest to a large number of students at Loyola University
Chicago, providing students with a greater understanding of the environment in
which they live as well as exposing the next generation of scientists to
interdisciplinary approaches in research. For more information about the project
visit the PI's lab website at http://sites.google.com/site/putonti/.