* 1149242
* CAREER: The influence of soil attachment on the biologic activity of extracellular proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Shannon Bartelt-Hunt, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 413,883.00

1149242-Bartelt-Hunt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extracellular proteins have recently
been implicated in a range of environmental engineering problems including
horizontal transmission of prion diseases and the release of insecticidal toxins
from transgenic plants. In addition, the increasing use of environmental
proteomics necessitates a more complete understanding of the behavior of
extracellular proteins in the environment. Despite this, the interactions
between proteins and environmentally-relevant surfaces such as soil minerals are
still poorly understood as is the influence attachment to soil can have on
biologic properties of extracellular proteins. The research objective is to
utilize a novel analytical tool to evaluate the interaction of one type of
extracellular protein with environmentally-relevant surfaces, as well as to
evaluate the subsequent changes in biologic function of the soil-attached
protein. The study utilizes the new analytical tool to simultaneously
investigate the amount and conformation of protein adsorbed to surfaces. In
addition, the PI will perform a series of experiments to evaluate how attachment
of proteins to soil can influence their biologic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information generated in this research will further
understanding of the role of the environment in transmission of chronic wasting
disease, an emerging animal disease that currently has no effective therapeutic
treatments. Results from this study will identify how extracellular proteins
interact with soils, and will inform a range of environmental engineering issues
including prion disease transmission, transport of extracellular enzymes
released from transgenic crops, and the behavior of proteins in soil mineral
cycles. Further, the project will provide cooperative learning materials in
engineering potentially leading to improved student retention in engineering,
and ultimately, a more robust and diverse engineering workforce. The PI will
share findings with extension educators in states impacted by prion diseases and
with K-12 math and science teachers in the state of Nebraska through the
University of Nebraska?s Science and Math Professional Development Summer
Technology Institute. The PI will involve undergraduate students in research,
and will leverage funding from an existing University of Nebraska program to
provide significant undergraduate involvement in the research activities
described here.