* 1149310
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Vowel Harmony in Maasai
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Catherine Ringen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,980.00

This dissertation research project will investigate vowel harmony in Maasai, an
Eastern Nilotic language with a million speakers in southern Kenya and northern
Tanzania. In a language with vowel harmony, some or all vowels in a word must
share a particular characteristic, so certain types of vowels may not occur
together in the same word. In Maasai, most words are pronounced either with the
tongue root advanced for all vowels or retracted for all vowels. Vowel harmony
is found in many languages, including Turkish, Hungarian, Finnish, Igbo, and
Mongolian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying vowel harmony in Maasai is important
for several reasons. First, little work has been done on Maasai; all of the
current analyses of Maasai vowel harmony depend on the same set of data from the
1950s. Second, vowel harmony in Maasai is extremely complex, and includes
intricacies not found in any other language. Previous descriptions are
inadequate, and none of the data are based on acoustic analysis. This project
will fill that gap. The student investigator will record Maasai speakers in
Tanzania in order to check the accuracy of data that have been reported in the
literature, to provide new data, to perform acoustic analysis of the data, to
present a phonological analysis of the data, and to make the data available to
the wider linguistic community for further research. Careful analysis of such a
complicated phonological system provides linguists with insights about the
possible types of complex sound systems that humans are capable of learning.