* 1149266
* CAREER: Dynamics and Pattern Formation in Active Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Aparna Baskaran, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research, education,
and outreach activities at the interface of soft matter and biology. The goal of
this research program is to develop quantitative theories for emergent behavior
in active fluids. Active fluids are a collection of "particles" that is driven
out of equilibrium due to the internal activity of each particle. They differ
from traditional nonequilibrium fluid systems because the energy that maintains
the system far from equilibrium is generated at the scale of the individual
units rather than at a boundary. Particular realizations of active fluids
include bacteria in suspension, motile cells on substrates, in vitro systems
made of cytoskeletal filaments and motor proteins and catalytically propelled
nanorods. The study of these systems has implications for phenomena ranging from
cytoskeletal dynamics, bacterial biofilm formation, wound healing, and
morphogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emergent behavior arises in active fluids
from a complex interplay between nonequilibrium dynamics arising from physical
interactions and bio-chemical regulation that controls the physical properties
of the system. Active fluids lack the scale separation between the microscopic
dynamics and the observed macroscopic dynamics exhibited in classical fluids, in
both space and time. As a consequence, detailed considerations of the effect of
boundaries, fluctuations and correlations become critical for building
quantitative theories of real systems. This project will address these
challenges in two ways: (1) Minimal models, both macroscopic and microscopic,
will be studied to unambiguously identify physical mechanisms that lead to
observed emergent dynamics and pattern formation in active fluids. (2) Theory
will be developed to quantitatively capture the effect of boundaries and
fluctuations on the dynamics of out-of-equilibrium systems and applied in
research thrusts. Specific planned investigations include: a) Elucidating the
influence of collective motility and physical interactions on pattern formation
and emergent dynamics; this is relevant at the scale of cytoskeletal dynamics
and for collective motility of cells that occurs in wound healing and tissue
development. b) Characterizing the role of shape and variable motility in the
large scale behavior of these systems with an eye toward bacterial biofilms that
are typically made of different phenotypes that show variability in both
properties. c) Charting the influence of hard walls on the collective dynamics
of motile particles due to both hydrodynamic interactions and direct contact
interactions which is relevant for most experimental realizations of active
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports an outreach effort that
capitalizes on the accessibility of soft materials physics and its relationship
to biological systems through everyday materials and table top demonstrations.
Specific initiatives include: a) a multiple contributor website that will be a
repository of popular articles on soft materials physics and a teacher's
resource center, b) a lecture-demonstration that will introduce the concepts of
rheology and its relevance to technological applications and biology targeted at
middle school and high school students, and c) a collaborative teacher
development program for high school teachers in the Waltham area and the physics
faculty at Brandeis to interactively develop aids and innovations to teach
science in the class room.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research, education, and
outreach activities at the interface of soft matter and biology. The
cytoskeleton of a living cell is made of long string-like molecules that are
interconnected in various places rather like a very tiny poorly made fish net.
Viewed this way, it is a material analogous to everyday rubber. Swimming
bacteria in a fluid suspension resemble the liquid crystals that form the basis
of modern display technology. The key features of these systems, organized under
the term active materials, is that they are pushed out of the balance of
equilibrium by various biochemical processes that together serve to dynamically
remodel the material. This project will use the tools of materials theory to
understand complex biological systems such as the examples above in order to
understand common mechanisms that underlie observed phenomena in diverse
systems. Such a study when coupled to detailed biological and biochemical
chemical investigations being undertaken today will serve as a stepping stone
towards approaching a quantitative and predictive understanding of biological
phenomena ranging from wound healing and morphogenesis to bacterial biofilm
formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports an outreach effort
that capitalizes on the accessibility of soft materials physics and its
relationship to biological systems through everyday materials and table top
demonstrations. Specific initiatives include: a) a multiple contributor website
that will be a repository of popular articles on soft materials physics and a
teacher's resource center, b) a lecture-demonstration that will introduce the
concepts of rheology and its relevance to technological applications and biology
targeted at middle school and high school students, and c) a collaborative
teacher development program for high school teachers in the Waltham area and the
physics faculty at Brandeis to interactively develop aids and innovations to
teach science in the class room.