* 1149391
* CAREER: Analysis and Automation of Systematic Software Modifications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Miryung Kim, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 10/31/2014
* USD 267,334.00

Software systems evolve. Developers must add features, fix bugs, and rewrite
software systems to provide better functionality and higher performance.
Existing systems also need to migrate to new hardware, computing environments,
programming models, and libraries. There exist redundancies, inefficiencies, and
error-proneness in the way that we evolve software systems today. In particular,
recent empirical studies indicate that developers often apply similar but not
identical changes to similar contexts. Making such systematic, repetitive
program modifications is a tedious, manual, error-prone
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the extent and
nature of repetitive program modifications and will design, build, and evaluate
a novel approach, called SYDIT, which improves developer productivity in
applying systematic changes. In this approach, developers no longer apply
similar changes manually. Instead, developers provide the old and new version of
selected code as an example change, and SYDIT will generalize a reusable,
abstract, context-aware program transformation from it.&lt;br/&gt;(1) SYDIT will
compute program differences between the old and new version of selected code and
create a reusable edit script by identifying relevant data and control flow
context and by abstracting the edits' content and position.&lt;br/&gt;(2) SYDIT
will then automatically identify related candidate change locations and produce
concrete, customized edits to each candidate.&lt;br/&gt;Incorporation with
testing and change impact analysis will help developers validate suggested
changes. SYDIT's new differential delta analysis will help developers understand
the effect of ported changes in each target context.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Using a large
corpus of project histories, this project will investigate the frequency and
types of repetitive changes. The resulting data set will be used to evaluate
SYDIT's accuracy and capability and to assess a productivity gain that can be
achieved by SYDIT.&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research will be substantially
improved developer productivity in evolving large software systems. By helping
developers apply changes to similar contexts exhaustively and inspect the effect
of suggested changes, SYDIT will reduce errors of omission and relieve
developers from tedious, error-prone hand editing. The empirical studies will
expand our understanding of repetitive program changes during software
evolution.