* 1149403
* CAREER: Investigating Middle and Secondary Mathematics Teachers' Transformative Learning of Statistics within Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2019
* Susan Peters, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 05/31/2019
* USD 587,254.00

This CAREER project addresses the professional development of middle and
secondary mathematics teachers by investigating teachers' statistical reasoning
and targeting characteristics of professional development that support teachers'
development of increasingly sophisticated ways to reason about variation.
Statistical variation plays a critical role throughout statistical
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates educational and
research activities in its design and implementation of a professional
development program and research on the professional development. The research
addresses three interrelated questions: In a professional development program
that encourages reasoning about variation from multiple perspectives and that
encourages dilemma, critical reflection, and rational discourse: &lt;br/&gt;1.
How do middle and secondary mathematics teachers reason about variation from
design, data-centric, and modeling perspectives?&lt;br/&gt;2. In what ways do
dilemma, critical reflection, and rational discourse affect teachers' reasoning
about variation?&lt;br/&gt;3. How do teachers differently engage with and
benefit from dilemma, critical reflection, and rational discourse?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project relies on multiple data sources and
strategically chosen combinations of qualitative and quantitative methods to
answer the three research questions. Data sources from two cohorts of teachers
include statistics assessments, interviews, video-recordings of program
activities, reflective journals, and classroom observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine how teachers reason about
variation subsequent to focused instruction and contribute knowledge to in-
service middle and secondary mathematics teacher education by targeting
characteristics of professional development that might support teachers'
reasoning about variation in increasingly sophisticated ways. The project will
produce a coherent collection of shareable instructional materials for use in
introductory statistics education and teacher education in statistics.