* 1149940
* REU Site: Biofuels and Bioproducts Production from Lignocellulosic Biomass
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Sushil Adhikari, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2016
* USD 335,748.00

This three year REU Site program at Auburn University will target undergraduate
participants from four-year institutions and community colleges where research
experience is limited. The REU site will include a diverse group of students
including females and minorities from Alabama and the southeastern U.S. It is
hypothesized that providing a research experience for undergraduates will excite
them about research, and motivate participants to seek higher degrees in fields
related to biofuels and bioproducts. The primary objective of this project is to
expose participants to different research techniques, scientific hypotheses
testing and experimental design, data collection, analysis, and presentation in
an engaging, interdisciplinary atmosphere that fosters a strong interest in
bioenergy field. REU participants will be paired with faculty mentors to work in
laboratories on research focused on converting biomass to biofuels and
bioproducts. Students will also participate in seminars focused on topics such
as research ethics, communicating science, resume building, the graduate
application process, graduate student life, GRE preparation, patents and
commercialization, professional etiquette training, team-work, etc. Students
will have an opportunity to visit local companies involved in bioenergy
activities, and will participate in talks from experts in bioenergy. REU
participants will live together in a residence hall with other REU participants
at Auburn, and this will help them to interact with peers and share their
experiences with various research projects. Weekly social events will be
organized to foster student-student and faculty-student interactions in a more
relaxed environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofuels and bioproducts from
lignocellulosic biomass have emerged as a promising alternative to reduce the
country's dependence on foreign oils. Over a three year period thirty
undergraduate students from diverse social and education backgrounds, mainly
those from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in the
southeastern U.S., in the field of bioenergy will participate in this REU Site
program. It is expected that the REU participants not only will benefit directly
from this project, but also that they will act as informal ambassadors to
inspire their siblings and friends to pursue higher degrees in engineering and
science. This program will also help to utilize Auburn University's resources
and expertise in bioenergy for training undergraduates in research. Further, the
program will promote faculty development through the undergraduate research
mentoring experience.