* 1149389
* CAREER: Context-aware Regression Testing Techniques and Empirical Evaluations of Their Economic Impact
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Hyunsook Do, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/29/2016
* USD 410,980.00

Successful software systems evolve: they are enhanced, corrected, and ported to
new platforms. To ensure the quality of modified systems, software engineers
perform regression testing, but this can be expensive depending on the size of
the systems and their complexity and is responsible for a significant percentage
of the cost of software. For reasons such as this, researchers have spent a
great deal of time creating and empirically studying various techniques for
improving the cost-effectiveness of regression testing. Despite the progress,
three important aspects of the regression testing problem have not been
considered: (1) factors involving the context in which testing occurs; (2)
assessment of regression techniques across entire system lifetimes; (3) proper
economic models that capture important cost factors and quantify benefits of
regression testing techniques and strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will lay a foundation for evaluating the cost-effectiveness of various
regression testing techniques and strategies in practical ways. Further, the
discoveries made by this work will promote software dependability, with
potential benefits to all organizations and people who depend on that
software.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these issues by performing the
following activities:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Creating cost-effective regression testing
techniques that address the testing process and domain contexts,&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Creating regression testing strategies that address system lifetimes,
&lt;br/&gt;(3) Creating economic models that enable the adequate assessment of
techniques and strategies, and&lt;br/&gt;(4) Evaluating and refining these
techniques and strategies through rigorous empirical approaches.