* 1149013
* Controlling the Hierarchal Structure of Light-Harvesting Chromophore Aggregates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Jeanne McHale, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2015
* USD 463,142.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jeanne McHale and her graduate
students will address fundamental questions about the hierarchal structures of
light-harvesting chromophore aggregates and their potential to improve the
efficiency of solar energy conversion. Based on previous studies of porphyrin
aggregates, the PI has developed the hypothesis that molecular flexibility
directs local supramolecular structure while environment determines the longer
range order. To pursue the objective of controlling and optimizing the optical
and energy-transfer properties of light-harvesting aggregates (LHAs), the
following four specific aims will be pursued: 1. Use resonance Raman
spectroscopy to reveal molecular conformation of flexible carotenoids in
aggregates whose supramolecular structure depends on solvent. 2. Prepare LHAs
with controlled size and shape using nanostructured metal and metal oxide
supports and examine their optical properties using ensemble and single-
aggregate resonance Raman spectroscopy. 3. Prepare self-assembled
heteroaggregates of energy donors (carotenoids) with energy acceptors
(porphyrins) and explore their energy transfer and excited electronic states. 4.
Exploit LHAs as energy donors and/or sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar energy
conversion to achieve improved light harvesting. These experiments will result
in fundamental knowledge required to exploit the extended wavelength response of
LHAs in solar photovoltaic devices. The proposal builds on the PI's longstanding
research in resonance Raman studies of photoinduced electron transfer, excited
state dynamics, and chromophore aggregation, as well as more recent
breakthroughs in solar energy conversion using plant pigments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project will also extend previous education and
outreach efforts aimed at broadening participation in science and specifically
in solar energy research. The PI and her graduate students will continue to
contribute to WSU's outreach program to Native American and Hispanic students:
"Pumping up the Math and Science Program." The PI and her students will also
partner with the Palouse Clearwater Environmental Institute to grow "solar
vegetables" as sources of plant pigments for demonstration solar cells to be
used in presentations to local schools and nonprofit groups. It is the goal of
both these projects to recruit future scientists to face the technical
challenges of powering the planet with sunlight.