* 1149544
* CAREER: Models and Algorithms for Comparative Analysis of Biological Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Byung-Jun Yoon, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2018
* USD 416,022.00

Recent advent of high-throughput technologies for measuring molecular
interactions has yielded large collections of biological networks, which enable
systematic studies of complex biological organisms. Since biological pathways
with critical functions are often conserved across different organisms,
comparative analysis of these networks can provide an excellent way of
investigating the organization of biological networks, as well as tracking down
novel pathways and studying their functions. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project aims to develop a solid mathematical framework for comparative network
analysis and devise innovative techniques for comparing genome-scale biological
networks. The main research objectives include: (1) develop a multi-state semi-
Markov random walk (SMRW) model for probabilistic comparison of large-scale
networks; (2) develop efficient algorithms for querying and aligning biological
networks; (3) apply the developed algorithms to identify novel biological
pathways and investigate their functions and their detailed
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The research activities in this project
are closely integrated with a comprehensive educational plan, whose overall goal
lies in enhancing students? learning experience through the integration of
research and education. This goal is translated into a three-part educational
plan: (1) develop a concept inventory (CI) for genomic signal processing and
computational biology (called the CIGSP); (2) shift a graduate-level course on
?Probabilistic Graphical Models? to a problem-based format; (3) design a new
undergraduate course on Probabilistic Models for Network Biology based on proven
and emerging pedagogical approaches. The new concept inventory CIGSP will
provide a valuable diagnosis/assessment tool for enhancing education in genomic
signal processing and computational biology, and it will be used in the PI?s
courses, to design measurable educational objectives and evaluate the learning
outcomes.