* 1149036
* CAREER: Nanoscale Phonon Spectrometer to Quantitatively Characterize Low-Dimensional Heat Transfer
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2019
* Richard Robinson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 01/31/2019
* USD 625,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The experiments in this Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) project aim to study the fundamental science of heat
flow through nanoscale geometries. The project intends to elucidate key model
predictions of phonon behavior, such as the wavelength dependence of surface
scattering and the ability of complex nanoscale geometries to selectively block,
enhance, or direct heat flow. This will be accomplished by developing a device
for probing single-frequency phonon transmission in nanostructures. Phonons of
controlled energy will be generated by using superconducting tunnel junctions
(STJs). Injection of excited-state electrons through the junction causes
emission of phonons during the subsequent relaxation and recombination of the
electrons into the Cooper-pair ground state. The same principle will be used for
phonon detection by STJs: incident phonons break Cooper pairs in the detector,
creating a measurable tunnel current. Successful measurements will be of broad
interest to researchers in the fields of nanomaterials, thermal transport, and
superconducting devices. The project will support the training of a graduate
student in nanofabrication, cryogenics, and sensitive measurement techniques. It
will educate the student in a broad range of contemporary physics research
areas, including superconducting devices and phonon transport. The research will
also be incorporated into a new outreach module promoting science learning to
students and a broader understanding of nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;In insulating
materials, heat is transmitted by atomic vibrations ('phonons'), which move
through a solid like ripples in water or sound waves in air, but much more
rapidly. Existing physical theories explain heat transport well in bulk
materials; however, these laws break down when the same material is reduced to
only a few thousand atoms wide. Theoretical modeling predicts remarkable
behaviors for nanostructures - such as the selective transmission of heat waves
based solely on the nanostructure's shape - but these ideas have not been
experimentally quantified. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project will study nanoscale heat transport by building a nano-sized device to
create and probe atomic vibrational heat transfer. This work will inform
improved engineering of devices like thermoelectrics and microelectronic cooling
modules through the exploitation of nanomaterials' unusual thermal properties.
This work has only recently been made possible due to newly available advanced
nanofabrication techniques. The project will support the training of a graduate
student in related cutting-edge nanofabrication, cryogenics, and sensitive
measurement techniques. It will educate the student in a broad range of
contemporary physics research areas, including superconducting devices and
phonon transport. In addition, the research will be incorporated into a new
outreach module promoting science learning to students and a broader
understanding of nanotechnology.