* 1149067
* CAREER: Supramolecular Light-Harvesting Materials from Self-Assembly of Bio-Inspired Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2017
* William Horne, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1149067 PI: Horne, William ORG: University of
PIttsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Supramolecular Light-Harvesting
Materials from Self-Assembly of Bio-Inspired
Macromolecules&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The design of chemical
species that mimic functions carried out by proteins involved in photosynthesis
is a frontier challenge in materials science. Underlying this challenge is the
requirement to create defined molecular entities on the 10-100 nm size scale
that accurately position arrays of functional groups with sub-nm spatial
precision. There is an unmet need for a design paradigm that combines (1) the
complete structural control offered covalent bond-by-bond chemical synthesis
with (2) the efficiency and large structures achievable by non-covalent self-
assembly. The overall objective of this project is to develop a platform for the
construction of supramolecular biomaterials with tunable properties based on the
self-assembly of protein-based building blocks in aqueous solution. The protein-
folding motif that will be used to direct monomer self-assembly is the alpha-
helical coiled coil. Prior studies on the relationship between sequence and
folding pattern have led to a thorough understanding of the basic principles for
the design of coiled-coil proteins. This rich knowledge base will be exploited
to create a family of subunits that self-assemble to form defined 1-dimensional
linear arrays or 2-dimensional networks. These materials will be applied in the
preparation of light-harvesting chromophore arrays that mimic the antenna
function of natural photosynthetic proteins. The fundamental principles
elucidated in the course of this research will be the foundation of a general
strategy for the design and construction of protein-based supramolecular
assemblies. Moreover, the light-harvesting materials will provide a model system
for the study and mimicry of energy delocalization in biological antenna
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The problem addressed in this
project has important societal implications. The development of a sustainable
supply of clean energy is one of the most significant scientific challenges
facing humanity in the 21st century. There is no simple technological solution
to this daunting task; however, the research proposed seeks to help define
physicochemical principles upon which such technology will rely. Development of
the light-harvesting materials that are the ultimate goal of this project will
improve understanding of photosynthetic energy transduction in nature and the
requirements to effectively mimic photosynthetic proteins with designed chemical
species. The interdisciplinary research program will provide a fertile training
ground for students at multiple levels and from diverse educational backgrounds.
An education and outreach plan is included that aims to engage research-active
undergraduates with a class aimed at teaching the effective oral communication
of scientific results. The course will foster outreach through organized
opportunities for enrolled students to present their work to peers as well as to
high-school students from the local community. The proposed program will (1)
enhance the competitiveness of STEM undergraduates at the University of
Pittsburgh by addressing an unmet need in the existing curriculum and (2) engage
potential future STEM majors, including underrepresented minorities, by enabling
participating students to act as near-peer role models for opportunities to
pursue undergraduate scientific research.