* 1149730
* CAREER: Bridging the Semantic Gap in Virtualization-based Security Solutions via Collaboration between Guest OS and Virtual Machine
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Daniela Oliveira, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 11/30/2014
* USD 261,193.00

In the last ten years virtual machines (VMs) have been extensively used for
security-related applications, such as intrusion detection systems, malicious
software (malware) analyzers and secure logging and replay of system execution.
A VM is high-level software designed to emulate a computer's hardware. In the
traditional usage model, security solutions are placed in a VM layer, which has
complete control of the system resources. The guest operating system (OS) is
considered to be easily compromised by malware and runs unaware of
virtualization. The cost of this approach is the semantic gap problem, which
hinders the development and widespread deployment of virtualization-based
security solutions: there is significant difference between the state observed
by the guest OS (high level semantic information) and by the VM (low level
semantic information). The guest OS works on abstractions such as processes and
files, while the VM can only see lower-level abstractions, such as CPU and main
memory. To obtain information about the guest OS state these virtualization
solutions use a technique called introspection, by which the guest OS state is
inspected from the outside (VM layer), usually by trying build a map of the OS
layout to an area of memory where these solutions can analyze it. We propose a
new way to perform introspection, by having the guest OS, traditionally unaware
of virtualization, actively collaborate with a VM layer underneath it by
requesting services and communicating data and information as equal peers in
different levels of abstraction. Our approach allows for stronger and more fine-
grained and flexible security approaches to be developed and it is no less
secure than the traditional model, as introspection tools also depend on the OS
data and code to be untampered to report correct
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will design, implement and make
available to the research community this collaborative architecture between a
guest OS and a VM layer and employ such architecture to counter various types of
kernel-level malware. The goal is to increase the cost for attackers by refining
trust/integrity values for subjects and objects at OS/VM layers by leveraging
social trust. In this architecture guest OS and a VM actively collaborate
requesting services and exchanging data and information through special
instructions protected from tampering. This will open up possibilities for
malware analysis and defense that are not currently possible (due to the
semantic gap problem) including, preventing the actions from privacy-invasion
malware like keyloggers, mitigating certain types of DoS attacks in the kernel
and return-oriented rootkits, increasing the costs for attackers by leveraging
social trust to refine integrity levels and restrict systems resources based on
them, just to name a few. This research will also lead to the creation of a
cyber security laboratory at Bowdoin, a liberal arts college located in Maine.