* 1149665
* CAREER: Non-canonical base pairs for the construction and application of DNA crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Paul Paukstelis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1149665 PI: Paukstelis, Paul ORG: University of
Maryland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Non-canonical base pairs for the
construction and application of DNA crystals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: DNA has proved to be a successful biomaterial for the self-assembly of
nanoscale structures because of its inherent programmability and predictable
structural features. The proposed research will use predictable non-canonical
base pairing motifs to: (1) design and assemble DNA crystals in three-
dimensions, and (2) apply these crystals as molecular scaffolds. Previously
identified non-canonical base pairing motifs will be used to design and assemble
scalable three-dimensional DNA crystals. New self-assembling non-canonical DNA
motifs will be identified through high-throughput crystallization screening of
many short DNA oligonucleotide sequences. This will also address fundamental
questions about the structural diversity of DNA. The second area of study will
focus on the application of three-dimensional DNA crystals as molecular
scaffolds for biological and non-biological molecules. This research will test
methods for attaching and orienting protein guest molecules within the internal
solvent spaces of DNA crystals. DNA crystals will also be used to align carbon
nanotube arrays and to assemble high aspect ratio metallic nanowires within the
framework of a self-assembling biomaterial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: This proposal describes fundamental steps for establishing a three-
dimensional DNA-based host/guest structure determination system for solving
protein crystal structures and for organizing nanomaterials. Host/guest
structure determination would simplify protein crystallization and decrease the
resource burden associated with crystallization trials. Ultimately, this would
lead to improved human health through providing structural clues related to
disease. The ability to organize nanomaterials with a self-assembled,
biocompatible framework will also provide significant advances to generating
components for molecular electronic devices. The research component of this
proposal focuses on exploiting the self-assembly properties of DNA for
engineering crystals, and the self-assembly theme will be used to develop a
hands-on workshop targeted to middle and high school students. The workshop will
introduce the fundamentals of self-assembly, describe biological processes where
self-assembly is observed, how self-assembly can and has been used in
engineering, and emphasize the interdisciplinary nature of science and
engineering. Additionally, the research and educational components of this
proposal will be directly merged through a macromolecular crystallography-
training program based on crystallizing short DNA oligonucleotides. This
training program will be in important part of identifying new non-canonical base
pairing motifs that can be used in DNA crystal design.