* 1149843
* CAREER: Approximating NP-Hard Problems -Efficient Algorithms and their Limits
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Prasad Raghavendra, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2013
* USD 160,000.00

The vast majority of planning or design tasks involves an optimization problem,
seeking to either minimize the cost of the proposed solution, or maximize its
efficiency or payoff. Often, the goal would be the identification of the optimal
solution from a set of finite many discrete options (combinatorial
optimization). Unfortunately, an exact solution for the overwhelming majority of
optimization problems turns out to be computationally intractable. To cope with
intractability, one often settles for algorithms that provably approximate the
optimal solution. The following question stems naturally from the notion of
approximation: For a given combinatorial optimization problem, what is the best
approximation to the optimal solution that can be efficiently computed?

There are two facets to answering the above question: designing approximation
algorithms and showing that no efficient algorithm can provide a better
approximation guarantee (hardness result). The convergence of these two
seemingly different facets has been one of the most exciting developments in
theoretical computer science in recent years. This project would involve the
design of improved approximation algorithms as well as showing that these
algorithms are essentially optimal. Although the design of approximation
algorithms is a vast area of research, the main tool underlying an overwhelming
majority of existing approximation algorithms is a convex optimization technique
such as linear or semidefinite programming. Existing algorithmic techniques have
hit upon a common barrier on a large number of fundamental combinatorial
optimization problems, a barrier that is encapsulated by the tantalizing "Unique
Games Conjecture (UGC)." Therefore the study of approximability is at a very
exciting juncture. On one hand, an affirmation of the UGC would resolve long
standing open questions , demonstrate an underlying unity in combinatorial
optimization problems, and, more importantly, show that the simplest
semidefinite programs yield the best approximations. On the other hand,
disproving the UGC would lead to new algorithmic techniques that will eventually
lead to better approximation algorithms.

The PI proposes a set of research questions involving both design of
approximation algorithms and hardness of approximation results. Broadly
speaking, the project has the following four research themes:

1) Understand the power of semidefinite programming hierarchies via the design
of new algorithms and constructions of integrality gap examples.

2) Extend the emerging framework of approximability under the UGC to a larger
class of combinatorial optimization problems.

3) Develop technical machinery and gadgets to show unconditionally some of the
hardness results based on the UGC, making progress towards its resolution.

4) Apply the analytic tools developed in hardness of approximation to other
branches of theoretical computer science, such as the study of exact algorithms
for constraint satisfaction problems.

This research necessarily draws upon tools from various theoretical disciplines
such as coding theory, property testing, computational learning, derandomization
and discrete harmonic analysis. The research has a strong potential for broader
impact in terms of scientific workshops, developement of graduate courses,
lecture notes and survey articles on the latest research in approximation,
promoting undergraduate research, and advising Ph.D students.