* 1149738
* CAREER:   Characterization of Translation Silencing Complexes During oskar mRNA Transport and Localization: Trans-acting ZFactors, RNAi and RNA Decay in the Drosophila oocyte
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Diana Bratu, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,067,045.00

Intellectual merit: Eukaryotes use a wide range of mechanisms to regulate gene
expression. Of particular significance is the transport of messenger RNAs
(mRNAs) to particular locations within cells where they are translated in a
spatially controlled manner. Processes that depend on the correct spatial and
temporal localization of different mRNA transcripts include asymmetric cell
division and the establishment of body axes during early development. Many
different factors (proteins or other RNAs) can associate with each transcript to
ensure its export from the nucleus and its transport to the correct location in
the cell. These dynamic interactions between mRNAs and proteins are best studied
by visualization of individual mRNA:protein (mRNP) complexes in living cells.
Using Drosophila melanogaster as the model developmental system, this project
aims to decipher the dynamic composition of a key mRNA transcript that governs
axial body patterning during oogenesis. The specific objectives
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) To co-visualize specific mRNA transcripts and
the protein factors that bind to them to inhibit their translation into proteins
while they are being transported to their target sites in living egg chambers.
&lt;br/&gt;2) To determine whether small regulatory RNAs (microRNAs) that are
predicted to bind to this transcript repress its translation to make protein
during its transport in oogenesis. &lt;br/&gt;3) To establish which components
of the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway target the mRNPs to specialized
cytoplasmic regions for storage or decay. An integrated suite of molecular,
genetic, biochemical, biophysical and advanced imaging approaches will be
applied to complete these objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion of this
project will increase our understanding of the mechanisms by which spatio-
temporal gene expression is achieved, especially the interactions of RNA-
transport machinery with cellular components responsible for RNAi, RNA storage
and RNA turnover in living cells. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project will provide undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity to
apply innovative fluorescence imaging techniques to address important biological
questions using a powerful genetic model system. The PI will actively recruit,
mentor and encourage students from groups underrepresented in the sciences to
work on the project, and serve as a role model for young female scientists. The
PI will continue to improve and expand an existing course in advanced
fluorescence microscopy that she has developed at Hunter College. Her hands-on
approach to teaching life sciences and her use of visualization tools to reveal
the intricacies of biological pathways, enable students to understand and
connect with science beyond textbooks. The educational framework of this project
is designed so that all students, regardless of cultural background, will gain
valuable experience that will prepare them for demanding graduate programs,
post-doctoral positions and the large number of jobs that require experience in
biotechnology and handling of model organisms. Moreover, this project will raise
the scientific literacy of the public via presentations by the PI and her
students of research results at local forums such at New York Academy of
Sciences and CUNY Science Caf√©.