* 1149549
* CAREER: System-level Run-time Management Techniques for Energy-efficient Silicon-Photonic Manycore Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Ajay Joshi, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 03/31/2018
* USD 469,305.00

The general purpose computing capacity of the world has been increasing at an
annual rate of more than 50% over the past few decades, and this trend is
expected to continue in the future. However, this increasing compute capacity
directly translates to increasing power dissipation. In fact, the server farms
and data centers in US consumed 1.5% of the nation's total electricity in 2006,
and this number has been steadily growing every year making it absolutely
critical to develop energy-efficient solutions for computing systems. Computer
scientists and engineers migrated towards designing systems with dozens of low
power cores on a single die to address the power problem while improving the
compute capacity through parallelism. However, the deployment of these manycore
systems has been impeded by the lack of energy-efficient high-bandwidth density
(on-chip and off-chip) link solutions in current and projected electrical
technology. Silicon-photonic link technology can potentially solve this problem
as it provides an order of magnitude higher bandwidth density than equivalent
electrical links. However, the power consumed in these silicon-photonic links
more than offsets any bandwidth advantages, in turn limiting their widespread
adoption for designing manycore systems.

This project explores system-level techniques (both reactive and proactive) to
minimize power dissipation and maximize bandwidth of the silicon-photonic
networks (inter-chip and intra-chip), and in turn improve the energy efficiency
of manycore systems. In particular, the project focuses on the two largest
sources of power consumption in silicon-photonic links - the laser sources and
the active tuning of modulator/filter rings (required to maintain resonance
under thermal variations). Four techniques - run-time assignment of photonic
resources, workload scheduling/migration, memory mapping, and dynamic voltage
and frequency scaling (DVFS), that use run-time system dynamics to reconfigure
the system for improving its energy efficiency are being investigated. A
vertically integrated approach where these system-level techniques are explored
while being cognizant of the underlying silicon-photonic link circuits and
silicon-photonic devices is adopted.

At a broader level, this project paves the way for the rapid adoption of
silicon-photonic link technology to enable the design of energy-efficient
manycore systems. This can provide energy-efficient computing solutions in turn
reducing the cost of operation and carbon footprint of the nation?s computing
server farms and data centers. On the educational front, the project leverages
the numerous outreach programs run by Boston University to engage students with
various backgrounds and levels of education in the different research activities
associated with the project.