* 1149703
* CAREER: 3D Stacked Systems for Energy-Efficient Computing: Innovative Strategies in Modeling and Runtime Management
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Ayse Coskun, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

CAREER: 3D Stacked Systems for Energy-Efficient Computing: Innovative Strategies
in Modeling and Runtime Management Ayse K. Coskun, Boston University

Abstract

Energy efficiency is a central issue in computing. In large-scale computing
clusters, operational and cooling costs impose significant sustainability
challenges. Embedded systems run increasingly complex, performance demanding
workloads, making the well-known energy management policies inadequate. High
power densities also cause high on-chip temperatures and large thermal
variations, both of which degrade system reliability.

The research goal of this project is to demonstrate that 3D stacked systems,
where multiple chips are vertically attached, can provide dramatic increases in
energy efficiency. Realizing this ambitious energy efficiency goal requires
novel analysis, design, and runtime management techniques. This project?s
objective is creating these catalyst techniques to make 3D systems effective
agents for attaining low-power, high-throughput computing in both embedded and
large-scale computing domains. Specific research directions are: (1) developing
a widely applicable methodology for jointly analyzing the performance, energy,
and temperature characteristics of 3D multi-core systems; (2) designing runtime
management policies to maximize performance under thermal or power constraints;
(3) optimizing liquid-cooled 3D systems to push the performance bounds while
maintaining reliable and low-energy operation.

A realizable target for this project in the next decade is a significant
reduction in overall energy consumption for computing infrastructure, which
translates into monetary savings and carbon footprint reduction. The project
also has immediate impact on the system and software design practice. Relevance
of the research topic to today?s fast growing computing paradigms such as
embedded systems, high-performance computing, and cloud enables constructing a
broad educational and outreach plan for K-12 and college students.