* 1149925
* CAREER:  The regulation of natural transformation in Vibrio
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Brian Hammer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2018
* USD 899,999.00

Intellectual Merit: The overall goal of this research is to understand the
contribution of extracellular chemical signaling in the exchange of genetic
material that accelerates bacterial adaptation. Although a transient human
pathogen, Vibrio cholerae is an endemic marine microbe often found attached to
the exoskeleton of arthropods, which are composed of the most abundant polymer
in the ocean, chitin. V. cholerae is a member of a distinctive group of bacteria
shown to be naturally competent to take up extracellular DNA and incorporate
this genetic material onto their chromosomes. This method of horizontal gene
transfer, termed natural transformation, occurs in V. cholerae in response to
two environmental signaling pathways; a chitin utilization system that results
in production of a regulator (TfoX), and a cell-cell communication (Quorum
Sensing; QS) system that induces production of the transcription factor (HapR).
The genes and network connections that link TfoX and HapR to DNA uptake are not
known. Thus, this project will address the following aims. Aim 1: To identify
genes that participate in horizontal gene transfer in response to extracellular
QS signal molecules and to chitin. Aim 2: To define regulatory pathways
connecting QS and chitin signaling to natural transformation. Aim 3: To examine
the function of natural transformation network components. Aim 4: To determine
the functionality of QS- and chitin-induced pathways in diverse V. cholerae
environmental isolates. The research in this proposal is designed to exploit our
understanding of chitin utilization and the V. cholerae QS paradigm for the
identification of novel natural transformation genes. This research will dissect
the role that both habitat and genetics play in bacterial evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The applicant engages in teaching and
service to integrate individuals in the academic community with members of the
broader society in the process of modern scientific inquiry. Dr. Hammer teaches
a Prokaryotic Molecular Genetics course for upper-level undergraduates and
graduate students; and has established research collaborations with colleagues
within the Unites States and other countries, to promote scientific and cultural
exchange opportunities for his lab members. He initiated a substantial outreach
program in 2009 that is expanded here, hosting a fifth grade teacher to work as
a summer intern in his lab. Together Dr. Hammer and the teacher develop
stimulating hands-on scientific exercises that engage ethnically diverse K-12
students in metro Atlanta. Activities are shared with local educators and will
be presented at regional or national meetings including the National Science
Teachers Association conference. Dr. Hammer is also an active teacher and mentor
for students at all levels and post-doctoral fellows.