* 1149187
* CAREER:   Secondary Active Membrane Transporters: Determining Protein Structure and Transport Mechanisms with a New Hybrid Simulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Jeffery Klauda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 07/31/2018
* USD 668,314.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT &lt;br/&gt;Cell membranes are a crucial component of all
biological organisms. They can protect the cell or compartments within a cell
that have their own membranes from harmful compounds. Membrane transport
proteins that span cell membranes can act as gatekeepers that control the influx
of helpful molecules and enable the efflux of harmful molecules. Membrane
transport proteins are grouped into classes based on their function; one such
class, secondary active transporters (SATs), is of specific interest to this
project. SATs couple the movement of a small primary substrate (protons or ions)
to that of a larger substrate (sugars, amino acids, peptides). These proteins
use the energy gain from the downhill movement (high to low concentration) of
the primary substrate to facilitate the uphill movement (low to high
concentration) of a larger substrate. Although atomic-level structures have been
determined for several SATs, for a given protein typically only a single
conformation in the transport cycle is known. However, transport of substrates
involves significant protein structural changes that are not captured by a
single conformation. The main objective of this research is to investigate the
transport mechanisms and multiple protein conformational changes of several SATs
with atomic-level simulations. A new atomic resolution simulation approach known
as "implicit-explicit membrane simulation" will be used to enhance
conformational sampling while preserving the natural transition between
conformational states in SATs. Initially, this new method will be tested on the
sodium-hydantoin transporter (Mhp1) because several structures in its transport
cycle have been determined from x-ray diffraction. In collaboration with
experimentalists, transitions between Mhp1 conformations facing inside and
outside the cell will be researched, as will possible mutations that stabilize
new structures, such as the inward-facing occluded structure. Studies on Mhp1
will lay the groundwork for using this new method on other SATs, especially
those with only a single known protein conformation, such as lactose permease.
This new simulation tool ultimately will allow studies of previously unknown
transport cycle states in SATs and give experimental structural biologists
insight into how these states may be stabilized. Moreover, studies of these SATs
may lead to better understanding of how similar proteins in mammals, plants, and
single-celled organisms transport substrates and change
conformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS &lt;br/&gt;High school
instructional aids will be developed to promote active student engagement and
interest in molecular biology. Specifically, an educational website will be
developed that focuses on three general topics, namely, proteins, cell
membranes, and function of membrane proteins. This website will include text,
figures, movies, and interactive applets that describe each topic. In addition,
this project will continue the development of a joint undergraduate and graduate
course, Molecular Modeling Methods, intended to introduce students to chemical
and biomolecular aspects of molecular simulation methods. Additionally,
undergraduate and graduate students, particularly those from backgrounds
underrepresented in research, will be recruited for training in computational
biology techniques. Key to these educational goals is proper assessment of the
impact of the educational website, teaching and mentoring. Collaboration with an
educational researcher experienced in developing educational tools, assessments,
and questionnaires will aid in fulfilling these educational goals. Overall,
implementing this educational plan will increase high school students interest
in STEM careers, promote interest in computational biology, and train the next
generation of science and engineering researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly supported by the Cellular Processes Cluster in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division.