* 1149218
* RAPID: Underwater Robotics Applied To STEM Education: A Time-Sensitive Discovery In Marine Archeology
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Mark Patterson, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 06/30/2013
* USD 199,927.00

The Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS) and The Watermen's Museum,
Yorktown, VA, will produce an underwater robotics research and discovery
education program in conjunction with time-sensitive, underwater archeological
research exploring recently discovered shipwrecks of General Cornwallis's lost
fleet in the York River. The urgency of the scientific research is based upon
the dynamic environment of the York River with its strong tidal currents, low
visibility, and seasonal hypoxia that can rapidly deteriorate the ships, which
have been underwater since 1781. Geophysical experts believe that further
erosion is likely once the wrecks are exposed. Given the unknown deterioration
rate of the shipwrecks coupled with the constraints of implementing the project
during the 2011-2012 school-year, any delays would put the scientific research
back at least 18 months - a potentially devastating delay for documenting the
ships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The monitoring and studying of the historic ships
will be conducted by elementary through high school-aged participants and their
teachers who will collect the data underwater through robotic missions using
VideoRay Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs) and a Fetch Automated Underwater
Vehicle (AUV) from a command station at The Watermen's Museum. Students and
teachers will be introduced to the science, mathematics, and integrated
technologies associated with robotic underwater research and will experience
events that occur on a real expedition, including mission planning, execution,
monitoring, and data analysis. Robotic missions will be conducted within the
unique, underwater setting of the historical shipwrecks. Such research
experiences and professional development are intended to serve as a key to
stimulating student interest in underwater archeological research, the marine
environment and ocean science, advanced research using new technologies, and the
array of opportunities presented for scientific and creative problem solving
associated with underwater research. A comprehensive, outcomes-based formative
and summative, external evaluation of the project will be conducted by Dr. L.
Art Safer, Loyola University. The evaluation will inform the project's
implementation efforts and investigate the project's impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly formed partnership between the Waterman's Museum
and VIMS will expand the ISE Program's objectives to forge new partnerships
among informal venues, and to expand the use of advanced technologies for
informal STEM learning. Extensive public dissemination during and after the
project duration, includes but is not limited to, hosting an "Expedition to the
Wrecks" web portal on the VIMS BRIDGE site for K-12 educators providing real-
time results of the project and live webcasts. The website will be linked to the
education portal at the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International,
the world's largest organization devoted to promoting unmanned systems and to
the FIRST Robotics community through the Virginia portal. The website will be
promoted through scientific societies, the National Marine Educators
Association, National Science Teachers Association, and ASTC. Links will be
provided to the Center for Archeological Research at the College of William and
Mary and the Immersion Presents web portal--consultants to Dr. Bob Ballard's
K-12 projects and JASON explorations. The NPS Colonial National Historic Park
and the Riverwalk Landing will create public exhibits about the shipwreck's
archeological and scientific significance, and will provide live observation of
the research and the exploration technologies employed in this effort.