* 1149302
* CAREER:   Creating a Unified Framework for the Quantitative Study of Animal Aggregations
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2020
* Steven Viscido, Winston-Salem State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2020
* USD 530,000.00

Animal social behavior occurs in many species, often with spectacular visual
results. In the past, studies have either focused on (1) why animals join
groups, or (2) the "traffic rules" animals use to position themselves within
groups. However, there is currently no theory to describe how one would go about
connecting these two ideas. This project will create a single theoretical system
that explicitly integrates the two concepts by combining existing models of
animal social behavior and will generate a new computer toolkit to allow the
development of the new model. The primary results of this project will be a new,
unifying theory of animal social behavior and a new user-friendly toolkit to
conduct behavioral analysis. By developing new theory and providing new tools to
study social behavior, this project will integrate research and education and
transform the way students learn about science. To make the new toolkit
available to the widest possible audience, all computer programs and data will
be stored in the WSSU library digital archive at http://www.wssu.edu/cg-okelly-
library/archives/digitalcollection.aspx.

This project will have broader impact on the scientific community by providing a
new framework for future investigators, and by providing them with a user-
friendly computer toolkit. This project will have broader impact in education
because it will popularize the science of behavioral ecology, and broaden
participation in science by under-represented groups. A new seminar course and
independent student projects will help increase the popularity of behavioral
ecology on campus. Students will also maintain a project web site and develop
"smartphone" applications based on the research toolkit. These student-led
projects will serve as portals to incite interest in behavioral ecology by the
general population, allowing the project's content to reach thousands.