* 1149697
* CAREER: Predicting and Mining Phenome-genome Association across Species
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Rui Kuang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 446,508.00

Understanding how genetic material determines the observable characteristics
(phenotypes) of an organism relies on knowledge of phenotype-gene relations.
From high-throughput genomic data, it is now possible to apply computational
approaches to identify the associations between individual phenotypes and genes.
Since the number of determined phenotype-gene associations is still very
limited, no computational framework has been developed to perform large-scale
cross-species analysis of the association between the whole collection of
phenotypes (phenome) and genes (genome). The objective of this CAREER proposal
is to develop new computational methods for predicting and understanding
phenome-genome association across multiple species. With the prediction tools, a
biologist or disease researcher could more reliably prioritize genes to test
their association with phenotypes in the laboratory. The availability of the
tools will greatly expedite the process of discovering new associations,
especially for studying rare phenotypes. The developed methods will be applied
to study phenome-genome associations for the analysis of several cancer tumor
phenotypes and the growth phenotypes of Arabidopsis thaliana in collaboration
with oncologists and biologists. The study of the plant growth phenotypes aims
to identify genes that govern seedling de-etiolation and seed development. The
collaboration should generate a potential increase in seed yield and concomitant
increases in the contents of proteins and oil per seed for the crop plants. The
study of the ovarian cancer and lung cancer tumor phenotypes will help reveal
the driving pathways of chemoresistance, and result in useful prediction tools
and drug targets for the treatment of ovarian cancer and lung cancer. The
research in this proposal will deliver a web portal called Phenome-Genome
Explorer with a collection of computational tools that utilize known phenotype-
gene associations to predict new associations, find conserved associations and
conserved modules of associations across species. The PI has a long-term
commitment to teach a summer class in the BioSMART program for Minnesota high
school students. He will also create a new course Computational Phenomics and
Genomics to support two graduate programs for training students in
biomedical/health informatics with knowledge in genomics and computer science.
The education plan in the proposal aims to promote high school students' early
interest in careers in computing science and biomedical/health informatics and
integrate the research development on phenome-genome analysis into training
graduate students to meet the need of workforce in the growing biomedical and
health informatics industry, with a focus on recruiting students in minority and
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal targets a
systematic computational study of phenome-genome association in a network
context. The comparative analysis across multiple species will expand the
current scope of understanding evolutionary relation between phenome and genome.
The proposed research work focuses on 1) How to discover patterns and predict
new associations by learning with the sparse connections in a large
heterogeneous network composed of phenotype network, gene network and their
association network; and 2) How to compare multiple heterogeneous networks to
find conserved patterns and modules, and to infer new associations. Both
scenarios require development of scalable new algorithms to deal with multiple
large heterogeneous networks.