* 1149530
* CAREER: Advancing Innovation in Bio-Design through Reality-Based Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Orit Shaer, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2017
* USD 472,217.00

In recent years, research in human-computer interaction (HCI) has generated a
broad range of interaction styles that move beyond the desktop into new physical
and social contexts. Key areas of innovation in this respect are tabletop,
tangible, and multi-touch user interfaces. These interaction styles leverage
users' existing knowledge and skills of interaction with the real, non-digital
world; thus, they are often referred to as reality-based interfaces. Such
interfaces offer a natural, intuitive, and often collaborative form of
interaction that reduces the mental effort required to learn and operate a
computational system. While these advances in HCI have been successfully applied
to a broad range of application domains, little research has been devoted to
investigating reality-based interaction in the context of scientific discovery.
The PI argues that it is particularly important to study reality-based
interaction in this context, where reducing users' mental workloads and
supporting collaborative work could potentially lead to exciting scientific
advances. For example, in a preliminary study of the workflow and computational
tools employed by synthetic biologists, the PI found that members of this
research community often experience difficulties in specifying, comparing,
documenting, and sharing information - interactions that have previously been
shown as critical for scientific discovery. She further observed that the
limitations of current computational tools pose barriers for collaboration,
information flow, and exploration. This lack of appropriate computational tools
coupled with the inherent complexity of biological systems has limited progress
to date, despite the enormous potential of synthetic biology to solve problems
such as low-cost drug development and alternative energy production. In this
project, the PI will investigate how reality based interfaces may be able to
advance innovation in biological design. To address this question, she will
develop and evaluate a suite of reality-based interfaces that support the design
and assembly of novel biological systems, and which she expects will promote
collaborative, effective, and safe workflow, facilitate exploration of
alternative solutions, and reduce the mental workload associated with accessing
and relating large amounts of information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Project outcomes will include: design, implementation, and evaluation of a suite
of reality-based interfaces for synthetic biologists; a set of design
requirements for developing future such systems; a methodology for evaluating
the efficacy of computer-supported cooperative work of scientists; novel
techniques for fluid interaction with heterogeneous computational devices of
different scale; and a set of design considerations and a participatory design
process for supporting scientific discovery. The PI will train three female
undergraduate researchers per year, who will be an integral part of her research
team and will participate in an international science competition. The project
will impact computing and science courses at the PI's institution (a women's
college) and at collaborating institutions. In addition, this research will
serve as a highly visible "magnet" project that attracts undergraduate and high-
school students' attention to computer science research through outreach
activities.