* 1149657
* CAREER: Integrated Estimation and Control of Over-Actuated Lightweight Electric Vehicles for Sustainable and Safe Mobility
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Junmin Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 406,000.00

The research objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
program project are: 1) to create new theoretical methods and tools that allow
systematic utilization of actuation-redundancy to achieve output-independent
parameter estimation and its seamless synthesis with adaptive control for
improving transient control performance of over-actuated systems under extreme
conditions; and 2) to develop new active vehicle control methodologies that can
explicitly address the lightweight vehicle (LWV) payload variation challenges
and substantially improve LWV safety by judiciously employing the actuation-
redundancy furnished by in-wheel motors on electric vehicles. Such research
objectives will be pursued via fundamental theoretical and experimental studies.
System evaluations and validations will be conducted by simulations and
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research results will
advance the active vehicle control by enabling accurate estimations of LWV
parameters without affecting vehicle motions and systematically incorporating
the estimated LWV parameters into the coordinated control of redundant actuators
to improve the LWV motion control performance under extreme conditions. These
methods will dramatically improve the safety of LWVs and thus enabling their
widespread utilization, which will significantly and positively impact the
energy and environmental (including greenhouse gases) concerns in the nation's
transportation sector. Furthermore, the output-independent parameter estimation
and integrated parameter estimation and control methods can advance the current
control of other over-actuated systems such as aerospace, robotic, and
biomedical systems. The research results from this project will be used to
enrich two undergraduate/graduate courses and disseminated to industry.
Undergraduate student research and high-school internship opportunities will be
generated through collaboration with Ohio State University Women in Engineering
Program and K-12 summer camp to engage students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups.