* 1149980
* CAREER: The ontogeny of mutualism: exploring variation in costs and benefits within an ant-plant symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Todd Palmer, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2019
* USD 649,967.00

Mutualisms, cooperative interactions among species, are among the most
widespread species interactions on earth. From tiny fungi that harvest nutrients
for their plant partners, to large mammals that disperse the seeds of forest
trees, to the pollinators that maintain global agricultural productivity,
mutualistic partnerships play a central role in the global economy and the
maintenance of biological diversity. A key unresolved question is, how do these
interactions remain cooperative when natural selection should favor selfish
individuals who reap benefits without paying the costs of cooperation? Studies
addressing this question typically calculate the costs and benefits of
interacting with a given partner species independent of an individual's life
stage and interactions with other partner species. But natural selection acts on
lifetime fitness, and many mutualists interact with multiple partners species
throughout their lives. Evaluating how the costs and benefits of multiple
partnerships integrate over the lifetime of mutualists is a critical link in
understanding how these globally important interactions evolve and function.
Focusing on a multi-species ant-plant (Acacia) mutualism found throughout East
Africa, this study seeks to evaluate how the costs and benefits of mutualism
change with variation in the life-stage of interacting partner species, and how
the net fitness effects of multiple interactions change with variation in the
timing, duration and sequence of plant partnerships with different ant species.
The results will shed light on how this model mutualism remains cooperative, and
what factors can precipitate its breakdown.

This research will also involve the development of four synergistic educational
objectives aimed at engaging U.S. and African undergraduate students, K-12
students, and the general public. The program will develop a month-long field
program that directly engages U.S. undergraduate students in original research
and experiential learning, and allow for the training of exceptional
undergraduates in the ecology of mutualism from both plant and animal
perspectives. In addition, by partnering with an African collaborator, the
program will bring 25 Kenyan K-12 students to the field site each year to learn
about the natural history of East Africa, using the ant-Acacia system to
actively engage kids in the process of scientific discovery.