* 1149786
* CAREER: Multi-Radio Multi-Channel Multi-Hop Cellular Networks: Throughput and Energy Consumption Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Pan Li, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2015
* USD 373,126.00

Due to the massive proliferation of mobile devices like smart phones and
tablets, mobile cloud computing (MCC) has emerged as a new paradigm and
extension of cloud computing, with which users can access a plethora of unique
features. Unfortunately, since mobile users offload most computation and storage
to the cloud and are usually battery-powered, high performance connections to
the cloud tend to become the bottleneck, hindering the efficiency of MCC. Thus,
throughput and energy efficiency for the connections to the cloud are two
critical and challenging design issues in MCC, which should be addressed
carefully. In this project, the PI proposes a novel Multi-radio Multi-channel
Multi-hop Cellular Network architecture to facilitate MCC, and investigates
throughput and energy optimization by focusing on the following three main
research thrusts: (1) throughput optimization for communications between cloud
users and base stations (U2B) in hybrid mode, (2) path capacity optimization for
communications among cloud users (U2U) with cooperation, and (3) energy
optimization for U2B/U2U communications. The results of this project will
advance the state of the art in network optimization for MCC and enrich the
scientific knowledge of network design. The proposed research is thus crucial to
the success of MCC, which can provide great opportunities for job creation,
greater productivity, and economic growth. The results of the project will be
disseminated through publications and talks. The proposed research will also be
integrated with curriculum development, minority student recruitment, training
and mentoring, and outreach to K-12 students.