* 1149763
* CAREER:   Structure And Function Of Sulfite Reductase Teach About Fundamental Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Elizabeth Stroupe, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 04/30/2018
* USD 990,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Sulfur reduction is central to life as a vestigial
reminder of Earth before the emergence of an oxygen-based energy currency.
Organic sulfur in the form of sulfide remains an essential nutrient in all
organisms, but higher eukaryotes are unable to reduce inorganic sulfur(IV) so
rely on bacteria, archaea, yeast, and plants to produce useable sulfur. The six-
electron reduction of sulfite to sulfide is central to the bio-geo sulfur cycle
and is catalyzed by a single enzyme, sulfite reductase (SiR). This "high-volume"
electron transfer is unique to sulfur and nitrogen cycles and represents one
powerful example of a biochemical reaction where nature is more versatile than
human chemical engineers. Together, the centrality of SiR to nutrient cycles and
its unique biochemistry make a compelling case that research into its mechanism
and structure lays important groundwork for understanding our natural
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to
experimentally dissect the chemistry and biology of electron transfer in sulfur
reduction by the oxidoreductase SiR and to broaden the impact of this research
through integrated educational outreach in the laboratory and classroom.
Experimental results will advance knowledge about mechanisms of sulfur reduction
by combining information at multiple resolutions from x-ray crystallography and
single particle cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) with biochemical
analysis. Specifically, two areas are under investigation. First, the role of
specific amino acids in SiR activity will be probed with mutagenesis, SiR
activity assays, and x-ray crystallographic structural analysis. Second, the SiR
subunit assembly will be explored, with multi-angled light scattering, cryo-EM
imaging, and single particle 3DEM analysis, to understand inter-protein
chemistry that drives sulfur reduction,. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Applying structural techniques to answer fundamental questions
about environmental bacteriology benefits society at large by providing insight
into the mechanisms that regulate the biogeological cycling of sulfur. In
addition, exploring sulfur reduction pathways provides a unique platform for
integrating research and teaching. The proposed outreach component uses
multifaceted classroom exercises based on hypothesis-driven research to engage a
range of students. Specifically, students from high school to postdoctoral
researchers will be targeted to join the laboratory where they will be exposed
to research in structural biology. Florida State University is home to one of
approximately 20 Titan Krios cryogenic transmission electron microscopes
worldwide and training on this unique instrument is integral to the proposed
research. Further, the applied structural techniques rely on diverse tools from
computation, mathematics, chemistry, biochemistry, and microbiology, providing a
range of potential research projects with a common focus on answering biological
questions. At the same time, active-learning modules developed specifically for
a first year Introduction to Biology class at Florida State University will
reinforce and enhance classroom lessons on biophysics, biochemistry, molecular
biology and cellular biology. SiR is an engaging, effective foundation for
classroom exercises because it is a novel model to explain basic life science
concepts not explored in most lecture courses or textbooks. These classroom
modules developed with, and for, students aspiring to teach K-12 science and
technology further broadens the long-term impact of this proposal on improving
general science education in the United States.