* 1149639
* CAREER: Documenting the Languages of Manang, Nepal for Local and International Impact
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Kristine Hildebrandt, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2019
* USD 408,520.00

In an increasingly globalized world, indigenous minority languages, such as the
tribal languages of Nepal's Manang District, are threatened by migration, the
loss of younger speaker populations, and the influence of dominant majority
cultures. This CAREER project undertakes a unique response to language
endangerment by exploring innovative methods of language documentation that also
involve and benefit diverse populations. The project encompasses collaborative,
multi-institutional field investigations of the four tribal languages
Nyeshangte, Gyalsumdo, Manang-Gurung and Nar-Phu in order to merge traditional
documentation methods with cutting-edge visualization tools. Investigators will
adapt approaches from other studies of language and dialect variation by
building a web-accessible, multi-media atlas to chart the rich language
histories, variation, and attitudes found in Manang. This output will represent
a new approach to documentation, one with a geographic perspective to chart
structural details, threats, survival scenarios and future prospects within and
across these languages. The project will also provide essential learning tools
about, and for, language endangerment and survival scenarios in Nepal. One focus
group will be undergraduate university students, who represent influential
global citizens who would otherwise encounter issues of endangerment and
preservation only in a detached context of textbooks and lecture. Project
methods will embrace a collaborative spirit, including work with Tribhuvan
University in Kathmandu, and with trained assistants in the Manang District. The
project will also involve work with colleagues and students in the Geographic
Information Systems program at the home institution. University students are
involved in all phases of data collection and analysis, and in the design of
pedagogical materials. Additionally, the project will collaborate with
archivists at the University of Virginia on long-term data preservation and
visualization protocols. The goals, methods, and resources garnered from this
project will provide an exciting and groundbreaking standard for future
documentation, archival, educational, and language awareness
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;This international project is funded by Cultural
Anthropology, Documenting Endangered Languages, and the Office of International
Science and Engineering.