* 1149436
* CAREER: Learning to Support Productive Collective Argumentation in Secondary Mathematics Classes
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* AnnaMarie Conner, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 06/30/2019
* USD 535,007.00

Doing mathematics involves more than simply solving problems; justifying
mathematical claims is an important part of doing mathematics. In fact, proving
and justifying are central goals of learning mathematics. Recently, the Common
Core State Standards for Mathematics has again raised the issue of making and
critiquing arguments as a central practice for students studying mathematics. If
students are to learn to make and critique arguments within their mathematics
classes, teachers must be prepared to support their students in learning to
argue appropriately in mathematics. This learning often occurs during class
discussions in which arguments are made public for all students in the class.
The act of creating arguments together in a classroom is called collective
argumentation. Teachers need to be able to support students in productively
engaging in collective argumentation, but research has not yet shown how they
learn to do so. This project will document how mathematics teachers learn to
support their students in engaging in productive collective argumentation. The
research team will follow a cohort of participants (college students majoring in
mathematics education) through their mathematics education coursework, observing
their engagement in collective argumentation and opportunities to learn about
supporting collective argumentation. The team will continue to follow the
participants into their first two years of teaching, focusing on how their
support for collective argumentation evolves over time. During their first two
years of teaching, the research team and participants will work together to
analyze the participants' support for collective argumentation in order to help
the participants develop more effective ways to support collective
argumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has shown that engaging students,
including students from underrepresented groups, in appropriately structured
reasoning activities, including argumentation, may lead to enhanced learning.
This project will provide information about how teachers learn to support
collective argumentation and will allow for the development of professional
development materials for prospective and practicing teachers that will enhance
their support for productive collective argumentation.