* 1149799
* CAREER: Advancing End-User Programming with Expertise Sharing Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Bjoern Hartmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate how to improve end-user
programmer productivity and learning through user interfaces and algorithms for
capturing, sharing, and accessing programming expertise. Focus is on the needs
of end-user programmers who create graphical user interfaces and build physical
computing systems. Fieldwork and data analyese will be conducted to understand
current practices around seeking and providing advice online. Informed by this
framework, tools will be developind for creating and sharing high-quality
examples and tutorials, finding and recommending relevant examples, and
integrating found code into new projects. Success of the methods will be
evaluated through laboratory experiments and deployment of instrumented
software. This work draws on methodology from computer-supported cooperative
work, end-user programming, the design of authoring tools, project-based
learning, and design of computer-realized scaffolding. Four types of results
will be produced: 1) knowledge about the types of problems end-user programmers
seek help on; 2) analysis how current systems help and hinder the sharing of
expertise; 3) novel techniques to improve expertise sharing within programming
environments; and 4) evaluations that quantify the benefits of such techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programmers increasingly rely on Web resources
such as question answering sites, forums, and example repositories to help them
prototype, implement, and debug software. This trend is especially prevalent in
end-user programmers, who write code but are not professionally trained in
Computer Science. They vastly outnumber professional programmers in the United
States. Current development tools are largely ignorant of the social exchange of
programming advice online: program editors and Web applications are isolated
from each other. This lack of specific applications for describing and sharing
programming expertise limits the effectiveness of both production and use of
knowledge. This work will lower the threshold for programming digital media. The
research will increase the quality, scope, and utility of online reference
materials. Access to these materials can accelerate learning, improve
productivity, increase self-efficacy of programmers, and democratize the
production and sharing of programming knowledge.