* 1149225
* CAREER: New Models, Representations, and Dimensionality Reduction Techniques for Structured Data Sets
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Michael Wakin, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant byproduct of the modern Information
Age has been an explosion in the sheer quantity of data demanded from sensing
systems. This project focuses on developing effective new frameworks for data
acquisition, processing, and understanding that will help meet the technological
challenges posed by this ever growing demand for information. Possible areas of
impact include, but are not limited to: social choice theory, recommendation
engines, sensor networks, computer vision, LIDAR, machine learning, medical
imaging, drug discovery, and neuroscience. Integrated with the research in this
project are the educational goals to inspire and educate students by creating
and disseminating new curricular and K-12 outreach materials that focus both on
the challenges of high-dimensional data processing and on the principles behind
the dimensionality reduction techniques for alleviating
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project draws from the concepts
of sparsity and geometry in pursuing theoretically sound, integrated models and
representations for broad classes of natural data. Of particular interest are
(i) pairwise comparison matrices, which arise in a number of applications
including recommendation engines, economic exchanges, elections, and psychology
but are inadequately captured by low-rank models, and (ii) point clouds, which
arise in signal and image databases and sensor networks but for which current
models fail to properly capture intra- and inter-signal structures. In order to
help mitigate the challenges in collecting and storing high-dimensional data
sets (including those above), this project is developing principled techniques
for recovering matrix-structured data sets from partial information that exploit
far richer models than conventional low-rank recovery techniques.