* 1149015
* CAREER: DNA Analysis Based on Dielectrophoresis
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Alexandra Ros, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 513,936.00

1149015 - Ros&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing complexity of current
analytical challenges demands novel and efficient separation and purification
techniques. For example, analyzing a large variety of biomolecules requires
powerful separation and purification techniques, and these are often the
limiting component in biochemical research such as in biomarker discovery,
clinical diagnosis or single cell analysis. The separation and purification of
novel macromolecular structures such as artificial DNA nano-assemblies is
further essential for their successful nano-technological applications, such as
for DNA computing, in photonic devices or in targeted diagnostics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supported by the Chemical and Biological
Separations Program of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems Division and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division supports aims in the study of dielectrophoresis (DEP) of DNA
and its application for concentrating, fractionating and separating DNA. The
phenomenon dielectrophoresis refers to the migration of polarizable molecules in
inhomogeneous electric fields. Variations in the polarization of different DNA
species will lead to differences in migration, which can be exploited for
analytical purposes. To date however, the polarization mechanism of DNA remains
only little understood, which hampers the use of dielectrophoresis for
analytical applications. This proposal thus aims at a quantitative study of the
polarizability for a wide variety of DNA not only allowing the application of
dielectrophoresis for separation and pre-concentration but also to reveal the
origin of DNA polarizability. A tailored miniaturized platform employing
insulator-based DEP will be used to establish the necessary electric field
conditions for DEP to occur. The employed microfluidic platforms further provide
miniaturized and fast analysis of DNA by DEP, and will allow the analysis of
minute samples in the range of pico- to nano-liters suitable for the analysis of
DNA in small cell ensembles or even single cells. Concomitantly occurring
transport mechanisms for DNA will be investigated to reveal their interplay with
DNA DEP with the ultimate goal to optimize DNA analysis. Based on this
knowledge, analytical applications ranging from DNA nanotechnology over quality
control of DNA vaccines to DNA-based diagnostics are
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also proposes a mentoring plan for
female undergraduate and graduate chemistry students in the Chemistry and
Biochemistry Department at ASU. The proposed activities aim in encouragement and
promotion of women, which are still underrepresented in chemistry at higher
career stages. The plan includes individual mentoring activities as well as
general activities for female undergraduate students including research
opportunities related to the intellectual merit of this proposal. At the
graduate level, the plan specifically intensifies these mentoring activities to
ameliorate communication, scientific presentation and negotiation skills as well
as networking opportunities, PhD progress and career development.