* 1149804
* CAREER:  Monolayer Devices: A Simulation Study
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Sayeef Salahuddin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Monolayer materials are two-dimensional sheets of a single atomic layer. Recent
experimental demonstration of electronic devices based on various monolayer
materials, both from academia and industry, show that the promise of these
devices to augment or in some cases replace CMOS based logic systems may soon
become a reality. This necessitates that appropriate design tools are available
so that individual device behavior observed in experimental labs can be assessed
from both a fundamental and also a system point of view. The major intellectual
contribution of the efforts proposed in this proposal will be to develop a
design software for monolayer devices that is based on fundamental physics yet
will exploit the increasing computational capability made available through
multi-core architecture and super computing clusters for real time and
realistically sized device simulation. The general software will be an
integrated tool that describes electron and spin transport in monolayer devices
in presence of dissipation mechanisms within a full quantum description and also
extend those numerical results to compact models appropriate for circuit and
system level simulation. This work will thus, on one hand, advance the
fundamental understanding of electronic and spin transport in monolayer 2D
materials and on the other, make it possible to take those insights to circuit
and system level, thereby fostering disruptive innovation in design and
optimization with these emerging materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
the Si based CMOS technology runs its course, new materials with novel
functionalities will be necessary to continue the growth of electronics that
contributes significantly to the US economy and also to ensure US leadership in
computing technologies. New materials may also lower the energy necessary to run
computers. Energy dissipation in computers accounts for a few percent of the
national energy needs in the US and this percentage is projected to go up as the
use of Cloud technology becomes increasingly commonplace in our daily life. This
proposal will train graduate students to think about these issues and also
encourage them to look for potential solutions. This work will draw on
electrical engineering, material science, computational science and physics,
thus providing a true interdisciplinary research experience for the students. A
number of UC-Berkeley-run programs will be leveraged to include undergraduate
researchers specifically focusing on minority and women. Simulation modules will
be made available on line to encourage and foster research in new materials for
electronic devices. In addition, industrial collaborations will be leveraged for
critical feedback and also to provide a channel for commercialization of any
relevant technology developed in this research.