* 1149062
* CAREER:  Enhanced Pyroelectric and Electrocaloric Effects in Complex Oxide Thin Film Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Lane Martin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Advances in the development of functional complex
oxide materials have enabled many of the devices that are utilized on a daily
basis from memories to actuators and beyond. This project is developing a deeper
understanding of electro-thermal responses of materials and finding routes to
enhance those effects to enable advanced thermal imaging (e.g., night-vision
systems), waste-heat energy conversion for energy efficiency, novel electron
emission for high-tech applications, and low-power solid-state cooling for
nanoelectronics. This project is developing a design algorithm by which
researchers can enhance the electric-field and temperature-dependent response of
materials for such applications. Possible applications range from communications
to data storage to logic to sensing devices. Fundamental research in these
fields fosters the United States innovation in the growing green economy and
high-technology spaces. The project includes research on the creation of new and
complex materials, computational and theoretical approaches to materials design
and optimization, and advanced characterization of materials properties. The
project also promotes discovery and understanding at the
K-12/undergraduate/graduate education levels by introducing students to advanced
functional materials and broadening the participation (through personal
interaction and recruitment) of underrepresented student groups in science and
engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project
provides the one of the first studies of so-called magneto-electro-caloric and
pyro-electric-magnetic effects, which make use of coupled order parameters in
multiferroic/magneto-electrics. Additionally, the project is investigating
frustrated ferroelectric order which should provide for large entropic changes
with applied fields. The research project combines advances in phenomenological
models, cutting-edge thin-film growth techniques (including pulsed-laser
deposition and molecular beam epitaxy), and modern characterization techniques
to develop a deeper understanding of the physics and thermodynamics of thermo-
electrical responses (i.e., pyroelectric and electrocaloric effects) in complex
oxide materials. This project is providing new insight into the underlying
mechanisms of such thermo-electrical responses and seeking pathways to
manipulate and control the temperature- and field-dependence of entropic changes
in ferroic oxides. The overall goal of the project is to further the fundamental
understanding of these effects, to develop predictive capabilities for responses
in thin-film systems, and to probe the properties and ultimate performance of
these materials to enable their use in devices. As part of this project, the
researchers are creating and characterizing high-quality, heteroepitaxial, thin-
film heterostructures and nanostructures of complex oxide materials and in turn,
are investigating innovative approaches to enhance thermo-electrical responses
in materials by exploring the temperature- and field-dependence of entropy in
modern materials. The project is also providing fundamental insight into the
physics of these effects by developing novel Ginzburg-Landau-Devonshire models
of these thermodynamic properties that include effects from domain walls,
polydomain structures, layered heterostructures, strain and composition
gradients, and other features common in films. Finally, the project seeks to
identify and overcome inadequacies in characterization of such properties,
including the utilization of new techniques to provide the first direct
measurement of such effects in thin films.