* 1149107
* Communicating Science and Innovation Policy through Narrative: Workshops on Fostering Narrative Nonfiction Partnerships between Science Communicators and Science Policy Scholars
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Lee Gutkind, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 02/28/2015
* USD 249,951.00

The goals of this workshops project are: (1) to provide collaborative
professional development opportunities for 24 early professional social science
researchers, and science writers and communicators, and (2) to foster a stronger
and durable "community of practice" between the fields of science policy
research and science communications for the purposes of helping the general
public better understand and become engaged with major issues of science and
innovation policy. In addition to the PI and co-PI, involved in the work will
be: twelve science policy scholars and twelve science communications
professionals (writers, bloggers, museum educators, and others); mentors;
editors of major science publications; several guest observers from university
writing programs around the country; and graduate students who will help
document and video record the activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
activities include a suite of opportunities: two, four-day workshops; mentorship
support; publication in hard copy and online of their articles in a special
edition of Creative Nonfiction magazine; and public engagement experiences at
Science Cafes around the country. These workshops and accompanying activities
will continue to develop a strong foundation for the establishment of nascent
collaborations of science policy scholars, science communicators, and informal
science education professionals, whose partnerships should position them better
to inform and engage the public on important science policy issues of our times.