* 1149970
* CAREER: Designing Socially Adept Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Bilge Mutlu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2018
* USD 498,245.00

Robots hold the promise of delivering significant social contributions in such
key domains as education, rehabilitation, and collaboration, but to achieve this
promise they must be able to communicate effectively with people. The goal of
this project is to design effective social behaviors for robots by modeling
human verbal, vocal, and nonverbal behavior using computational tools,
regenerating them in robots, and evaluating their effectiveness in human-robot
studies in social scenarios such as storytelling, interview, conversation,
instruction, and collaborative work. The research will follow an
interdisciplinary approach, combining computational and social-scientific
methods toward advancing the state of the art in robotic
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research will create a
set of design specifications that robot designers can use to create robots that
effectively communicate with people. These specifications will be openly
disseminated to robot designers and researchers as modules for the open-source
Robot Operating System (ROS). The project will also lead to new computational
tools that will enable modeling human behavior and synthesizing effective
behaviors for robots. In addition, this research will contribute to social
science by providing a more detailed, computational understanding of human
social behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will enable
robots to communicate more effectively with people in such critical domains as
education, collaborative work, and health and wellbeing. The projects will also
introduce computational tools into areas that have not yet substantially
benefited from advancements in computer technology, such as the diagnosis and
treatment of autism and traumatic brain injury. Through an integrated education
and outreach program, this project will also contribute to interdisciplinary
education, undergraduate and graduate curricula, K-12 and special education,
public understanding of science and technology, and further inclusion of
minorities and children with disabilities in scientific research and education.