* 1149257
* CAREER: Bridging Game Theory, Economics and Computer Science: Equilibria, Fixed Points, and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Xi Chen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 499,932.00

The Internet is undoubtedly one of the most significant innovations of our era.
Beyond serving as a medium of communication, it also enables huge opportunities
for new markets and business. The study of the Internet and e-commerce has been
one of the most exciting and challenging research areas in computer science
during the past few decades. Recently, concepts and methodologies from game
theory and economics have found numerous successful applications in this area.

The main goal of this proposal is to bridge the algorithmic gap between game
theory, economics and computer science. While computational efficiency has
always been a critical issue in the design of any computer system, the study
within game theory and economics has been almost entirely non-algorithmic. The
PI will work to develop efficient algorithms for some of the fundamental models
and solution concepts and to understand the computational difficulties inherent
within them, with the aim to inspire and enable the next-generation e-commerce
systems.

For this purpose, the PI will perform a systematic study of both algorithmic and
complexity-theoretic questions related to Nash equilibria and market equilibria.
This includes the search of a polynomial-time approximation scheme for two-
player Nash equilibria and the development of new techniques to understand the
computation of market equilibria with various utility functions and with social
influence. The PI will also work to improve our current understanding of PPAD
and FIXP, two complexity classes for (discrete and continuous) fixed point
computation, on which many of the hardness results of equilibrium computation
rely. As two of the most fundamental solution concepts, the proposed research on
Nash and market equilibria will contribute to a more solid algorithmic and
complexity-theoretic foundation for the interdisciplinary field of Algorithmic
Game Theory. Finally, the PI will tightly integrate education with the research
activities by, e.g., developing new (introductory and advanced) courses on
Algorithmic Game Theory and on its use in analyzing social networks; mentoring
Ph.D. students; and promoting undergraduate research.