* 1149965
* CAREER: Toward Automating Surgical Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Ron Alterovitz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 02/28/2019
* USD 499,542.00

This project, developing a new motion planning framework for medical robots that
combines automatic planning algorithms, robot control, and human oversight to
enable new and safer robotic procedures that are beyond current clinical
capabilities, will increase the autonomy of surgical robotic systems. This
framework will result in improved speed, accuracy, and precision of existing
procedures and enable entirely new classes of procedures that require dexterity
and control beyond the capability of a human operator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funding of this proposed work will introduce and evaluate a new motion planning
framework that simultaneously addresses the challenges of deformations,
uncertainty, and optimality that arise in medical applications. The research
will combine ideas from multiple areas of computer science and engineering,
including robotics, computer graphics, finite element methods, optimization
theory, Markov decision processes, stochastic modeling, and learning from
demonstrations. Expected scientific contributions include new motion planning
algorithms that efficiently integrate physically-based simulation, motion
planning under uncertainty, and sensor placement, as well as new approaches to
integrate user input into feedback-based motion planning. In the long term,
these contributions may lead to new avenues of research at the intersection of
motion planning, anatomy and biomechanical modeling, learning from
demonstrations, and medical robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A
motion planning framework for medical robots will improve patient care and the
resulting increased autonomy will reduce surgical errors -- which currently
contribute to 1 in 10 post-surgical deaths -- by enabling physicians to focus on
high-level tasks rather than low-level motion control. The application of this
framework to prostate interventions, lung biopsies, and neurosurgery could
affect hundreds of thousands of people annually and have broad societal impact.
The ability of computer science to improve healthcare may attract new students
to computer science who might previously not have been interested in the field,
particularly women and underrepresented groups. The PI will develop new outreach
activities centered around an interactive game-like simulation of medical
procedures that highlights the impact that computer science can have on
medicine, create a new undergraduate course for pre-meds to teach future
physicians crucial computer science concepts, and revamp the robotics curriculum
to create excitement through labs and provide students with the skills necessary
to pursue a career in America's growing healthcare and service robotics
industries.