* 1149899
* CAREER: Low-Dimensional Spin Systems: Interplay of Chemical Pressure on Triangular Lattices with Spin- and Orbital Degrees of Freedom
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Angela Moeller, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2016
* USD 473,071.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER proposal, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program, is to understand the
effects of chemical pressure on geometrically frustrated lattices in the
presence of spin and orbital degrees of freedom. A recently identified and
subsequently synthesized new series of compounds exhibiting a triangular lattice
of magnetic ions confined in a robust two-dimensional building block has emerged
as a suitable template to investigate: (1) the impact of induced slight
structural distortions and (2) the dependence of the magnetic correlations on
the respective spin system. A unique opportunity to derive insights into tuning
ferromagnetic and anti-ferromagnetic correlations mediated through super-
exchange pathways has emerged for this series of compounds. The investigations
are mainly experimental and encompass solid state chemistry synthesis,
spectroscopy, magnetization, and specific heat measurements. The scientific
impact of this work will contribute to a fundamental understanding of phenomena
occurring on geometrically frustrated systems, including aspects of spin-orbit
coupling for divalent and trivalent 3d transition metal cations. Furthermore,
the discovery of new members of the highly unique class of ferromagnetic
insulators represents an additional exciting advance and an important
contribution to the field of multifunctional materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Advances in the field of
next-generation materials with relevance to energy and sensors rely on the
development of a fundamental understanding of the properties of materials.
Further, the design of new classes of materials and the ability to control
important functional parameters of these materials require a detailed
understanding of the mechanisms at work. To this end, the conceptual framework
underlying the proposed research activities, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program (SSMC), seeks to establish the fundamental
structure-property relationships that define the behavior and utility of new
classes of functional materials. For example, recent discoveries in our
laboratory demonstrate our ability to tune the magnetic properties of a novel
series of insulators; these materials should ultimately find use as
magnetoresistive sensors for global positioning/navigation in remote areas. In
conjunction with these activities, the proposed educational activities seek to
provide training in the interdisciplinary areas of solid state chemistry and
condensed matter physics for both undergraduate and graduate students at the
University of Houston, which is ranked second among the country's most diverse
universities. The PI has established mentoring and volunteer programs from
elementary to K-12 levels at schools within the Houston Independent School
District. These programs communicate fundamental materials science geared toward
understanding scientific aspects of everyday life in experiments and lectures to
raise awareness and fascination for next-generation challenges. Furthermore, the
PI's activities aim to promote materials science, encompass interaction with
young scientists at large, and include international collaborations with highly
regarded institutions.