* 1149456
* CAREER: BuckliOrigami: Soft, Active and Foldable Structures Through Instabilities and Large Deformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Katia Bertoldi, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 01/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to exploit the non-linear behavior of soft structures with purposeful
design patterns to create a new class of responsive origami-like materials that
use their large deformation and dramatic geometric changes induced by
instabilities to change their shape and volume. Possible and exciting
applications include reversible encapsulation systems, active materials for on-
demand drug delivery, rapidly expandable shelters and robots that can squeeze
themselves through small openings and into tight places. Although instabilities
have traditionally been viewed as an inconvenience, this proposal will show that
they can be exploited to create materials with novel and switchable
functionalities. For the proposed research an approach based on a powerful
combination of computational analyses and experiments will be used to gain
deeper insight into the non-linear behavior of soft patterned
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central goal of this effort is to promote
interdisciplinary research and teaching and to increase the interactions between
mechanicians, engineers, physicists and material scientists. This will be
accomplished by: i) organizing an exhibition at the Harvard Museum of Natural
History to promote science and engineering to a broad audience; ii) organizing
the 'New England Workshop on the Mechanics of Materials and Structures' to bring
together the New England mechanics community and stimulate exchange of ideas and
collaborations; iii) involving students of all levels into active research
projects and exposing them to concepts from engineering, material science and
applied physics; iv) developing new courses with a focus on using powerful
numerical techniques, such as the Finite Element Method, in a creative way to
reach a broader audience.