* 1149051
* CAREER: Automatic Learning of Adaptive Network-Centric Malware Detection Models
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Roberto Perdisci, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 402,601.00

Malicious software (a.k.a. malware) is at the basis of most cyber-criminal
operations, causing significant financial loss and posing great risks to
national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research creates novel network-
centric behavior-based malware detection systems that automatically learn how to
identify malware-compromised machines within a network, and that can self-tune
to achieve the best possible trade-off between malware detection rate and false
alarms for a given network. This self-tuning property is achieved by combining
models of malware-generated network traffic with models of legitimate user-
generated network activities to build hybrid detection models that can adapt to
a specific network environment and accurately detect malware-generated network
traffic crossing the network perimeter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new approach
to malware detection takes into account events that occur within an entire
network, rather than focusing on events that occur at each single host, and
focuses on adaptive detection of all types of malware, rather than being limited
to a specific malware type (e.g., botnets). Therefore, the detection systems
resulting from this research will provide new effective detection capabilities
that can complement current anti-malware technologies and significantly
contribute to a better defense-in-depth strategy against malware.