* 1149748
* CAREER: The evolutionary mechanics of rapid movement
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,05/31/2014
* S. Patek, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 05/31/2014
* USD 536,284.00

Rapid-fire trap-jaw ants, exploding dogwood flowers, ballistic amphibian tongues
and the cellular spears of jellyfish produce extremely rapid movements through
the simple physical principle of power amplification: the amplification of work
relative to time, such that the duration of movement is decreased as speed and
acceleration are increased. For the past forty years, power amplification has
been the guiding physical principle in understanding fast movement in biology.
However, most studies to date have focused on solving the intriguing
biomechanics of single species and notably little is known about the
evolutionary processes and patterns underlying the diversification of power-
amplified systems. This proposal has two primary goals: (1) to examine and test
the broad, unifying principles that underlie rapid movements in biology and (2)
to establish and implement a quantitative framework for understanding the
evolutionary dynamics of biomechanical diversification. &lt;br/&gt;To address
these goals, the evolution and biomechanics of power amplification will be
studied in mantis shrimp (Stomatopoda) which generate among the fastest and most
forceful predatory movements in the animal kingdom. These impressive movements
are controlled by slowly contracting muscles that activate a network of power
amplification structures including springs, latches, linkages and lever arms.
This power amplification system is conserved across the 450+ species of
stomatopods, yet their raptorial appendages exhibit remarkable diversity ranging
from spiny and barbed spears to hatchets and hammers.&lt;br/&gt;Power
amplification will be examined from two perspectives. The first aim is to probe
how the components of power-amplified systems vary to achieve different outputs.
Spring material and mechanical testing will be performed, a mathematical model
will be used to measure the effects of variation in loading regimes, energy
transmission and drag, and a physical model will be used to examine the
energetic costs and benefits of fluid dynamic forces and cavitation. The second
aim is to ask how a balance of biomechanical integration and macroevolutionary
variability is achieved, specifically by testing how key parameters of power
amplification mechanisms are varied over time while still maintaining a
cohesive, functional mechanical system. The culmination of this research will be
a quantitative, evolutionary analysis of the dynamic interplay between the
fundamental physical principles of power amplification and the evolutionary
diversification of rapid biological movements. &lt;br/&gt;The Educational Plan
includes discovery and training at multiple levels, ranging from high school to
postdoctoral. Hands-on training in interdisciplinary, computational and field
research will involve undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars. A new undergraduate-level course will incorporate physics,
engineering, computational and evolution-based approaches to organismal
movement. An existing program founded by the Principal Investigator (PI), which
has generated over 200 undergraduate research experiences in biology
laboratories over the past two years at UMass Amherst, will be expanded to
include a second program to match UMass undergraduates with interdisciplinary
research opportunities outside of their degree-granting departments. A Research
Experience for Teachers program will be established in the UMass Biology
department through this grant; each summer, a high school teacher will conduct
research in the PI?s laboratory leading to a presentation at a regional
conference, a photo-documentary of the experience, and the development of
inquiry-based classroom materials that conform to state standards.