* 1149235
* CAREER: Reliable Contact Under Uncertainty: Integrating 3D Perception and Compliance
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Marsette Vona, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* David Miller
* 02/28/2017
* USD 395,021.00

This project, developing a coarse/fine approach to walking on unstructured
terrain based on integrating 3D perception and compliant contact, addresses
central challenges in robotic locomotion. Despite recent advances, unstructured
tasks such as walking on rocks with sparse footfalls - a task that is easy for
humans - remains very challenging for robots. This effort seeks to solve this
type of problem with a coarse approach using 3-D perception that uses range
sensing to find general curved surface patches in the environment that might be
suitable for foot placement. Along with patches on the robot itself, these
patches are placed into a novel dynamic spatial patch map with estimated
uncertainty that mates robot patches with environmental patches. The fine
alignment is handled by a compliant ankle that allows the patches to mesh
naturally. This approach is applicable to dexterous manipulation, as well.

Broader Impacts: We are now at a transformative frontier where we must introduce
robots to unstructured tasks -- in factories, hospitals, and labs; in outer
space; and in the home -- where now only humans can manage the uncertainty.
Through building robot analogues to the human process of uncertainty tolerance
combining vision and compliance, this work will help enable a new science of
high-uncertainty robotics. The proposed education plan is built around modules
and open hardware that will be portable to mobile manipulation courses at other
institutions, which will be actively promoted. It also aims for broader
audiences with specific plans to engage younger students and adult self-
learners.