* 1149521
* CAREER:  Modeling Assemblies and Interactions at the Replication Fork: Sliding Clamps and Clamp Loaders
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Ivaylo Ivanov, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2018
* USD 823,454.00

Intellectual Merit: Replication of chromosomal DNA is accomplished by a dynamic
protein assembly termed the replisome. Processivity clamps such as Proliferating
Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA) are important constituents of the replisome that
ensure processive replication. Sliding clamps also act as versatile scaffolds in
the recruitment of cell-cycle control and DNA repair proteins and are engaged in
almost every aspect of DNA metabolism. Their remarkable ring-shaped architecture
allows them to topologically encircle and slide along DNA. To fulfill their
varied functions, the clamps have to strike a delicate balance between stability
and the ability to open in order to be loaded onto DNA. Processivity clamps are
opened and resealed at DNA primer-template junctions by the action of a clamp
loader in a cycle involving ATP binding and hydrolysis. The project aims to
delineate the detailed mechanisms for processivity clamp opening, determine the
role of the clamp loader and describe the utilization of ATP during each step of
the clamp loading cycle. Atomistic models for the intermediates in the cycle
will be constructed to describe the conformational transitions leading to clamp
opening and reclosing. This project will achieve a unified molecular-level
description of the clamp loading processes and provide insight into clamp-
associated activities and their essential roles in duplication of the genome and
the regulation of genome fidelity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project will substantially impact our knowledge of the biological mechanisms
controlling genetic integrity with broad implications for biotechnology,
environmental and bioenergy research. The project blends new methodologies and
novel applications to create a multidisciplinary research and education program
that is interesting and challenging for students of all levels. In particular,
students will be introduced to a broad arsenal of theoretical methods, molecular
modeling algorithms and High Performance Computing (HPC) architectures.
Curricular innovation would involve development of a new module (advanced
sampling, QM/MM and AIMD methods) for a graduate-level Computational Chemistry
class at Georgia State University (GSU) and the introduction of Advanced
Modeling seminars for the computational chemistry center at GSU. Additionally,
molecular visualization will be used as an effective tool in attracting high
school students to STEM fields with an emphasis on bringing students from
disadvantaged backgrounds to the GSU campus. The research and educational
objectives are tightly coupled and the educational plan reaches out to a broader
community, with goals to integrate chemistry, biology and computation across the
curriculum, actively promote diversity and encourage interest in science among
students at all levels: from high school students to advanced graduate students.