* 1149929
* CAREER:  Role of Plant Nutrient Uptake in Forest Nutrient Retention and Carbon Sequestration: an Integrated Research, Teaching and Outreach Program
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Pamela Templer, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2019
* USD 755,640.00

This project is focused on climate change effects on northern forests. Many
studies have evaluated the impacts of variation in climate on forests within a
single season, but few have examined the impacts across seasons and how these
impacts may interact. Seasonal impacts may differ, and they may interact in ways
that are either antagonistic or synergistic. For example, soil warming in summer
may increase root growth, but warming in winter may increase the frequency of
freeze/thaw cycles and damage plant root systems. The goal of this project is to
determine the interactive effects of winter and growing season climate change on
nutrient and carbon uptake in northern hardwood forests. This will be
accomplished by establishing an ecosystem warming experiment at Hubbard Brook
Experimental Forest, NH, and a greenhouse experiment at the Arnold Arboretum in
Boston, MA. Data generated from these experiments will be used to modify an
existing ecosystem-scale model (PnET-BGC) to improve its ability to predict
ecosystem nutrient retention and carbon storage. This combination of
experimentation and modeling will improve our understanding of the interactive
effects of increased soil temperatures in the growing season and more frequent
freeze/thaw cycles in winter, and may transform our thinking of how climate
change will affect northeastern forests and other temperate ecosystems. This
CAREER project will integrate research, teaching, and outreach. In particular,
twenty-five high school teachers will be trained in forest ecology through
formal lectures and field exercises. Ten high school students, ten
undergraduates, and two graduate students will perform the hands-on laboratory
and field experiments. Up to 240 undergraduate students at Boston University
will participate in weekend field trips to learn about forest ecology and gain
field research experience. Together, these activities will enhance scientific
literacy and foster an understanding of the relationship between variation in
climate and ecological processes for both students and high school teachers.
Additionally, a new 'Sap-Net' network of maple syrup producers will be
established to gain a better understanding of how variation in climate
influences maple syrup production and quality.