* 1149773
* CAREER: Holistic System Solutions for Empowering Parallel Programmers
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Satish Narayanasamy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2018
* USD 538,671.00

The central vision of this project is to bring parallel programming, which
continues to be a daunting task to this day even for experts, to mainstream
programmers. The fundamental challenge is that the concurrency semantics defined
by memory models of popular parallel languages are too weak. This project is
investigating solutions that span from processors to languages to enable
stronger memory consistency models starting with sequential consistency, but
goes far further in achieving much stronger concurrency semantics such as
determinism at the language-level. The end goal is to find solutions that
provide the best of both worlds: sequential semantics and parallel performance.
A set of correctness and performance enhancing tools that exploit the stronger
concurrency semantics are also being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in
computing have relied on the exponential growth in processor performance.
Unfortunately, unlike in the past, successive generations of processors can no
longer improve sequential performance because of technology constraints. The
burden has shifted to software developers who must now evolve to take advantage
of parallelism in multi-core processors. Unfortunately, parallel programming
continues to be a daunting task to this day even for experts. This project is
developing solutions that can bring parallel programming to mainstream
programmers by dramatically simplifying the process of developing, debugging,
and maintaining parallel software. Programmer productivity tools developed as
part of this research will be directly beneficial to students, software
developers and researchers. By involving colleagues in industry, this project
could serve as a catalyst to bring the software and processor industry together
to solve a problem that is common to both: enabling mainstream programmers to
take advantage of multi-core architectures.