* 1149557
* CAREER:An Introspective Architecture for Manycore Performance and Power Debugging
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2018
* Guru Prasadh Venkataramani, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 02/28/2018
* USD 400,157.00

Rapid advances in transistor technology combined with innovations in computer
architecture have led to manycore processors, which can deliver significantly
higher software performance. Getting scalable performance (for example, eight
times speedup in program execution time on an eight-core processor) is a
challenging task even for experienced software developers. This is because
parallel programs can suffer from performance problems that either do not exist
in sequential applications or that are aggravated by parallel execution. Also,
power consumption of manycore applications is a crucial factor limiting their
widespread adoption. Unfortunately, analyzing manycore applications for
performance and power using just software tools presents challenges due to
programs written in multiple languages and source files, libraries in binary-
only form, and so on. An efficient hardware-software framework, that can offer
insight into performance and power profiles of software execution and
subsequently facilitate remediation mechanisms to overcome the observed program
bottlenecks, would be a valuable step toward realizing the promise of manycore
computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project explores a transformative
hardware-software cooperative solution, where the software receives an
introspective look into the hardware behavior and dynamically deploys
remediation mechanisms to boost performance and lower the power consumption in
manycore applications. This hardware-software approach is drastically different
from the conventional hardware-level optimization techniques that can no longer
automatically guarantee performance scalability, given the increasing diversity
and complexity of manycore applications. The outcomes of this project can be
used both in software development and education to more precisely understand the
manycore application behavior. On a broader level, this introspective framework
can boost programmer productivity by offering fast and more accurate feedback
about the program execution, and effectively improving the software development
cycle.