* 1149789
* CAREER: Machine Learning Methods and Statistical Analysis Tools for Single Network Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Jennifer Neville, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 496,640.00

CAREER: Machine Learning Methods and Statistical Analysis Tools for Single
Network Domains

Machine learning researchers focus on two distinct learning scenarios for
structured network data (i.e., where there are statistical dependencies among
the attributes of linked nodes). In the first scenario, the domain consists of a
population of structured examples (e.g., chemical compounds) and we can reason
about learning algorithms asymptotically, as the number of structured examples
increases. In the second scenario, the domain consists of a single, potentially
infinite-sized network (e.g., the World Wide Web). In these "single network"
domains, an increase in data corresponds to acquiring a larger portion of the
underlying network. Even when there are a set of network samples available for
learning and prediction, they correspond to subnetworks drawn from the same
underlying network and thus may be dependent.

Although estimation and inference methods from the field of statistical
relational learning have been successfully applied in single-network domains,
the algorithms were initially developed for populations of networks, and thus
the theoretical foundation for learning and inference in single networks is
scant. This work focuses on the development of robust statistical methods for
single network domains -- since many large network datasets about complex
systems rarely have more than a few subnetworks available for model estimation
and evaluation. Specifically, the aims of the project include (1) strengthening
the theoretical foundation for learning in single network domains, (2) creating
accurate methods for determining the significance of discovered patterns and
features, (3) formulating novel model selection and evaluation methods, and (4)
developing improved approaches for network learning and prediction based on the
unique characteristics of single network domains.

The research will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms that influence the
performance of network analysis methods and drive the development novel methods
for complex network domains. Expanding the applicability of machine learning
techniques for single network domains could have a transformational impact
across a broad range of areas (e.g., psychology, communications, education,
political science) where current methods limit research to the investigation of
processes in dyad or small group settings. Also, the project results will serve
as an example application of computer science in the broader network science
context, which will attract and retain students that might not otherwise be
engaged by conventional CS topics. For more details see:
http://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/neville/research-nsf-career.html