* 1149942
* CAREER:   Isolation by Distance or Adaptation:  The Extent of Population Genetic Distance that Results from Adaptive Divergence in Intraspecific Signals and Migratory Behavior
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Rebecca Safran, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2019
* USD 934,569.00

Classic debates on the formation of new species center on the relative
significance of geographic isolation and adaption to different environments. New
tools in genomics allow a closer look into how these features influence
population differentiation. By analyzing how patterns of genomic variation among
populations are affected by local ecology, behavior and extent of geographic
isolation, important insights about how biodiversity forms can be achieved. Barn
swallows are comprised of six closely related sub-species worldwide, where
populations vary in: (1) geographic distance from one another, (2) different
combinations of mate-selection traits, (3) climates they encounter, and (4)
their extent of migratory behaviors, and thus provide powerful opportunities to
explore the relative significance of these factors in population divergence.
Fifty-five sampling sites across the entire breeding distribution of barn
swallows have been established to conduct nearly 1,500 pair-wise population
comparisons of genomic and phenotypic divergence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
investigation will be among the most comprehensive analyses of the relative
significance of migratory behavior, climate variability, mate selection, and
geographic distance on population genomic divergence, with important insights
about how these factors affect the evolution of new species. Here, the
scientific goals can be achieved through intermeshing the research with
international collaboration, integrative training in Biology and outreach. Two
Science Education Fellows will be used to help implement and assess innovation
to two courses taught by the PI. Public engagement in this research will be
achieved via a newly established Citizen Science program and an exhibition on
avian diversity.