* 1149056
* CAREER: Individual Variation in Dispersal Through a Social Landscape: Causes and Consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Michele Nishiguchi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 910,000.00

Young animals must often leave their birthplace and search for a new home before
producing their own offspring; such movement between natal and breeding
locations is known as natal dispersal. Dispersal behavior underlies many
ecological processes. For example, individual movement across the landscape
during dispersal provides crucial ecological connectivity in natural
populations. However, extraordinarily little is known about how young animals
navigate the complex social and ecological environments they encounter during
dispersal. This project will use the brush mouse (Peromyscus boylii) as a model
system to answer the following questions: 1) How do pre-existing behavioral
differences among individuals influence dispersal movements? 2) How do social
interactions with resident adults affect the behavior of juveniles as they move
through the landscape? 3) How are survival and reproductive success affected by
the interplay of socioecological conditions and individual dispersal strategies?
This project will utilize a new automated animal tracking system, social network
approaches, and genetic tools to develop a more complete understanding of
dispersal dynamics in a natural population of brush mice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes multiple opportunities for training
and outreach. Through a multi-institution undergraduate course, students will
collaborate across campuses using a wilderness wireless network and social media
to coordinate field research projects, collect data, and communicate their
experiences to a wider audience. Outreach activities introducing elementary
school students to the tracking technology employed in the field research will
be developed and distributed. Education and outreach activities will be
integrated online: a research blog written by project participants will document
the movements of radiotracked animals, social networking sites will allow course
participants to communicate their experiences from the field, and outreach
activities based on field research methods and data will be made freely
available online.