* 1149495
* CAREER: CIF: Anonymous Networking with Guaranteed Quality of Service: Towards a Theoretical Foundation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Parvathinathan Venkitasubramaniam, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 449,567.00

Anonymity in networked systems refers to protecting the identities of
communicating parties and paths of data flow. Exposing such information not only
is a violation of user privacy, but also empowers a malicious adversary to
launch powerful attacks. While a great deal of attention has been paid to
information security and methods of protecting network activity using contents
of communication, far less is known about vulnerabilities and risks of a network
to adversarial timing analysis and its implications on privacy and social
interactions. In this research, a rigorous theoretical foundation is developed
for delivering any desired level of anonymity to networked systems with provable
guarantees on network quality of service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
built on an information theoretic framework to measure anonymity which yields
the first quantitative model for anonymity that takes into account the complete
information available to an adversary and the resource and topological
constraints of a network. While conventional approaches circumvent the
interdependence between network and adversary by modeling the adversary as
omniscient, the investigators model anonymous networking as games between
network nodes and the adversary and study Nash equilibrium behavior of the
players, behavior from which none has the incentive to deviate. Using the
mathematical framework, the fundamental trade-offs between anonymity and network
performance is characterized. Consequently, insights are derived into likely
behavior of network adversaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context, this
rigorous analytical foundation will have significant impact in delivering
provable privacy to a range of networked systems including computer networks,
healthcare, transportation and smart energy distribution systems. In addition,
the programs for middle and high school students and distance learning
opportunities broaden the awareness of privacy vulnerabilities of networks in
society.