* 1149603
* CAREER: Photoprotection for Tolerance to Abiotic Stress: Discovery through Natural Genetic Variation
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Maria Salas-Fernandez, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 04/30/2017
* USD 608,461.00

Photosynthesis, the fundamental biochemical process sustaining life in this
planet, requires light energy. Any environmental stress such as cold, drought or
heat will limit the amount of fixed CO2, and trigger photoprotection mechanisms
to dissipate or avoid absorption of excess energy that might cause damage to
cells and the plant as a whole. The physiological and genetic aspects of
photoprotection have been studied in model species but there has been no
investigation of photoprotection as a useful and improvable mechanism of abiotic
stress tolerance in crop species. Considering that abiotic stresses are the main
cause of yield loss in agricultural systems, and that climate change will
generate even more extreme environmental conditions, the utilization of a novel
abiotic stress mechanism such as photoprotection could have a significant impact
on crop productivity and thus on the prosperity of our society. The goal of this
project is to discover genes/molecular markers affecting the plant's capacity to
cope with excessive energy under stress conditions, using natural genetic
variation in sorghum, a commercially important crop. This project includes the
following specific aims: 1) to determine the drought and cold experimental
conditions that would maximize the photoprotection response; 2) to test the
association of photoprotection candidate genes with photosynthesis and
fluorescence by Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) mapping; 3) to discover novel
genes/markers associated with variation in photoprotection; and 4) to identify
candidate genes, functional polymorphisms and determine expression levels of
allelic variants associated with higher photoprotective capacity under stress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project include genes/markers and
allelic variants associated with superior photoprotective capacity, the
functional polymorphisms and expression profiles of those genes, and molecular
markers that could be tested under multiple environmental conditions and
exploited in breeding programs. The project will also provide research training
and mentoring for one PhD and one undergraduate student. With regard to outreach
to the general public, the project will develop a new module for Meta!Blast, a
real-time 3D action-adventure video game designed to engage students in the
learning process of complex biological systems. "Photoprotection" complements
current modules and will focus on photoprotection and its effects on society.
This game will be utilized by high school teachers in biology courses but also
in undergraduate courses at Iowa State University (ISU). In addition, the
project will provide demonstrations and extension presentations at the biannual
Iowa Farm Progress Show and the ISU Research and Demonstration Farms,
respectively. These opportunities to disseminate knowledge generated in this
project to the general public are uniquely valuable because of the number of
people attending those events, their roles on agricultural production systems
and therefore their impact on society. All germplasms used in this project are
freely available through the USDA-ARS National Genetic Resources Preservation
(NCGRP). All sequence data will be deposited in the NCBI GenBank dbSNP and GSS
databases. All phenotypic data will be deposited long-term at the USDA-ARS
Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN) (http://www.ars-grin.gov/).