* 1149851
* CAREER: A novel framework for mining graph patterns in large biological and social networks
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Mohammad Hasan, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2017
* USD 547,427.00

Frequent subgraph mining is a core task in data mining which can be applied to
various real-life problems related to graphs and networks. Presently, the
research value of this task has been heightened by the increased availability of
massive network data in the domains of life and social sciences. However,
existing algorithms for subgraph mining suffer from various limitations;
noteworthy among these are lack of scalability, lack of user interaction and the
absence of a mechanism to mine dynamic graphs. This research aims to overcome
the above limitations by accomplishing the following three related tasks: (1)
use of Monte Carlo sampling mechanisms for designing scalable graph mining
algorithms; (2) develop real-time interactive graph mining systems using
subgraph sampling approaches; and (3) discover models for graph evolution that
are based on sampling and driven by the principles of game theory and
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds a novel paradigm for
subgraph mining that is based on Monte Carlo sampling. This allows the
development of algorithms that are scalable, by avoiding the need to enumerate
all subgraph patterns. The resulting algorithms will be applied to subgraph
mining problems in systems biology, e.g., predicting disease pathways by mining
graphs from genomics and proteomics co-expression networks. A second outcome of
this research is an interactive pattern mining framework using subgraph sampling
where user feedback guides updates of the sampling distribution such that
subsequent sampling prioritizes patterns that are considered "interesting" to
the user. A third outcome is a subgraph sampling method that uses a game
theoretic mechanism to design a subgraph evolution model for prediction tasks
(such as link prediction) in dynamic networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Availability of tools for mining large graphs enables the opportunity
to build network biomarkers, which are novel signatures for disease diagnosis
and risk factor analysis. A sampling based interactive pattern system is
instrumental to mine "interesting" associations between diseases and medicines
from numerous hidden datasets that are currently unexplored in many hospitals
and health clinics. Scalable graph mining algorithms are also likely to find use
in search, e-commerce and social networks based industry. The educational goal
of this research is to leverage the PI's industrial experience to develop a
"Large-scale data analysis" course on methods needed to build data mining
systems that work on industry-scale data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional
information about the project, including the findings, methods, open source
implementations of algorithms, publications and data can be accessed through the
project website at http://www.cs.iupui.edu/~alhasan/graph_mining.