* 1149308
* CAREER:  Community Ecology of Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Pieter Johnson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2018
* USD 737,280.00

Biodiversity loss and emerging infectious disease are among the most pressing
environmental threats to society. While traditional biomedical research focuses
on single-host, single-parasite systems, there is an urgent need to incorporate
community ecology into disease research to understand host-pathogen interactions
and patterns of disease emergence. Growing evidence suggests that other species
in communities, including predators, alternative hosts, and other parasites, can
alter patterns of disease and could provide novel tools for the control of
emerging infections. The aim of this proposal is to bridge the gap between
community ecology and disease ecology by determining how host, non-host, and
parasite diversity interact to affect disease risk in a group of globally
threatened vertebrates: amphibians. The investigators will combine field surveys
of free-living and parasite communities in California with controlled
experiments to determine how patterns of biodiversity function to influence the
risk of disease. This work will lay a foundation for determining the role of
parasites in ecological communities and developing effective tools for managing
emerging infections in humans and wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will capitalize on the public's interest in the decline of amphibians. The four
outreach activities are designed to reach a wide audience. First, in
collaboration with the National Geographic Society and the USGS, this research
will enhance a citizen science program focused on reporting deformed frogs.
Second, the researchers will develop a documentary media package with the goal
of promoting freshwater awareness and amphibian conservation. Third, the PI has
partnered with biology textbook publishers Pearson and Sinauer to design an
educational module for high school and undergraduate students. Beyond the PI's
own classes, this effort will reach tens of thousands of students annually in
classrooms and online learning environments (MasteringBiology). Building on the
PI's ongoing commitment to involve undergraduate researchers from under-served
groups, the investigators will partner with the Colorado Diversity Initiative to
promote experiential research opportunities.