* 1149875
* CAREER:  Synthesis and Fundamental Organometallic Reactivity of Low-Valent Uranium Alkyls
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Suzanne Bart, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemistry Synthesis program is supporting the
research of Professor Suzanne Bart at Purdue University. In this project,
Professor Bart will focus on the synthesis, characterization, and reactivity of
reduced uranium complexes for small molecule activation. The planned research
will test the hypothesis that low-valent uranium alkyls are useful synthons for
elusive uranium targets. Experiments will be carried out to 1) obtain a family
of uranium(III) alkyls with a variety of ancillary ligands, 2) understand under
what conditions uranium can undergo two electron processes, similar to late
transition metals, including reductive elimination, oxidative addition, and
migratory insertion, 3) explore the utility of uranium alkyls for multiple bond
formation. The planned research includes synthetic methods, spectroscopic
analysis, and computational approaches to fully understand the reactivity of
these compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the educational plan,
Professor Suzanne Bart will continue and expand her initiative to increase the
population of women among college age science majors with her ChemTeens
conference (formerly "High School Day on Campus for Girls"). Through this
program, junior and senior female students are invited to interact with leading
female faculty in the chemical sciences at Purdue to learn about careers,
college majors, and the benefits and challenges of a career in the sciences. At
this event, participants also make connections with current undergraduate and
graduate students who can serve as mentors and take the intimidation out of a
major in science as the participants begin their college careers. Professor Bart
will also participate in a program aimed at high school teachers in Indiana.
Through this program, the high school teachers could perform and videotape in
Professor Bart's laboratory those demonstrations not possible in their own
classrooms. These demonstrations help to highlight the importance of rare earth
and actinide elements.