* 1149079
* CAREER:  Fundamental Studies on Ultrasonic Vibration Assisted Laser Surface Modification (UV-LSM) of Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Sandip Harimkar, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for the
development of novel ultrasonic vibration-assisted laser processes for the
surface modifications of advanced materials, including light alloys, metal
matrix composites (MMCs), and porous ceramics. The proposed processing approach
is expected to achieve refined grain structure in light alloys, deeper
penetration of ceramic reinforcement in metal matrix composites, and denser
crack-free surfaces in porous ceramics. The research project will investigate
the effect of combined laser operation and ultrasonic vibrations on the
development of microstructure and properties of these materials. The
microstructural features such as grain size (light alloys), depth of particle
penetration (MMCs), and depth of infiltration (porous ceramics) will be
characterized using combination of experimental and computational approaches.
The effect of these microstructural features on hardness, strength,
corrosion/wear resistance, and residual stress state of the modified surfaces
will be systematically investigated. Major emphasis of the proposed activities
will be on establishing processing-microstructure-properties relationships for
these advanced materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed
project will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in laser surface
engineering for improving surface properties of materials. The development of
these new ultrasonic vibration assisted laser surface modification processes
will accelerate the utilization of surface modified light alloys, MMCs, and
porous ceramics in wider applications requiring improved performance. In
addition, the proposed project will provide unique hands-on-experience
opportunities to the diverse groups of undergraduate and graduate students to
prepare them for future career in this important field of manufacturing
research. The results of this research project will be widely disseminated to
the academic, research, and manufacturing community through journal
publications, conference presentations, and proceedings.