* 1149735
* CAREER: Self-Organizing Demand Side Management for Smart Grid: A Dynamic Game-Theoretic Framework
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Amir-Hamed Mohsenian-Rad, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 10/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to apply dynamic game theory to develop a new
self-organizing demand side management paradigm that can adapt and coordinate
consumers load in response to changes in electricity prices and renewable power
availability and when the system reliability is at risk, with minimal overhead
on utilities. The approach is to first design new plug-and-play
hardware/software energy consumption scheduling agents that control the
consumers load, such as charging electric cars. Then to build a game-theoretic
foundation and new mathematical tools to investigate and optimally shape the
operation of energy consumption scheduling agents to encourage consumer
cooperation, support renewable power integration, minimize generation cost, and
maintain power quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The challenges
in modeling the energy consumption management agents and their interactions will
be investigated with respect to the inter-temporal and locational dependencies
in demand, renewable generation, and conventional generation in both micro-grid
and macro-grid scenarios. Novel competitive and cooperative dynamic game-
theoretic demand side management solutions will be derived. A self-organizing
demand side management test-bed will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project has a transformative potential to replace existing
centralized demand response programs with decentralized self-organizing systems
that can encourage large-scale consumer participation to reach the twenty
percent peak load shaving goal identified by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission. The education plan includes organizing LEGO Energy Competitions and
Energy Camps for K-12 students to increase awareness about demand side
management, recruiting a minority graduate student, developing a new course on
smart-grid, and training students for energy careers.