* 1149570
* CAREER: Signal Models, Channel Capacity, and Information Rate for Noninvasive Brain Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2019
* Deniz Erdogmus, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2019
* USD 520,608.00

The PI's ultimate research goal is to empower people with severe speech and
physical impairments so they can live their lives to the fullest extent
independently and productively. To this end, he will in this project exploit and
advance emerging brain computer interface (BCI) technology by rigorously
developing macro-level dynamic models for the visual evoked potentials (VEP) in
the brain measured by electroencephalography (EEG) in the context of BCI design.
The models will enable a communication channel interpretation of the BCI and
will allow analysis and design breakthroughs stemming from the application of
information theory and digital communication concepts. Cortical dynamics and
background processes will be modeled using a probabilistic dynamic framework at
a spatiotemporal scale appropriate for BCI analysis and design. Model-based
performance limits on bandwidth and calibration accuracy will then be
determined, in order to develop better information coding techniques for optimal
communication bandwidth (speed) utilization and better subject training and
model calibration procedures for best accuracy return on investment of effort.
Prototype real-time applications that operate at optimal or near-optimal
performance levels utilizing the developed theoretical advancements for
communication and control will be implemented, to enable access by and support
independence for the target user groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project outcomes
will disrupt the trend of black-box BCI design by building dynamic system models
for stimulus-to-EEG systems encountered in BCI applications, and treating them
as stochastic communication channels in order to characterize signals
accordingly and to employ information theoretic approaches to analysis and
design. This novel theoretical framework will enable model-based quantitative
characterization of BCI performance limits and will allow the design of optimal
or near-optimal coding/decoding strategies as well as improved calibration
procedures that will have immediate impact on increasing bandwidth and intent
detection accuracy, as well as calibration duration reduction in BCI systems -
primary barriers between laboratory prototypes and real-world-worthy BCI
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If successful this project will
advance BCI technology to the next level, thereby revolutionizing human computer
interaction and empowering persons with physical disabilities by enabling
seamless control of computers and devices. The project will afford, through
collaboration with the Center for Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems
(CenSSIS) at Northeastern University as well as colleagues across departments
and institutions, opportunities to both undergraduate engineering and non-
engineering majors for enhanced learning and collaboration skills by immersing
them in interdisciplinary cutting-edge research and design projects with
societal impact. The PI will engage high school students and teachers in the
research through his institution's Center for STEM Education. And he will inform
the broader public of ongoing technological advances in the BCI field and raise
disability awareness through collaboration with the Cahners ComputerPlace at the
Boston Museum of Science.