* 1149408
* CAREER: Equivariant Homotopy and Algebraic K-Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Teena Gerhardt, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2019
* USD 405,230.00

The primary research goal of the proposed project is to use the tools of
equivariant stable homotopy theory to study algebraic K-theory and related
invariants. Although the definition of algebraic K-theory is not inherently
equivariant, the tools of equivariant stable homotopy theory have proven useful
for K-theory computations. In particular, one fruitful approach exploits the
equivariant structure of topological Hochschild homology (THH) to compute
algebraic K-theory. In some cases K-theory computations can be reduced to the
computation of equivariant stable homotopy groups of THH, graded by the real
representation ring of the circle. Determining which groups need to be computed,
computing them, and assembling the groups to recover algebraic K-theory are all
important components of this approach. Goals of this project include completing
these steps for various specific K-theory computations, as well as defining
abstract algebraic objects embodying equivariant structures arising in such
computations. Other goals of this research program include describing the
structure of higher topological Hochschild homology, and developing and
exploring applications of a new equivariant model for
THH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic K-theory is an invariant which can be
applied to study basic objects from several fields of mathematics. In
particular, algebraic K-theory can be used to study properties of fundamental
objects in algebra, called rings. Although higher algebraic K-theory was defined
more than 30 years ago, computational progress has been slow. Indeed, even for
some very basic rings, the algebraic K-theory is still not known. K-theory
computations, however, have important applications to many areas of mathematics.
Algebraic K-theory lies in the intersection of algebraic topology, algebraic
geometry, and number theory, with applications to motivic homotopy theory,
classification of manifolds, special values of L-functions, etc. A goal of this
project is to use tools from algebraic topology to not only produce new
algebraic K-theory computations, but also to develop the framework and theory to
facilitate future computations. This project also includes several educational
and mentoring programs centered around the recruitment and retention of women
and other underrepresented groups in mathematics. Programs aimed at
undergraduate students include the development of a Women in Mathematics course,
the creation of a Careers in Science lecture series, and undergraduate research
opportunities aimed at early-career undergraduates. For graduate students,
career mentoring seminars will be developed both for students at Michigan State
University, and more broadly for students and post-docs in the international
Algebraic Topology community through a retreat at an upcoming semester-long
program. Also included are opportunities for K-12 students from underrepresented
groups, as well as a program for female faculty members in science, mathematics,
and engineering. Additionally, Gerhardt proposes a research project addressing
the question of why many successful female mathematicians choose to leave
academic math.