* 1149860
* CAREER: Joint Topographic Imaging and Materials Characterization using Atomic Force Microscopy - a Systems Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Aditya Ramamoorthy, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* richard brown
* 02/28/2018
* USD 413,672.00

The atomic force microscope (AFM) is an instrument that allows the interrogation
and manipulation of matter at the atomic scale and has revolutionized science
and engineering. AFM based nano-interrogation includes, topographic imaging
where one is interested in recreating an image of a sample, and material
characterization where one wishes to determine intrinsic material properties.
The primary drawback of AFMs is their low speed especially when interrogating
soft matter, e.g., polymers and biological samples. This research involves the
study of advanced signal processing algorithms that will allow simultaneous
topographic imaging and materials characterization at ultra-high speeds and high
fidelity. This will significantly accelerate the knowledge discovery process in
domains such as material science, where the focus is often on fast evaluation of
new materials. The investigator will promote cross-fertilization of ideas
between the signal processing and the AFM communities by organizing joint
workshops. The findings will be integrated into the curriculum via lab
components and modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AFM uses a cantilever with a
sharp tip that deflects based on inter-atomic forces; interrogation is performed
by sensing and interpreting this deflection signal. This research focuses on the
dynamic mode operation (the preferred mode for interrogating soft material),
where the cantilever is typically excited sinusoidally and gently taps the
medium. Current methods work by analyzing the steady state cantilever trajectory
and are fundamentally limited in speed by the time-constants of the cantilever
dynamics. This research will study order-of-magnitude improvements in speed by
leveraging (a) the systems viewpoint and (b) newer AFM techniques such as multi-
frequency excitation. Signal processing algorithms for simultaneously detecting
topographic features and/or material property changes will be studied and
exhaustively tested on experimental data.