* 1149144
* CAREER: Dynamics and Diversity of Bone Morphogenetic Protein Signaling in Epithelial Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Nir Yakoby, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 04/30/2018
* USD 686,544.00

Localized activation of cell signaling pathways plays a key role in tissue
morphogenesis. During evolution, the expression patterns of pathway components
can change both quantitatively and qualitatively, which in turn may lead to
morphological changes. The proposed research uses the development of the
Drosophila egg, an established model system with powerful genetics tools, to
study morphological variations during 45 million years of fly speciation. The
research focuses on tissue patterning by the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
pathway, a major regulator of tissue development across animals. Using genetic,
molecular and bioinformatics tools, and the natural variations of eggshell
morphologies, this study aims to systematically determine which of the
components comprising the BMP signaling pathway can account for signaling and
morphological variations across multiple Drosophila species with different
eggshell morphologies. The research will provide valuable information on
molecular mechanisms underlying the evolution of morphologies, and it will yield
new genetic tools for detailed analyses of epithelial tissues' development.
Published results will interest broad scientific communities including those of
developmental, computational, evolutionary, and systems biology. The PI has
created research, educational, and outreach modules to support pre-college,
undergraduate and graduate students. For example, an outreach program in the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines, for middle
and high school biology teachers and students from the Camden area, aims to
provide experimental and computational tools to enrich their current biology
curriculum. The researcher has developed an experimental and computational
genetics lab for junior and senior undergraduates. Numerous undergraduate
students followed up with their research by conducting experiments under the
guidance of the PI's graduate students. The Rutgers-Camden campus recruits and
enrolls students from local populations traditionally underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. The researcher's lab provides an excellent environment for students
of multiple learning levels to conduct research, educational, and outreach
activities.