* 1149442
* Cooperation under Competition: System implications for DSA and computing systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Taieb Znati, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 196,669.00

Many infrastructure industries have made the transition from private ownership
to utility, often through intermediate stages. It is believed that computing is
in the midst of this transition today. The PIs believe that wireless-based
systems will follow the same route in time. This path promises to alleviate the
spectrum bottlenecks that plague emergent wireless applications. For this to
occur, technological advances must take place that elicit cooperative behavior
from firms that also compete with each other. These advances must leverage
advances in radio system design, including cognitive radios. Relying heavily on
system design methodologies and agent-based simulation modeling, this research
explores the relationships between cooperation, competition and the
implementation mechanisms, including system architectures and protocol design,
especially where agents optimize locally. Particular attention is paid to the
scalability of different approaches to large numbers of devices and
heterogeneous uses. In the application to wireless systems, the research pays
particular attention to ways in which transmission opportunities (called
spectrum holes) may be created. These outcomes will enable easier access to
wireless connectivity to emergent applications, thus enabling application
designers to build services with explicit quality expectations for their users.
Realistic models are constructed so that the mechanisms for spectrum hole
generation and their use through protocols can be evaluated. The results will be
published in major communications conferences and journals, and the development
of pilot applications will be encouraged.