* 1149745
* CAREER: Individual Attributes and Social Participation: Designing for Citizen Science
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2018
* USD 531,735.00

This project seeks to transform the study of technology-mediated social
participation through the human-centered computing equivalent of genetically
targeted medicine. Just as advances in medicine enable us to use information
about a person's genetic profile to target medical treatment to his needs,
information about a user's personal attributes such as his motivations and
personality traits can be used to target individually-tailored, theory-driven
design aimed at increasing the user's participation in technology-mediated
social efforts. The research focus is on technology-mediated citizen science,
which offers an ideal laboratory for studying issues that are important in many
other fields. The project will involve three citizen science modalities:
distributed analysis, distributed data gathering, and volunteer computing. The
research will test the effectiveness of design features informed by social
psychology theory and human-computer interaction research, and develop a
rigorous theoretical understanding of individually-tailored
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to advance human-centered
computing theory and practice. The intellectual merits of the research therefore
include: 1) advancing technology-mediated social participation theory by
developing a theoretical framework that combines personal attributes and design;
2) developing and testing empirically a novel technique and specific design
guidelines to enhance technology-mediated social participation, with application
to citizen science projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique setting of this
research within the citizen science domain promises long-term benefits to
society and science. In particular, the broader impacts of the research include:
1) leveraging technology-mediated social participation and citizen science to
engage members of the public in science and scientific work, and in particular,
members of disadvantaged communities to whom traditional science-related
activities may otherwise not be accessible; 2) enhancing the infrastructure for
scientific research through effective citizen science; and 3) integrating
technology-mediated citizen science in outreach programs.