* 1149553
* CAREER:   Selective sweep of plasma cell specificity following vaccination
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Erin Bromage, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 880,000.00

Vaccines have been responsible for improvements in human health, but they also
have been vital for improving the health of domesticated and farmed animals.
Vaccines work by administering a pathogen in a non-infectious form, which allows
the animal to develop a pool of B-cells and T-cells with receptors specific for
that pathogen. These pathogen-specific immune cells are retained for many years
(immunological memory), and upon exposure to the real pathogen, they are ready
to effectively combat and neutralize the threat. Mammals actively regulate the
vaccine response, allowing only 1-2% of the adaptive immune cells to be specific
for any given target. This allows mammals to be protected against many pathogens
simultaneously. In contrast, when rainbow trout are vaccinated they direct
40-60%, and in some cases &gt;90%, of their B-cells to the vaccine. This
dramatic, and unexpected, response comes at the expense of all other B-cell
specificities which are lost from the animal. This "all-in" response to
vaccination may have long-term consequences for the health of the animal, as
memory to other pathogens may have been lost. This project will investigate the
B-cell responses in vaccinated rainbow trout across 3 levels of organization
(cells, proteins, and genes). We are expecting to find that even though the
proteins may have a singular specificity, the genes that encode for the protein
will maintain considerable diversity. Discoveries made in this grant may aid in
the development of vaccine strategies to improve the health of vaccinated
rainbow trout which are grown on farms or released to restock our waterways. The
project provides research experiences for high school and undergraduate
students, and considerable research training opportunities for graduate
students. The project also seeks to foster long-term educational relationships
with the local community through numerous outreach initiatives.