* 1149582
* CAREER: Inference-Based Adaptation Techniques for Next Generation Jamming and Anti-Jamming Capabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Patrick Tague, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 512,424.00

Continual advances in wireless communication technology offer additional
protections against interference and jamming, but these same advances
unfortunately also enable stronger attacks. Observant attackers can achieve
significant gains by incorporating knowledge of the network under attack, and
jammers can consider various metrics, including attack impact, energy
efficiency, and stealth. Moreover, attackers can continually adapt parameters
and behaviors to compensate for system dynamics, thwart detection, and save
valuable resources. Robust wireless communication protocols that can survive
such adaptive attacks require new techniques for near-real-time defensive
adaptation, allowing the defenders to similarly modify their parameters in
response to perceived attack impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve the three primary tasks of identifying and modeling advanced inference-
based jamming attacks, developing novel cross-layer network defenses to mitigate
jamming attacks using similar adapatation techniques, and characterizing system-
level behaviors that emerge from the interactions between multiple adapting
parties. Contributions of the project will expand the existing body of knowledge
in wireless network security by developing novel probabilistic, game theoretic,
and control system theoretic models to better understand efficient and stealthy
jamming attacks and provide a basis for future robust protocol design.
Application areas in which the project work will be included are mobile commerce
using NFC, home networking, medical information management, smart grid
communication, and disaster response.