* 1149600
* CAREER:   COMMUNITY ASSEMBLY OF NECTAR-INHABITING MICROBES
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Tadashi Fukami, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2017
* USD 857,500.00

In ecology, "historical contingency" happens when the composition of species
found in a community is influenced by the history of species colonization; i.e.,
the order and timing in which different species joined over time. This project
will investigate the causes and consequences of historical contingency, using a
uniquely tractable study system: the communities of nectar-inhabiting fungi and
bacteria that develop in the flowers of hummingbird-pollinated shrubs in
California. These microorganisms immigrate to flowers via hummingbirds and other
pollinators and, upon arrival, use nectar as the resource for reproduction. The
researchers will conduct field and laboratory experiments to test four
hypotheses about historical contingency: (1) species immigration history is more
variable under higher flower density; (2) more variable immigration history
results in more variable species composition, affecting species diversity at
multiple spatial scales; (3) species-specific traits concerning resource
consumption and toxin reduction explain immigration-history effects; and (4)
historically induced changes in microbial species composition alters the
function of flowers for plant reproduction by altering chemical properties of
nectar and, consequently, pollinator visits to
flowers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate research and education
in two ways that make them mutually beneficial. First, with nectar
microorganisms used as a case study, a new inquiry-based undergraduate course
will be taught. In this course, students will identify and work on unanswered
research questions, to learn the scientific process by practicing it. An
adaptive strategy will be taken, with an annual cycle of course implementation,
course evaluation by science education experts, and incorporation of the
evaluators' recommendations the following year. The course will be adaptive in
one more sense: each year new research findings will be used as prior knowledge
that students can build their hypotheses on. Second, the nectar microbial system
will be used for targeted and broad outreach activities. Targeted activities
will involve mentoring high-school students from under-represented groups
through summer internships. Broad activities will involve running workshops to
share experience with teachers from community colleges and high schools and
publishing peer-reviewed papers to disseminate the knowledge on science
education gained through the undergraduate course and the high-school
internship.