* 1149458
* CAREER: Beyond Akamai and BitTorrent: Information and Decision Dynamics in Content Distribution Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Srinivas Shakkottai, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Recent studies estimate that a majority of Internet traffic is digital content
distribution, whose dominant component is applications that require tight time
deadlines, such as content streaming and realtime services. Excessive costs of
always-available server-based content distribution networks (CDNs), and a lack
of service guarantees in low-cost peer-to-peer (P2P) networks have led the
pursuit of agile hybrids of both systems that seek to leverage the best of each.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Such a hybrid requires coordination across peers, across
information, and across shared resources available to the peers, which form the
three research thrusts of this project. The first objective of this project is
the development of a systematic analytical framework to achieve this
coordination, using ideas drawn from game theory, learning and stochastic
networks. The aim is to capture the fundamental properties of large-scale
content distribution systems using analytical models, and bind together
applications such as file sharing, streaming, cloud-based services, and device-
to-device wireless networks by employing this framework. The second is to
generate prescriptions for ensuring economic viability by using revelations on
the value of the system to participating agents. Finally, the basic analytical
methodology developed will be applicable generally beyond the core problem of
content distribution. The analytical insights will be validated via a smart-
phone-based server-assisted P2P content streaming network. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project is supported by an education and outreach
agenda that aims at familiarizing students with analytical results developed and
how best to apply them in a real-world setting. A core component is a semester-
long course for seniors and first-year grads in which classroom teaching is
complemented by research experience through app development at the AM-Droiders
smart-phone laboratory. Outreach includes demonstrations and illustrative
projects at a yearly week-long summer camp for high school students, as well as
tele-seminars in which students from multiple universities (including Prairie
View A&amp;M, an HBCU) can participate interactively. The project is further
enhanced by strong collaborations with industry.