* 1149552
* CAREER:   Genetic and Functional Characterization of Microbial Secondary Lipid Biosynthesis - a Biomes to Biotechnology Investigation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Eric Allen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Crane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 864,751.00

Intellectual Merit. Microbial synthesis of fatty-acid-derived hydrocarbon
molecules (alkanes and alkenes) has garnered intense interest in recent years as
potential sources of renewable fuels and chemicals. Realization of this
potential necessitates a molecular-level understanding of the genes and gene
functions involved in microbial hydrocarbon biosynthesis and their relationship
with the fatty acid biosynthetic processes that provide the chemical backbone
for these hydrocarbon products. The current project focuses on several newly
discovered microbial biosynthetic pathways catalyzing the formation of secondary
lipids, accessory lipid molecules that are chemically distinct from core
(primary) fatty acid products and synthesized via a novel biosynthetic mechanism
in diverse microbial lineages. Our current knowledge of chemical products
associated with secondary lipid biosynthetic pathways is severely limited.
Likewise, the biological function(s) of these lipid classes is unknown. The goal
of this CAREER project is to characterize the genetic and physiological basis of
unique microbial fatty acid and fatty acid-derived hydrocarbon biosynthesis. A
key deliverable of this research will be a translational framework uniting
functionally diverse microbial processes involved in lipid and hydrocarbon
synthesis with the physiological, ecological and evolutionary underpinnings of
lipid diversification. To confront these outstanding scientific questions and
advance the scientific foundation for the production of renewable commodity
hydrocarbons, the research strategy involves three synergistic specific aims:
Pathway Discovery, Product Discovery, and Physiological Significance. By
integrating comprehensive data-mining strategies that leverage all available
genomic and metagenomic sequence archives and the direct interrogation of
environmental samples for lipid and hydrocarbon biosynthetic activities, the
proposed research will deliver important new insight into microbial lipid
metabolism as it relates to bioenergy applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. In addition to its scientific and societal impacts relevant to
bioenergy, this project will directly contribute to the teaching and training of
students in diverse scientific disciplines including bioinformatics, genetics,
analytical chemistry, and biotechnology. To enhance the infrastructure for
research and education, one key deliverable of this research will be a
comprehensive database devoted to microbial lipid and hydrocarbon biosynthesis.
This research component will provide actionable data for potential
biotechnological application and exploitation. Furthermore, to extend the impact
of this research and engage a broader student audience, a globally accessible
educational resource will be developed highlighting the exciting concept of
biological discovery to biotechnological application. The interactive learning
and analysis portal will serve as a general biology, genomics and computational
biology educational platform and will be integrated as part of the Community
cyberinfrastructure for Advanced Microbial Ecology Research and Analysis
(CAMERA) resource.