* 1149417
* CAREER: MUSE: An Integrated Approach to Managing Uncertain Scientific Experimental Data
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Tingjian Ge, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 03/31/2019
* USD 474,110.00

Science is becoming increasingly data intensive. As the experimental data starts
to accumulate within or across institutions and over time, it is indeed a
valuable wealth of information. However, little has been done to query the data
repository in an integrated manner, mainly because the results among different
replicates of an experiment often show a large degree of inconsistency and
variance. This database poses unique challenges in data types, query types, and
accuracy of distributions, etc. The broad goal of the project is to solve some
major query processing challenges in such a
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific techniques used to achieve this goal
include: (1) Coupling top-k query answering with computation of the score
distribution of top-k tuples, and the novel usage of this framework in a number
of contexts; (2) Measuring the accuracy of probability distributions which
affects user?s perception of query results, and devising new predicates for
decision making; (3) Proposing novel semantics and efficient query processing
for join queries on uncertain data; and (4) Designing a suite of algorithms for
approximate substring matching and windowed subsequence matching for online
monitoring queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to effectively and
accurately share, query, and monitor diverse scientific experimental data on a
large scale will greatly benefit the science community. The extra data analysis
capability provided to scientists can even change the way they conduct their
research. The education plan includes teaching both computer science students on
managing scientific data and science major students on relevant database
techniques, attracting middle school and college students into computer science,
and inspiring students of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;