* 1149494
* CAREER:  Image-Based Computational Methods for Understanding Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Cellular Processes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Ge Yang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 805,729.00

The inner environment of the cell is highly heterogeneous and dynamic yet
exquisitely organized. Successful completion of cellular processes within this
environment requires the right molecule or molecular complex to function at the
right place at the right time. Understanding dynamic spatiotemporal behaviors of
cellular processes is therefore essential to understanding at the systems level
their molecular mechanisms. The research objective of this project is to extract
mechanistic knowledge of cellular processes from images of their spatiotemporal
dynamics by developing and applying required computational analysis and modeling
methods. The technological development will be driven and guided by fundamental
and specific biological questions regarding the spatiotemporal regulation of
axonal cargo transport in neuronal cells as well as microtubule and motor
translocation in mitotic spindles, which are representatives of cellular
processes that are one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) in space,
respectively. The specific research aims are: 1) To characterize spatiotemporal
cell dynamics by combining single particle tracking with super-resolution
imaging techniques; 2) To represent microscopic and macroscopic spatiotemporal
dynamics of 1D cellular processes using hidden Markov models and spatiotemporal
point process statistics, respectively, and to combine with biophysical modeling
to understand patterned axonal cargo movement; and 3) To represent
spatiotemporal dynamics of 2D cellular processes via non-rigid shape
registration and uniform lattice space partitioning, and to combine with
biophysical modeling to understand organized spindle microtubule and motor
translocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in biology over the past half a
century have made it possible to identify all the molecular components of a
cell. How these components function and interact in space and time to drive
specific cellular processes and what general principles govern these processes
are fundamental questions to biology. This project will provide computational
methods and software that are required to address these questions in a broad
range of biological studies. The methods and software will be made freely
available to the broader research community. In the meantime, the project will
advance and promote teaching and training of computational analysis and
understanding of biological images (also referred to as bioimage informatics) at
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), especially for students from engineering,
computer science, and biology programs, and from the CMU-University of
Pittsburgh joint PhD program in computational biology. Research and educational
resources made possible by this project will be used for teaching and training
of graduate and undergraduate students and for participating in outreach
programs organized by the Department of Biomedical Engineering and the School of
Computer Science at CMU.