* 1149311
* Manufacturing Roundtable Series
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Gardner Carrick, Manufacturing Institute
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2012
* USD 34,592.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)/Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) program related manufacturing roundtable/workshop will
help to better establish useful connections between the National Science
Foundation (NSF) SBIR/STTR companies and U.S. manufacturers. This is the first
in a series of roundtables hosted in regions that have identified clusters in
the specific areas of focus in the SBIR/STTR portfolio. The unique design of the
roundtable will allow growth manufacturers to learn about the cutting-edge
technologies coming from SBIR/STTR companies while simultaneously offering
SBIR/STTR companies the opportunity to learn specific technology challenges
faced by manufacturers in their industrial space. The NSF SBIR/STTR program is
designed to invest in promising ideas and technologies that have breakthrough
potential. With specific grants in several cutting-edge manufacturing sectors
like nano-manufacturing, solid state lighting, and robotics, NSF is supporting
the growth of technologies that could significantly enhance the competitiveness
of U.S. manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be to ensure that the breakthrough
technologies&lt;br/&gt;developed under the NSF SBIR/STTR program will help
support innovation in U.S. manufacturing. This has the&lt;br/&gt;potential to
create a continuous pipeline of useful technologies from universities and
startups, through this NSF SBIR/STTR program, that can be incorporated into the
U.S. manufacturing sector, improving our innovation edge and allowing this
country to remain the world?s foremost manufacturer. The manufacturing sector is
a critical component of the U.S. economy. Its value-added processes create
significant wealth for the United States and enable the industry to compensate
its employees at a greater rate than the average industry. Over the course of
the last decade though, the U.S. manufacturing industry has experienced a
significant transformation as the production of lower-value and labor-intensive
goods has disappeared as a result of lower cost, foreign competition. This
transformation has left the U.S. manufacturing sector concentrated in higher
value-added sectors. To maintain our competitive advantage in these sectors,
U.S. manufacturers must continually innovate through the application of
technology to improve manufacturing processes and create new products and
product features.