* 1149106
* CAREER:   Unraveling the Design Principles of Protein Kinases using an Evolutionary Systems Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Natarajan Kannan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/28/2018
* USD 969,822.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Protein phosphorylation is a fundamental
mechanism by which cells respond to environmental signals. In eukaryotes,
protein phosphorylation is carried out by a large and diverse family of protein
kinases, which display remarkable diversity and complexity in their modes of
regulation. The complex modes of protein kinase regulation have evolved as a
consequence of natural selection operating on genomic sequences for billions of
years. Despite the availability of over 100,000 protein kinase sequences from
diverse organisms, however, very little has been done to use the evolutionary
information embedded in genomic sequences to understand the complexity and
diversity of the protein kinase machinery. The overall goal of this project is
to generate testable models of protein kinase evolution and regulation through
quantitative and integrative analysis of protein kinase sequence, structure and
functional data. Specific goals are to (i) quantify the sequence and structural
similarities and differences between eukaryotic and distantly related
eukaryotic-like kinases in prokaryotes, (ii) identify and experimentally
characterize the evolutionary constraints acting on major protein kinase groups,
in particular tyrosine kinases, which represent an important transition state in
the evolution of the kinase domain, and (iii) provide conceptual representation
of protein kinase sequence, structure and functional data in the form of an
ontology. In order to accomplish these aims this project will use a novel
evolutionary-systems approach in which mechanistic models of protein kinase
regulation and evolution will be built and tested through quantitative and
integrative analysis of sequence, structure and functional data. Accomplishing
this project is expected to have a major impact by providing new testable
hypotheses/models for experimental studies, a computational resource for large-
scale integrative analysis of protein kinase data, and a conceptual framework
for understanding the evolution of regulation in other signaling
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The major educational
goal of this project is to help students develop an understanding of the
importance of evolutionary and integrative approaches in biology. To accomplish
this goal, the investigator will develop and assess new educational tools useful
for teaching undergraduate and graduate students about data integration and data
mining. These tools will be piloted, assessed, revised and broadly disseminated
to undergraduate educators through web-resources and publications. The
investigator will provide research training for undergraduate and high school
students through existing training programs at the University of Georgia, and
incorporate under-represented minorities in educational and research activities
by partnering with the NSF REU Fungal Genomics and Computational Biology
program. The educational activities of this project will promote inquiry-based
learning at the high school and undergraduate level, and prepare the next
generation of scientists for careers in integrative biology.