* 1149023
* Protein dynamics and hydrogen tunneling in enzymatic catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Amnon Kohen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2016
* USD 439,610.00

Prof. Amnon Kohen, from the University of Iowa, seeks to gain a better
understanding of how enzymes activate covalent bonds through a study of C-H bond
activation that combines methods of experimental and computational physical
chemistry, biochemistry, and molecular biology. The proposed research will
examine the roles of protein dynamics, coupled motion, and hydrogen tunneling in
enzyme catalysis. Specific aims of the research and outreach plans include: (i)
examination of physical features of enzyme catalyzed H-transfer as imposed by
the active site, (ii) elucidation of a proposed network of coupled dynamics
across the protein through kinetic and dynamic methods; (iii) analysis of the
nature of H-transfer in the context of enzyme evolution; and (iv) outreach
activities that will enhance scientific research and science awareness in the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address
fundamental aspects of catalytic C-H bond activation. Tools to be developed
utilize isotopic labeling of ubiquitous cofactors, and thus will be useful for
studying many enzymes in a number of laboratories in this country and abroad.
The concepts to be tested will impact both chemistry and biology, and may impact
rational drug design, biomimetic catalyst design, and understanding of evolution
at the molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and pedagogical
activities will involve a broad range of institutions, from K-12 to research
universities. At the elementary and middle school levels, these activities will
boost the proportion of students who may choose science electives in high school
(that is, potential future scientists). They will also encourage students who
may choose non-science careers (such as future policy makers and the general
public) to adopt a sympathetic perspective on science, as well as a better
understanding of the critical role science plays in human well-being.
Cooperative efforts with Colleges with small research programs will broaden the
pool of prospective Ph.D. students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the projects
are designed to enable involvement of a diverse cohort of students. To this end,
efforts to recruit, train, and educate students from underrepresented groups
will continue. In the last four years Dr. Kohen has had five minority students
working with his group. Additionally, both men and women are equally represented
in Dr. Kohen's group, and students come from very diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings, methods, and ideas originating
from this project will be disseminated by means of publications and conference
presentations, useful computer programs will be posted on-line free of charge,
and experimental data will be made available to any researcher interested in
analyzing similar chemical and biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly supported by the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the
Chemistry Division and the Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.