* 1149365
* CAREER: A Predictive Modeling Framework for Exploring Process-Structure-Property Relationships in Organic Solar Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Baskar Ganapathysubramanian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for the
development of a numerical framework to model solvent-based fabrication of thin
film organic solar cells. The developed numerical tools will track the evolution
of the thin-film morphology (i.e. material distribution) as a function of
processing conditions (evaporation rate, spinning speed, annealing time) and
configuration (blend-ratio, solvent type and substrate). An adaptive time-
stepping strategy along with domain-decomposition and associated parallel
computing tools will be used to solve this multiscale, multiphysics problem. A
computational tool, based on ideas from graph theory, will be developed to
rapidly classify and characterize the predicted morphologies. The numerical
predictions will be validated using available microscopy and x-ray diffraction
experiments. High throughput simulations will be performed to quantify and
understand the effects of solvents, substrate patterning and evaporation
conditions on morphology evolution and device
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will lead to improvements in the performance of organic photovoltaic devices.
The quantitative analysis of morphology evolution during fabrication will
accelerate the design process by delivering the ability to directly predict and
interpret time-varying three-dimensional snapshots of intermediate morphologies.
The high throughput fabrication process-morphology analysis will provide
valuable insights toward synthesis and design. The research involves formulating
and solving several algorithmic and computing problems, which provide
contributions to applied math and computer science in their own right. The
proposed work will also educate the next generation of STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) students and the predominantly
experimental organic solar cell community about integrating computational
thinking with experimental analysis in renewable energy research through
education modules, short courses, and open source software.