* 1149096
* Short [N,N] Carbon Nanotubes of Uniform Diameter by Chemical Synthesis and Tests of Methods for Their Elongation
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Lawrence Scott, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2015
* USD 660,000.00

The long term objective of this project is the development of methods to access
useful quantities of uniform diameter, single-walled carbon nanotubes, all
having identical sidewall structures, by chemical synthesis. Carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) having [n,m] indices with n = m, the so called armchair CNTs, have been
chosen as the initial objectives, because they will all be electrically
conductive (metallic) and can therefore serve as nanowires in molecular scale
devices. The overall strategy begins with bottom-up chemical syntheses of short,
hemispherical hydrocarbon nanotubes and culminates with their elongation to full
length CNTs; the diameter and rim structure encoded in the short hydrocarbon
templates will dictate the diameter and sidewall structure (the [n,m] index) of
the resulting nanotubes. The Chemical Synthesis Program of the National Science
Foundation supports Professor Lawrence Scott of Boston College to synthesize
[5,5], [6,6], and [10,10] CNTs and, in collaboration with Professor Robert C.
Haddon of the University of California at Riverside, to test methods for the
elongation of such templates. The enormous amplification in size resulting from
such growth processes is anticipated to make useful amounts of uniform diameter
armchair CNTs available from even milligram quantities of the small hydrocarbon
templates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of carbon nanotubes in 1991
almost instantly inspired dreams among scientists and engineers about how these
light weight, super strong, heat resistant, ultra thin nanowires could
revolutionize the miniaturization of electronic devices far beyond what can
currently be achieved by lithography on silicon chips. Unfortunately, not all
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are alike. Some are semiconductors, whereas others are
highly conductive, like metals, with current carrying capacities up to 1000
times greater than that of copper wire. Despite two decades of extensive
experimentation worldwide, however, all known preparation methods still yield
mixtures of different types of CNTs that are virtually impossible to separate
into their individual components in useful amounts. More controlled methods for
synthesizing CNTs of predefined dimensions and chemical structure are clearly
needed, and this project is focused on the development of such methods. This
interdisciplinary project provides research training to graduate and
undergraduate students (including women) and a postdoctoral researcher. In
addition, several Ph.D. students who have won fellowships from their home
countries have recently come to the laboratory of Professor Scott from
Switzerland, Japan, Taiwan, and Australia to collaborate on this project for
periods of three to twelve months each. The interactive and diverse research
environment of this project provides an excellent setting for training and
learning and for the development of a stronger, scientifically and culturally
literate workforce. The broader impacts also involve disseminating research
results through publications and presentations at national and international
conferences.