* 1149538
* CAREER:   Does Crowding Stabilize Intrinsically Disordered Proteins?
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* David Weis, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 676,759.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Proteins are complex
biomolecules that regulate nearly every cellular process. A long-standing
paradigm is that the structure of a protein, that is, the three-dimensional
arrangement of its atoms, determines how the protein functions. Research over
the past decade, however, has uncovered a vast universe of intrinsically
disordered proteins (IDPs) that carry out their functions through flexible
regions that do not have a well-defined three-dimensional structure. The growing
recognition of the importance of IDPs is overturning long-held ideas about the
connections between protein structure and protein function. In cells, protein
molecules are packed tightly together leading to a phenomenon known as crowding.
Crowding is known to affect structured proteins, but much less is known about
the effects of crowding on IDPs. While it is clear that IDPs lack structure
under pristine laboratory conditions, it is not at all clear whether such
proteins remain unstructured in highly crowded environments found inside cells.
Thus considerable effort has been directed at understanding the effects of
crowding on IDPs. Such efforts include attempts to simulate crowding in the
laboratory and efforts to probe IDPs directly in cells. Despite advances,
obtaining information about IDP structure under crowded conditions remains
challenging. Until this challenge is met, understanding of IDP function will be
limited. Therefore, the goal of this project is to understand how crowding
affects the structure and flexibility of IDPs. In this project, the effects of
crowding on a panel of IDPs will be determined. The expected outcomes will be
(1) new insight into the effects of crowding on IDPs and (2) transformative
methodology that can be used to obtain information about the behavior of other
IDPs under crowded conditions. Successful completion of this research will lead
to a deeper understanding of how intrinsically disordered proteins function in
the cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This project will advance
discovery while promoting teaching and learning by engaging both undergraduates
and graduate students to answer fundamentally important questions about protein
structure. The educational objective of this proposal is to enable broad
dissemination of the principles of molecular structure and their impact on
biology, by developing a course that increases scientific literacy, develops
future science teachers, and shares knowledge with the local community. Through
its educational objective, this project will have important societal benefits by
broadly disseminating the principles of molecular structure to undergraduate
students and the general public, by developing an understanding of how these
principles apply to modern life, by supporting the development of future
secondary science teachers, and by increasing understanding of scientific
research. Finally, this research will broaden participation of underrepresented
groups by supporting underrepresented groups in science.