* 1149670
* CAREER: Simultaneous Single-Molecule Manipulation and Visualization for Study of ATP Coupling to Base Pair Unzipping
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Wei Cheng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Wei Cheng at University of Michigan and his group will
develop an ultrasensitive technique that allows manipulation and visualization
of a biochemical reaction, one molecule at a time. They will use this technique
to study how ATP is consumed for base pair unzipping in a helicase-catalyzed
reaction. 2% of the eukaryotic genome encodes helicase proteins. These proteins
are ubiquitous and use ATP to unzip DNA or RNA so that genetic information is
accessible for further processing. However, the mechanism of how these enzymes
use ATP for bp unzipping remains poorly understood. This project focuses on the
development of a single-molecule technique to simultaneously manipulate and
visualize the reaction of hepatitis C virus NS3 protein, a model helicase. The
success of this technique can lead to fundamental knowledge in our understanding
of helicase mechanism, and allows quantitative measurement of a broad range of
biochemical reactions in exquisite detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project involve research and teaching activities that aim to
emphasize the importance of technical innovation in advancement of science,
particularly to students with interests in biochemistry and biophysics.
Professor Cheng proposes to teach biochemistry classes with emphasis on
technical innovation that enabled important scientific discoveries. Moreover, he
plans to establish an annual single-molecule showcase in his lab, which will be
open to local high school and college students. Through simple demonstration
experiments and hands-on experience, he hopes to inspire the students' interest
in basic science.