* 1149464
* CAREER: Explicit Loop Architectures for Efficiently Exploiting Instruction- and Data-Level Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Christopher Batten, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2017
* USD 499,654.00

Systems across the computing spectrum, from cellphones to supercomputers, are
increasingly using a heterogeneous mix of general-purpose multicores augmented
with programmable graphics processing units (GPUs). General-purpose multicores
are easier to program but often less energy and area efficient, while GPUs are
harder to program but more efficient on specific applications. Unfortunately,
the two kinds of processors have radically different programming methodologies,
instruction sets, microarchitectures, and VLSI implementations, and this
heterogeneity significantly increases complexity at all levels of the computing
stack. The tension between programmability, efficiency, and complexity is one of
the key research challenges in computer engineering today. Overcoming this
challenge will help ensure the continued increase in computational capability
which has enabled tremendous advances in all corners of society.&lt;br/&gt;While
there have been some modest steps towards tighter integration between general-
purpose multicores and GPUs, this project is developing a truly convergent
architecture that elegantly unifies these two types of processors. At the heart
of the project is a new explicit loop (XL) architectural design pattern that is
based on the concept of explicitly encoding and executing a loop iteration
space. The project is using a vertically integrated approach to investigate: (1)
XL programming frameworks, compilers, and runtimes; (2) XL instruction sets that
provide an effective software/hardware interface for expressing explicit loops;
(3) XL microarchitectures that are either optimized for instruction-level
parallelism (ILP) or for data-level parallelism (DLP), as well as hybrid
microarchitectures that can dynamically reconfigure the same underlying hardware
resources to be either ILP or DLP focused; and (4) XL VLSI implementations that
will enable accurate design-space exploration of performance, area, and energy
implications.&lt;br/&gt;This project can broadly impact the field of computer
architecture by offering a novel approach for designing future computer systems
that is able to improve programmability and efficiency while reducing both
software and hardware complexity. The project also includes an ambitious
educational outreach plan to increase high-school-student participation and
undergraduate-student retention in computer engineering.