* 1149434
* CAREER: Reading magnetic fingerprints from deep time: An insight into the geodynamo and early Earth system evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2018
* Aleksey Smirnov, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 10/31/2018
* USD 476,009.00

(a) The first four billion years of Earth history was a time of many critical
transitions in the Earth system (e.g., the beginning of plate tectonics,
oxygenation of atmosphere, and emergence of life). However, many of these
processes and links between them remain poorly understood. This project will
advance an understanding of our planet's early evolution by obtaining high-
quality data on the strength of ancient Earth's magnetic field. It is well
established that for at least 500 million years, the field has been sufficiently
strong to provide magnetic shielding of the biosphere and atmosphere from solar
radiation. This strong field has been generated by convection of molten iron in
the outer core (geodynamo), powered by density settling and heat of fusion of
the crystallizing inner core. However, field characteristics for earlier times
remain largely unknown. The solid inner core could have formed sometime during
the Proterozoic eon (2500 to 542 million years ago). Before the inner core
formation, the geodynamo could have produced a much weaker and less stable
magnetic field. An attendant weaker magnetic shielding would allow solar
radiation to affect the life evolution and atmospheric chemistry. Our research
will provide high-quality data on the strength of Proterozoic field by
investigating the fossil magnetism of several suites of well dated extrusive and
intrusive rocks around the globe. This study will result in nearly doubling the
size of current paleointensity database for the Proterozoic, including the time
periods for which no determinations of the paleofield strength currently exist.
These data will provide important insights into early Earth's geodynamo
mechanisms and will have important implications in how we use the magnetic field
records to decipher the geological history of our planet, including the age of
the inner core. Broader implications of the study include a better understanding
of the link between evolution of Earth's magnetic field and evolution of
biosphere and atmosphere. The project will involve Michigan Tech undergraduate
and graduate students, thus training the next generation of scientists. The
project will also establish a sustainable framework for linking the academic
research to K-12 science education advancement and to scientific outreach in
order to increase the public awareness of Earth Science. In particular, unique
summer research experiences will be provided for pre-college science teachers.
These partnerships will provide a basis for classroom action research to improve
student achievement in science.

(b) Data on the long-term behavior and configuration of the geomagnetic field
during the Precambrian are crucial in understanding the nature of Earth's early
geodynamo. These data are also important for investigating potential causative
links between the evolution of geomagnetic field and other components of the
Earth system. For example, a weak or unstable field of an early geodynamo could
result in weaker magnetosphere shielding and, hence, a stronger effect on the
atmosphere and biosphere from solar and cosmic radiation. In addition, long-term
trends in the strength and stability of geomagnetic field may provide insight
into the timing of some important transitions in the Earth's interior, such as
the formation and growth of the solid inner core. In the absence of strict
theoretical constraints, paleomagnetic data become a principal source of
information about the Precambrian field. However, our knowledge of the field
characteristics during the first four billion years of Earth history remains
very limited. In particular, the database on the field strength contains only a
handful of reliable data points. In our project, we will investigate the
strength of the Proterozoic geodynamo by detailed paleomagnetic analyses of
several reliably dated, globally distributed basaltic sequences and mafic dike
swarms that have been previously shown to contain pristine paleomagnetic
records. Our proposed targets are the ~1.1 Ga rocks of the Mid-Continent Rift
System (USA and Canada), the 615 Ma Long Range dike swarm (Canada), the 755 Ma
Mundine Well Dike, 1070 Ma Warakurna dolerite sills and dikes, and the 1210 Ma
Marnda Moorn (Western Australia), the 810 Ma Xiaofeng and 1765 Ma Taihang dike
swarms (China), and the ~925 Ma Salvador-Olivença, ~1.5 Ga Curaçá, and ~2.6 Ga
Uauá dike swarms (Brasil). In this study, we will use conventional and novel
experimental and interpretative approaches to contribute to a synoptic view of
the Precambrian geodynamo. This project will significantly increase the number
of high-quality paleointensity determinations for the Precambrian, including the
time periods for which no determinations of paleofield strength currently exist
(for example, for the Neoproterozoic). The outcomes of the proposed research
will be integrated into an Earth-system-wide timeline of Neoarchean-Proterozoic
geological history, possibly transforming the current view of causative factors
between geophysical boundary conditions and evolutionary response of the
biosphere and atmosphere.