* 1149728
* CAREER:   Characterizing a Landscape of Signal Processing in the Immune System
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Dana Peer, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,150,810.00

Intellectual Merit. Signaling networks are the information processing devices of
cells and organisms. These drive complex processes such as the development of an
entire human being from a single cell and protecting the body in a coordinated
response to a pathogen. The immune system presents a unique opportunity for
studying development in mammals. White blood cells undergo differentiation and
proliferation, a never-ending process throughout the life of the organism. The
goal of this research is to present a global, systems view of the immune system,
its function and its development. The approach is based on a new revolutionary
technology, Mass-Cytometry, which enables us to observe cellular signaling and
development at unprecedented resolution and detail. This empowers the
exploration of development in a brand new way, unraveling the mystery of how we
are made from just a single cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Biological research is paved with novel technologies that lead to new
opportunities, new challenges, and most importantly new discoveries. Elucidating
general principles for molecular signal processing and development have great
utility across a host of fundamental challenges in modern biology. This is an
exciting era, during which interdisciplinary research can really make an impact
on biology. To make such impact requires scientists trained in both quantitative
and biological sciences. A key part of this project is to develop ways to
distill complex science to a broader community, including science expo for K-8
and specialized systems biology training at the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The modeling and visualization tools developed in this project are ideal
for presenting the complexity of biological systems in a more tangible and
concrete manner for students and are ideal training and outreach resources. The
synergistic combination of technology and computation will have a transformative
influence on broad topics across all of biology.