* 1149936
* CAREER: From Storm Clouds to EverClouds: Heading Off Long-Term Cloud Computing Risks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Bryan Ford, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

The cloud computing model, however appealing from economic and management
perspectives, brings risks that should be understood before too much critical
infrastructure "moves to the cloud." While the privacy and information security
risks are well-known, cloud computing may bring other long-term risks that are
neither widely recognized nor addressed. EverCloud is a novel cloud computing
model that explores and attempts to mitigate these
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, clouds exacerbate security risks from timing
side-channels, which current approaches cannot address without undermining the
cloud business model. EverCloud introduces a Timing Information Flow Control
(TIFC) model, providing a tool to reason about and limit timing channels despite
fine-grained hardware resource multiplexing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, cloud
services built atop one another risk hidden interactions that might lead to
unpredictable instabilities or "meltdowns," as well as resource
interdependencies that undermine a service's resilience to failure. EverCloud
adapts labeling techniques to enforce stability constraints on reactive cloud
computations, and to ensure independence in the provisioning of cloud hardware
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, clouds exacerbate digital
preservation challenges, because no one but a cloud application's provider can
archive a "working" copy of the application and its data. EverCloud enables any
stakeholder (e.g., customer, librarian) to create and independently preserve
fully-functional "snapshots" of cloud applications, while mitigating the
computing, storage, and bandwidth costs of preservation via proportionate cost-
sharing among stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploring these possible
cloud computing risks and potential solutions, EverCloud may increase the
security, robustness, and predictability of cloud computing systems throughout
the many areas in which cloud computing is increasingly used.