* 1149374
* CAREER:Thermal Energy Transport in Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Jonathan Malen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 01/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Jonathan A. Malen, Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CBET-1149374&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER proposal is to
study thermal transport in organic-inorganic hybrid materials. Organic-Inorganic
Hybrid Materials are attractive alternatives to single crystal semiconductors
for electronics, photonics, and energy conversion because they can be
manufactured with scalable solution-based processes. For these applications the
organic-inorganic interface has been leveraged to control electronic transport,
but thermal properties remain uncultivated. It is hypothesized that collective
properties, emergent at the organic-inorganic interface, will enable
unprecedented control of the thermal phonon spectrum in hybrid materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal centers around the
experimental measurement of thermal transport in two novel hybrid materials:
self assembled monolayers (SAMs) and nanocrystal superlattices (NCSLs). SAMs are
2-D molecular crystals that form on inorganic surfaces, and NCSLs are 3-D arrays
of inorganic spheres spaced by organic molecules. Coupling and alignment of
dissimilar vibrational states in the organic and inorganic components can be
controlled by chemistry to yield diverse thermal transport properties. These
effects will be experimentally interrogated through (i) the development of a new
continuous-wave laser method to probe an unparalleled range of phonon mean free
paths in solids, (ii) measurements of thermal conductivity and phonon mean free
path distributions in NCSLs, and (iii) systematic measurements of SAM interface
thermal conductance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to manipulate the phonon
spectrum will broadly impact a wide range of applications in energy and biology.
Due to short phonon wavelengths (&lt;10 nm), hybrid based phonon-optics would
achieve much higher resolution than visible light having much longer
wavelengths. Such non-destructive imaging can be extremely useful in assays of
biological, organic, and inorganic samples. Further, solution chemistry based
manufacturing and tunable electro-optic properties make hybrids ideal for energy
conversion technologies that demand wide deployment, including thermoelectrics,
photovoltaics, and LEDs. Engineering hybrid devices requires knowledge of their
hitherto unknown thermal properties, whereas phonon control can yield unique
performance upgrades. Bandpass filtering of phonons by SAMs can increase the
efficiency of optoelectronics, while decoupled thermal and electronic transport
properties make NCSLs ideal for thermoelectric waste heat conversion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated educational plan that aspires to demystify
the phonon is highlighted by the "Phonon-Simulator", a model spring-mass system
that simulates vibrations in matter. This educational kit will be paired with
online software and deployed throughout the Pittsburgh Public Schools (PPS) to
introduce the origins of heat transfer through an interactive educational
program. The local focus will be underrepresented pre-college students from PPS
as well as students at Carnegie Mellon. Broader dissemination will be achieved
by workshops at the Intel International Science &amp; Engineering Fair and the
Siemens Competition, aimed at jointly recruiting scholars into engineering.