* 1149822
* CAREER:   Exploring the mechanistic roles of NF-Y transcription factors in photoperiod-dependent flowering
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Ben Holt III, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2018
* USD 936,722.00

The timing of flowering is especially important in plant development because it
directly impacts reproductive success. For example, flowering at the wrong time
could mean that important pollinators are not present or that fragile embryos
will be subjected to freezing temperatures. Thus, plants have complex and highly
specific mechanisms to harmonize flowering with the natural ecosystems in which
they evolved. Understanding flowering time has further important implications in
agricultural settings, as flowering time can have profound effects on the
overall production of commercially valuable vegetative organs, fruits, and
seeds. To properly time flowering, many plants have an internal clock that
monitors day length (photoperiod) and seasonally activates genes that drive the
transition from vegetative growth to reproductive growth. In particular,
activation of the floral integrator gene FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) is an essential
early step in the photoperiod-regulated transition to flowering. This project
uses a combination of genetic and biochemical approaches to specifically
investigate how regulatory proteins called NUCLEAR FACTOR Y (NF-Y)
mechanistically control FT expression to initiate flowering. In addition to
potentially impacting agricultural production and our collective understanding
of natural ecosystems, this project will train undergraduate and graduate
students in both the research and classroom laboratories. Elements of the
research aims will be incorporated into an upper division Plant Physiology
course. Additionally, molecular plant biology forums will be initiated as part
of an effort to improve collaborative interactions among Oklahoma researchers.
All discoveries and resources developed from this funding will be made freely
publicly available through a combination of peer-reviewed publications,
distribution to public stock centers/data repositories, and direct distribution
of materials.