* 1149885
* CAREER:   Dissecting the Mechanisms of Genetic Control of Biological Systems via High-Dimensional Sparse Graphical Models
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Seyoung Kim, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Crane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 933,210.00

Since the completion of genome sequencing projects for various organisms
including human and other model organisms, the fundamental goal of research in
computational genomics, systems biology, and genetics has been to gain a
complete understanding of how the instruction sets encoded in genomes get
executed within a cell system and organism. The recent advances in the high-
throughput technology and next-generation sequencing technology have allowed the
researchers to collect a large amount of data for the genomes and various other
aspects of a cell system. Such datasets hold the key to understanding the
detailed mechanisms of the genetic control of a biological system and further
deepening our knowledge of cell biology with the potential for broad
application. This project will develop statistical machine learning methods
based on high-dimensional sparse graphical models for integrative analysis of
genomic datasets. As graphical models provide a powerful tool for representing
the complex structure of the unknown biological processes that underlie the
observed genomic data, the computational methods to be developed in this project
will be able to extract rich information on the genetic control of gene
regulation systems from genome-scale datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will also include training the next-generation computational biologists by
supervising graduate students and incorporating the research results into the
curriculum. The project will involve collaboration between computational
scientists and biologists to participate in outreach programs for high-school
students to present them an alternative career path that combines biological and
computer sciences. In addition, the project will contribute to increasing womens
participation in science and engineering.