* 1149297
* CAREER: Near Optimal Water Management to Improve Environmental and Ecological Decision Making
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* David Rosenberg, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2017
* USD 409,985.00

1149297-Rosenberg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this CAREER proposal
is to apply uncertainty and modeling to generate alternatives frameworks to the
problem of allocating scarce water to improve environmental watershed services.
Sustainable environmental decision making requires a new paradigm of flexible
water management tied to quantifiable environmental performance metrics. It must
also consider pervasive uncertainties. The PI moves beyond the notions and
mathematics of ?optimal? and ?best? to achieve four outcomes: (1) quantify
habitat suitability, topological complexity, and hydro-period environmental
service metrics for wetland and riparian areas at monthly and annual time scales
with parameter, functional, and conceptual uncertainties. Also, relate metrics
to water flow and depth variables; (2) compare enumeration and parallel
coordinate strategies to identify the region of near-optimal water management
strategies that perform within a specified tolerance of modeled optimal
solution; (3) embed uncertain environmental performance metrics and near-optimal
solution strategies in a watershed systems model to identify tradeoffs among
uncertain system components; and (4) enhance current and future decision makers?
skills in observation, data synthesis, leadership, and sustainable decision
making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop and apply multiple
environmental performance indicators with pervasive uncertainties in a systems
modeling framework. He will demonstrate new computationally efficient ways to
visualize high-dimensional resource management problems and identify sustainable
water management strategies. Near-optimal solution techniques systematically
identify promising (rather than single best) water management alternatives
without quantifying or specifying preferences among difficult-to-characterize
social, equity, and other un-modeled objectives. He will also measure and show
the impacts of these advances on environmental decision making in the study
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these advances, the project will
cultivate a systemic problem-based learning (PBL) environment that integrates
research and education activities. The PI will present numerous learners with
relevant environmental water problems, offer them tools to help solve these
problems, and provide feedback to encourage mutual learning and deeper
discovery. Here, PBL will have graduate students, river basin professionals, and
researchers define and quantify environmental performance metrics; incoming
undergraduate students observe metrics during 5-day experiential learning trips
along key river reaches that lead to year-long research experiences to map,
synthesize, and present collected data and findings. Graduate students will also
build new near-optimal algorithms and together with basin professionals vet and
compare model-recommended water management strategies. The PI will apply
developed techniques to the lower Bear River, Utah watershed where environmental
managers seek new ways to secure water for wetlands and riparian areas.