* 1149888
* CAREER:Coding and Information Theory for Interactive Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Mark Braverman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This project expands classical information and coding theories to the
interactive communication settings. Information and coding theories give us a
near-perfect understanding of the capacity of networks, such as the Internet or
mobile networks, to transmit information. This understanding however, is
generally limited to the non-interactive setting: there is a sender and a
receiver and the goal is to transmit a message from the sender to the receiver
as quickly and reliably as possible. In recent years, applications such as cloud
computing gave rise to interactive communication problems, where the goal is to
implement a whole functionality over a communication channel, rather than just
transmit data. The investigators study fundamental questions surrounding
extending information theory approaches to interactive problems. The project
aims to establish the limits of interactive computation, as well as to develop
new encoding algorithms that make interactive computing more
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical concept being developed by the
investigators is that of information complexity. Information complexity is the
natural generalization of Shannon's entropy to interactive problems. Shannon's
entropy measures the amount of information contained in a random message.
Interactive information complexity measures the amount of information contained
in the interactive computation, as perceived by the participating parties. The
project develops this concept to address problems in communication complexity,
such as direct sum theorems, multi-party communication complexity, and hardness
amplification. More broadly, the investigators develop techniques for applying
information theory to computational complexity, with the aim of expanding the
technical toolbox available to attack fundamental problems in complexity theory.