* 1149454
* CAREER: Automated Concurrency Debugging ? An Essential Ingredient for Safety-Critical Software Assurance and Security
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Chao Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 526,042.00

Detecting and repairing concurrent software defects has always been labor-
intensive due to the inherent complexity in analyzing the astronomically large
number of thread interleavings. The situation is exacerbated by the increasingly
widespread use of multicore processors, whose computing power can only be
unleashed by concurrent software. Automation of this detection and repair
process promises to drastically reduce the time spent in debugging such systems,
leading to reliable and secure software as well as fully utilized parallel
hardware. The objective of this research is to improve the concurrent software
reliability and security through innovations in automated concurrency debugging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate new theoretical and
algorithmic advances, and tools to fully automate the crucial process of bug
detection, diagnosis, repair, and optimization for large concurrent software.
The unifying theme of this research is the judicious application of logical
constraint based symbolic methods and automated thread interference
abstractions. Symbolic methods will mitigate interleaving explosion, which is
the major scalability bottleneck in concurrent software analysis, verification,
synthesis and maintenance. Interference abstraction will enable the use of the
most economical methods to analyze properties of the system via under- or over-
approximated modeling of thread interactions. The PI will incorporate the
results from this research into the undergraduate computing curriculum and
summer retraining courses for Information Technology (IT) practioners with the
aim of maintaining the competitive vitality of the U.S. IT workforce.