* 1149605
* CAREER: High Performance III-V-Bismide Mid-Infrared Semiconductor Lasers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Shui-Qing Yu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This CAREER proposal will launch a major research
direction in the emerging field area of III-V bismide devices. III-V compound
semiconductors containing the heaviest naturally occurring group V element,
Bismuth, is a relatively unexplored material system that is expected to offer
many unique optical and electrical properties desirable for numerous innovative
device applications. This research emphasizes the development of high
performance Mid-IR (3-4 micron) type-I quantum well (QW) lasers using the
(In)GaAsSbBi materials grown on GaSb substrates by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).
An analysis shows that (In)GaAsSbBi based QW lasers can easily obtain 3-4 micron
emission and they have a great potential to achieve high performance. A
systematic research plan for this project will be studied with three tasks: i)
MBE growth of III-V-Bi and material characterization, ii) Development of
infrared lasers and Mid-IR detectors/emitters, and iii) Development of Mid-IR
lasers; which are complemented by a "Networking" task that will effectively
promote the development of the PI's academic career. This research project will
address performance issues in GaSb based type-I QW lasers through the
development of novel (In)GaAsSbBi active materials that offer i) extended lasing
wavelengths, ii) improved hole confinement, iii) the suppression of the dominant
Auger loss mechanism, v) the avoidance of the growth miscibility gap in InGaAsSb
based compounds, and vi) a "quasi-Al free" device design for highly reliable
high power applications. The material work aims at superior device performance
through the development of techniques to alloy Bi, which surface segregates,
with III-V semiconductors, and to use Bi as a surfactant to improve the quality
of barrier/cladding layers. The reserach will build on the PI's experiences in
the areas of optoelectronic materials and device design, growth, fabrication,
and characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non Technical:The successful
development of devices based on the (In)GaAsSbBi material system will fill the
3-4 micron gap in high performance semiconductor lasers and enable many
important Mid-IR applications, such as sensing, communication, surgery, optical
integration, and homeland security. This project will provide comprehensive
training for graduate students in all aspects of advanced optoelectronic devices
and as well heavy involvement of undergraduate students. This research activity
will advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and
learning through strong collaborations with the "Bismuth Materials World
Network" to develop cybertools for research and education. The outreach
activities include the recruitment of STEM underrepresented students through
existing university programs and outreach activities that include participation
in the "Green" team to conduct high school teacher and two year college faculty
training and instruction lab construction in HBCU in the areas of optics and
solar cells.