* 1149001
* EAGER: Distributed Imaging Through Networks of Robotically Actuated Cameras
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* George Legrady, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2014
* USD 124,644.00

This project enhances the research direction of the interdisciplinary arts-
engineering Media Arts &amp; Technology (MAT) doctoral program at UC Santa
Barbara, through the introduction of a practice-based, study in visually applied
robotics. The ultimate challenge in any arts, science and engineering
collaboration is a convincing articulation as to why and how artistic
contribution can be of benefit to the scientific and engineering research. We
propose to develop a prototype multi-camera instrument consisting of three
robotically actuated cameras for experiments in content recognition and image
stabilization of real-time noisy images generated by the moving cameras which
try to synchronize their visual content. Our project?s purpose is to develop new
solutions in image synchronization through the study of images generated by
machine behavior, bridging knowledge perspectives from visualization experts
from the two fields of arts and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the
iterative working process of experimental staging and evaluation of results, we
plan to identify and formally define methodology similarities and differences by
which artists and engineers arrive at solutions. We are therefore interested in
closely examining problem-solving at the implicit and explicit levels. Our
project?s principal objectives are to: a) To develop an instrument of an
exploratory, experimental nature that will be used in multiple ways to stimulate
advances in research dealing with the optical-mechanical robotic vision machine;
the study of machine behavior, and the study of machine generated images. b)
Advance the infrastructure for research and education through the creation of an
imaging instrument that will bring together specialists from different
disciplines to explore a common computational imaging problem and lead to
further arts-engineering collaboration, and c) the intent is to position
artistic vision as a contributing force to advancing research and thereby to
push recognition of the artistic paradigm as of relevance to the research
community. A part of this work will therefore be to identify opportunities that
current scientific/engineering research have not explored but that have
potential and resonances for both disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have significant educational impact as imaging-computational-robotics is a
curriculum and research direction that MAT has desired to integrate for years,
and the project will formally set the stage for direct engagement with the
controls mechanical engineering branch of the College of Engineering.
Dissemination of results will occur in a broader spectrum then conventional
research such as engineering conference papers and arts academic presentations.
This proposal also includes the creation of a state-of-the-art installation
based on the result of the experimental studies, to be circulated in the general
public context of exhibitions in museums, where feedback can be further
collected.