* 1149466
* Grants for Collaborative Research: Understanding Innovative Science: The Case of the Wisconsin Institues for Discovery
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Daniel Kleinman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 371,271.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is distinctive about contemporary
science? This question is addressed in this project by examining how emerging
ideas and social arrangements of contemporary science affect the practices and
outcomes of scientific research in one strategic case, the Wisconsin Institutes
for Discovery. These institutes are research organizations that explicitly seek
to break disciplinary barriers, forge new tools for public/private
collaboration, and speed the application of transformative
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will engage in this analysis by using multiple methods including
ethnography, oral history, and archival analysis to engage in historical and
contemporary comparisons. It will explore how the Wisconsin Institutes for
Discovery embody what is different about contemporary science as well as what
remains the same. Three questions guide the research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
How do widely discussed ideas about such issues as interdisciplinarity,
transdisciplinarity, and public/private collaboration shape the evolution of a
new institution?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. How do these ideas affect scientific
work as well as the public work of forging relationships with the Institutes'
constituencies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. How (and for whom) do new ways of doing
science succeed? What new metrics are needed to capture their
success?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will support graduate research training and scholarly publication,
expand a publicly accessible electronic archive, enabling others to study the
Wisconsin Institutes of Discovery. Broad dissemination of findings will be
accelerated through a concluding symposium that brings together the researchers,
stakeholders in the Institutes, science policymakers, and invited scholarly
commentators. A policy-oriented whitepaper and a book summarizing the results of
the symposium will also serve to broaden the projects overall impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will have the potential to
guide future investment in research and research infrastructure. It will add new
evidence to ongoing discussions about the value of interdisciplinarity, the pros
and cons of public/private collaborations, and the community-wide effects of
centers and institutes.