* 1149752
* Understanding and Controlling Reactivity of Functionalized Alcohols on Metal Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Will Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2016
* USD 276,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program, Prof. Will Medlin of
the University of Colorado at Boulder will investigate the reactions of
functional alcohols on metal surfaces. The objective is to identify methods to
design solid catalysts for selective reactions of biomass-derived compounds.
Surface spectroscopy will be used in conjunction with quantum chemical modeling
to understand how the molecular structure of alcohols controls their reactivity
on the surfaces of metals that are commonly used as active components in
industrial catalysts. The role of molecular structure will be linked to the
influence of pendant functional groups on C-OH bond strength and on the geometry
of the chemisorbed alcohol. For the purpose of controlling reaction selectivity,
this work will investigate the use of surface modifiers that favor the
adsorption of functional alcohols in specific geometries above metal surfaces.
As a specific model system of real-world importance, the selective
hydrogenolysis of furfuryl alcohol will be used to test the catalyst design
principles developed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
directed toward making important advances for the conversion of renewable
biomass feedstocks to fuels and chemicals. Functional alcohols such as furfuryl
alcohol and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural can be produced in large volumes from
biomass-derived sugars. Identification of robust solid catalysts that
selectively convert these intermediates to desired products is hampered by the
complexity of the reagents. By developing fundamental design principles for such
catalysts, this work can lead to new, sustainable pathways for production of
fuels and useful chemicals. Graduate students will conduct research for the
project, and the impact of their research will be extended from ongoing
collaborations with researchers at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Undergraduate students will also conduct independent research on their own
small-scale projects that build on the research of graduate students. Finally,
outreach activities oriented toward a general audience will be organized through
existing programs in which the principal investigator plays an active or
leadership role, including the Renewable Energy Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center, the Colorado Center for Biorefining and Biofuels, and the
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute.