* 1149644
* CAREER:  Harnessing Hybrid Computing Resources in PetaScale Computing and Beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2019
* Melissa Smith, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 458,130.00

Future ExaScale computing systems are expected to exceed a hundred-thousand
nodes and contain a rich mix of heterogeneous computing resources created by
coupling multi-core processors with accelerator processors. However, current
applications are not yet able to exploit more than a few tens of thousands of
these nodes, or effectively manage this heterogeneous mix of resources to
balance workloads. Moreover, this heterogeneous mixture of resources in hybrid
or multi-paradigm systems presents programmers with new, but challenging
opportunities for exploiting the various types of parallelism within algorithms.
This CAREER research will formulate an inclusive hierarchical framework for
performance modeling and analysis of hybrid computing systems that include
multi-core processors and accelerators. The framework includes a coarse-grained
model for rapid assessment of the fitness match between the application and the
hybrid system and a fine-grained model for predicting execution time and
workload balance analysis. These models will be useful for researchers and
scientists developing, optimizing, and maintaining scientific codes.

The research project includes forming a taxonomy of application and architecture
characteristics through a rigorous study of application optimization and
execution on multi-core and accelerator processors. The study focuses on the
inter-node parallelism of the applications across a mix of heterogeneous nodes
and the intra-node parallelism on the multi-paradigm nodes. These hybrid system
studies elucidate the application and architecture characteristics included in
the coarse and fine-grained models of the hierarchical framework. The
optimization methods (resource ratio optimization, load balancing and memory
management) and the model framework are qualitatively assessed for other
application domains not included in this study. The project also transitions
this knowledge into educational modules suitable for classroom use in the
undergraduate and graduate curriculum.