* 1149178
* CAREER: The physiology and genetics of adaptation in a complex environment
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Kristi Montooth, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 12/31/2014
* USD 641,490.00

Organisms have a remarkable capacity to respond physiologically to their
environment to maintain survival and health even in times of stress. This
research program investigates the physiological responses of the model genetic
organism Drosophila melanogaster to a complex environment. D. melanogaster
recently expanded its range out of tropical Africa and into higher latitudes
with more variable thermal environments. At the same time, D. melanogaster
evolved a remarkable tolerance of ethanol and acetic acid in its fermenting
fruit habitat. The natural history of this fruit fly allows for an investigation
of how organisms are likely to respond to a complex and increasingly variable
climate. In particular, this research will test hypotheses about how changes in
cell membranes and metabolism maintain health, performance and fitness in a
thermally-variable and alcohol-rich niche. The experiments investigate changes
that occur within the lifespan of organisms to deal with the environment --
plastic physiologies -- and changes that have evolved to fit organisms to their
environment via the process of natural selection physiological adaptations. The
goal of this research is to identify the interactions among multiple genes that
underlie these plastic and adaptive responses to a complex
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will further our
knowledge in areas identified by the Frontiers in Evolutionary Biology workshop
(NSF 2005), provide insight on genetic, cellular and physiological mechanisms of
environmental tolerance, and develop new methods for associating physiological
traits with complex genetic variation at multiple genes. Data will be made
publicly available using the DRYAD database (http://datadryad.org/), and genetic
lines will be made available upon request after publication. Genetic lines
judged to be of use for many labs will be placed in the Bloomington Drosophila
Stock Center (http://flystocks.bio.indiana.edu/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational objectives draw on the PI's history of integrating her research and
teaching. Objective 1 develops a novel curriculum for college-level biology
classes that uses case studies to teach skills in information literacy, writing,
quantitative thinking, and data representation. Curricula will be deposited in
the publicly available database of the NSF National Center for Case Study
Teaching (NCCST; http://sciencecases.lib.buffalo.edu/cs/collection/). Objective
2 will create an educational multimedia display to promote public literacy in
the life sciences. Objective 3 advances a research training program for students
that integrates genetics, evolution, and cellular and organismal physiology, and
includes minority and female students.