* 1149314
* Stimuli-Responsive Supramolecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Lisy
* 06/30/2016
* USD 480,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Chad A. Mirkin of Northwestern University
will employ the Weak-Link Approach (WLA) to rationally design and synthesize
chemically sophisticated, highly functional supramolecular architectures with
important capabilities in the context of molecular recognition, catalysis, and
amplified detection. The cooperative chemical properties that arise from such
motifs lead to allosteric capabilities, where their activity can be regulated
through small-molecule or ion-binding events at remote metal sites. These
features make the WLA an ideal platform for synthesizing abiotic structures
capable of mimicking and sometimes exceeding the structural and functional
sophistication of biological systems. Specifically, the proposed project will
explore: 1) the development of Pt(II) WLA chemistry, 2) the expansion of the
scope of functionalities that can be incorporated into WLA complexes, and 3) the
development of more diverse methods for inducing WLA complex conformation
change. Furthering the understanding of the WLA not only will lead to the
discovery of novel reactions, but also structures with unique properties that
cannot be synthesized via any other methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program will impact the training and education of graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars. These young scientists will gain important laboratory
skills in supramolecular inorganic coordination chemistry, homogeneous
catalysis, spectroscopy, and analytical chemistry. Advances will be disseminated
to the scientific community through publication in high-impact journals and
presentations at national and international scientific conferences, and to the
general public via the popular press and through participation in outreach
events like the NSF Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network (NISEnet) and
NanoDays. Undergraduate students and high-school teachers will participate in
the research activities of this program through summer REU and RET programs run
through Northwestern University.