* 1149344
* CAREER: Addressing Fundamental Challenges for Wireless Coverage Service in the TV White Space
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Zhenghao Zhang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,883.00

This project addresses fundamental issues in the White-Cover network which
provides data coverage services in the densely populated areas with the TV White
Space spectrum. It is motivated by the fact that a White-Cover cell will likely
host hundreds of users while supporting highly dynamic data traffic, a scenario
beyond the capabilities of existing network protocols. In addition, the White-
Cover devices will likely have to coexist in the same channel with heterogeneous
devices due to the lack of free TV channels in the densely populated areas.
These challenges are addressed by a combination of novel physical layer
techniques and advanced machine learning techniques, and the solutions are
enhanced by further optimizations. This project studies: 1) efficient physical
layer schemes for node state detection with which the transmissions in the cell
can be scheduled very efficiently, 2) advanced protocols that adapt to the
heterogamous interferences conditions with the reinforcement learning technique,
3) optimized protocol for power consumption and integrated partial packet
recovery, and 4) network-wide performance analysis and planning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The White-Cover network designed in this project provides
a better alternative to the current technologies for the TV White Space. Users
may enjoy data coverage at much less cost than from the cellular phone networks
and new business may be enabled. The expected results of this project include
the protocols and algorithms optimized for the unique features of White-Cover
and tested with experiments. The results will be disseminated in conferences and
journals; the source code will be freely available online.