* 1149446
* CAREER:  BCSP:  Network level analysis of oxytocin regulation of naked mole rat and hippocampal neuron interactions.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Daniel McCloskey, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2019
* USD 931,946.00

The goal of this project is to establish a research environment to investigate
how the brain accomplishes the extraordinary task of orchestrating social
behavior among members of a group. This work will take advantage of pre-existing
differences in social behavior to test hypotheses about what systems in the
brain are responsible for those differences. The naked mole rat (Heterocephalus
Glaber) is a rodent that relies on social interaction and cooperative activity
to survive in its harsh natural habitat. As a result, naked mole rats maintain
the largest colony of any vertebrate animal, use a cooperative breeding system
to raise young, and are capable of individual recognition of colony members. A
preliminary examination, achieved through the development of novel technological
tools to track behaviors, demonstrates that within each colony, there is
variability in the amount of time animals spend engaging in social behavior.
With the help of students supported by this award, we will use a social network
analysis approach to identify animals with particularly high or low levels of
social behavior, and measure whether brain expression of a candidate hormone,
oxytocin, corresponds to these individual differences. We will also manipulate
oxytocin levels in the brains of targeted naked mole rats to determine how this
influences their place in the social network. Finally, the effect of oxytocin on
neuronal interactions in the naked mole rat brain will be determined by using
large-scale recordings of neuron activity. As the mole rat behavior and neuronal
data are collected, they will be shared, in real time, through social media
outlets to promote collaboration and provide unique educational opportunities
for students at all educational levels. Teaching fellows, funded through this
proposal will help to use these tools to develop new science curriculum for K-12
students in New York City public schools.