* 1149632
* CAREER: Differential Types and Declarative Hypothesis Testing for Software Evolution
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Iulian Neamtiu, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 394,040.00

Software continues to evolve long after the first version is released. Changes
made to source code in the course of evolution might not have the intended
semantics (fix bugs, add features), which negatively impacts both software
producers and software consumers, and has high economic costs. More generally,
the software evolution process is not very well understood. To remedy this
situation, this work will use information derived from analyzing software
history in two ways. First, to develop a type systems-based approach named
differential typing, that enables reasoning about the properties of source code
before and after a change has been made, and reveals the semantics of source
code changes at development time. Second, to construct a framework for
declarative hypothesis testing that automates and simplifies the process of
conducting empirical studies in software evolution, and software engineering in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary foundation of this work will
catalyze interaction between two primary communities, programming languages and
software engineering. The results of this research will lead to a better
understanding of how software evolves, and to improvements in the software
evolution process. By making the semantics of software changes explicit and
revealing certain kinds of errors before software is deployed, the incidence of,
and costs associated with, software bugs and incorrect software updates are
reduced. The project will transform the way researchers conduct empirical
software evolution studies by shifting the focus from how hypotheses are tested
to what the right hypotheses are. The contributions will be made publicly
available, which will benefit not only the research community, but also the
software development community. Ideas from this work will be incorporated into
education, so that tomorrow's graduates are better prepared to tackle software
evolution challenges.