* 1149662
* CAREER: Quantifying diffusion and dynamics on healthcare, innovation and communication networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Edoardo Airoldi, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 495,208.00

Many modern data collections, gathered for the purpose of providing insights
into matters of national interest such as medical and technological innovation,
typically measure quickly evolving interactions, in addition to traditional
unit-level measurements, in the context of a network. This project develops an
integrated research and educational program to enable scientific and
quantitative analyses of interactions and other combinatorial measurements as
they change over time. Technical problems being addressed include, but are not
limited to: an efficient representation that facilitates quantitative analyses
of large-scale networks; models of how information and behavior evolve over time
as a consequence of the network context they are embedded in; and fast
algorithms to perform estimation of critical parameters in these models. These
methods will be demonstrated on case studies exploring: the diffusion of medical
innovations among physicians and its impact on health; technological innovation
dynamics in the United States and the role of non-compete agreements; the
estimation of point-to-point communications on a network, from aggregate traffic
that is passively monitored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of interactions
and other combinatorial measurements as a source of observed variation in the
data creates new statistical and inferential challenges. For instance,
generalized linear model theory needs to be extended to responses on a network.
The analysis of processes on a network often induces constraints that make the
inferential problems ill posed, since they involve a large number of unknown
quantities to describe few observations. Estimation may require sampling from,
and integrating over, extremely constrained parameter spaces. Importantly,
interactions do not necessarily encode statistical dependence. In this sense,
dealing with observed interactions requires original thinking; the data settings
they entail are not amenable to analysis with classical methods, in which
interactions are inferred as a means to encode dependence among unit-level
observations. This project tackles technical challenges with a statistical and
machine learning approach. Anticipated technical results include, but are not
limited to: (1) a new wavelet decomposition of multivariate and dynamic
networks; (2) statistical models of diffusion of information on a given network,
and models of inhomogeneous network dynamics in continuous time; (3) scalable
estimation algorithms for these models; and (4) theoretical foundations of
inference with big data. This research will be evaluated qualitatively and
quantitatively, at Harvard and in collaboration with industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is integrated with an
interdisciplinary educational program, which will attract undergraduates to
research at the intersection of statistics and computer science, in the context
of problems of national importance. It will provide opportunities to actively
encourage students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in statistics
and computer science. Key elements of the educational program include the
development of a statistical machine learning curriculum; lectures on YouTube
available to everyone; tutorials at national and international conferences and
workshops; and a monograph. Outreach activities include open-source software and
webtools for the community at-large, and a collaborative effort with industrial
partners to leverage the new computational tools and algorithms for benefiting
their pools of users worldwide. Additional details regarding the project can be
found at: http://www.fas.harvard.edu/~airoldi/career.html.