* 1149312
* CAREER: Phylogenomics - New Computational Methods through Stochastic Modeling and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Sebastien Roch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 444,405.00

In this project, modeling and analysis techniques from probability theory will
be used to study several important computational problems in the area of
phylogenomics, i.e., the integration of genome analysis and systematic studies.
Various mechanisms such as hybridization events, lateral gene transfers, gene
duplications and losses, and incomplete lineage sorting commonly lead to
incongruences between inferred gene genealogies. As a result, one is led to
consider forests of gene histories as well as more complex network
representations of the evolutionary history of life. The main goals of the
research are to improve large-scale likelihood-based gene tree estimation,
develop computational methods to assemble species phylogenies from gene
histories, and detect network-like signal in molecular data. Drawing on a
combination of ideas from discrete probability, algorithms, and mathematical
statistics, novel methodologies will be developed that are both statistically
accurate and computationally efficient for these challenging inference problems.

Biologists face major statistical and computational challenges in modeling,
analyzing, and interpreting the massive genetic datasets produced by next-
generation technologies, including genomic variation within populations, whole
genomes from multiple species, and environmental samples. In particular, high-
throughput sequencing is transforming the reconstruction of the Tree of Life, a
fundamental problem in biology which provides insights into the study of
evolution, adaptation, and speciation. Through the development, implementation,
and broad dissemination of new practical algorithms for phylogenomic studies
based on mathematical analysis, this project will help advance the state of
knowledge in evolutionary biology and contribute to the numerous benefits to
society of phylogenetic research. Integration of research and education is a
major component of this proposal. In addition to providing training for graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers, new undergraduate and graduate courses
will be developed and research experiences for undergraduates will be an
important part of the project.