* 1149611
* CAREER: SensorFly: Minimalistic Dynamic Sensing and Organization in Groups of Semi-Controllable Mobile Sensing Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Pei Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

In a rapidly developing emergency situation the timely discovery of discovery of
information about the inside of a building, such as temperature during a fire,
is key to a successful response. A challenge is that the needed sensors are
difficult to deploy and maintain in these situations. While robots can be used
to gather some information, considerations of deployment logistics, dynamic
environment, infrastructural dependence, reliability, and speed have limited
their adoption. To address these problems, this project explores a novel
approach of using a collection of simple controlled mobile air vehicles with
sensors (SensorFly). By taking a minimalistic approach, where each device has
few sensors, the SensorFly project will develop a basic understanding of such
controlled-mobile networked systems, including trade-offs between per device
capability and system capability, and low-level collaborative techniques to
counter system non-determinism. To test models and evaluate different
approaches, the project builds on testbeds involving SensorFly nodes, a low-cost
30-gram flying sensor node.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The SensorFly project has the
potential for broad social impact. Studies that improve information gathering in
emergency situations will improve safety for both the responders and building
occupants. Although the size and weight of available sensors and platforms may
decrease over time, the application of minimal mobile sensing platforms will
remain attractive due to their reduced intrusiveness. Therefore, the
investigation into minimalistic approaches will have a lasting impact that
extends beyond today's sensing systems. Finally, the project continues the PI's
efforts for advising students in research and encouraging members of under-
represented groups into science and engineering fields.