* 1149123
* CAREER:   Modeling made easy: Extending systems biology modeling approaches to genetics and ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2020
* Laurence Loewe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,060,297.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison is awarded a CAREER grant to support
Laurence Lowe in his research to extend rigorous mathematical simulation methods
and make them available in a user-friendly model description language designed
to solve computationally challenging forward simulation problems in biology.
Many user-friendly simulation tools have been developed in systems biology, but
their underlying mathematical representation impairs their use for important
problems in genetics and ecology. This project will transform quantitative
modeling into a mainstream activity that will be an integral part of biological
research in the future. The first task will be to implement a new language that
makes it easy to read and write such models for humans and for computers. To
harness the large-scale computing power needed for analyzing complicated models,
a link will be built to the evolution@home public global computing system and to
private Condor pools. To efficiently store the results produced, a new standard
for storing and sharing simulation results will be pioneered. The second goal
will be to address combinatorial explosions in genetics and ecology models with
algorithms and representations that work efficiently with both systems biology
and genetics simulations, and that also allow for distributions of event times
other than the standard assumption (exponential). Finally, the project will
apply these new tools to intensely studied biological systems, including growth
of VSV viruses in cells and adaptive evolutionary ecology of copepods (important
zooplankton food source for fish). Close collaborations with neighboring labs
will help shape the development of tools to ensure the resulting cyber-
infrastructure is useful for cutting edge research. Such research is pivotal for
increasing the quantitative rigor, realism and accuracy represented in models
that will become increasingly important for various decision support
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The same language and simulation tools developed
for research will be used to teach graduate and undergraduate students, and
design innovative teaching materials that improve the understanding of
quantitative modeling for diverse audiences. Using "the real thing" is
fascinating and transformational for learning, as witnessed by the rise of "R"
in statistics. Working with K12 teachers, materials will be developed that
explain the importance of good models to a broad audience. To this end, a brief
interactive course with comprehension tests will be implemented to impart basic
modeling knowledge, encourage responsible use of models, and discourage abuse.
Successful completion of the course will provide a "License for Using Models".
This and other teaching tools will be developed and tested on K12 students and
evolution@home participants. The latter contribute CPU power to simulations of
evolution and have a natural interest in models they are simulating, an interest
to be met by an engaging website. The overall vision is to raise awareness for
the importance of good quantitative models. The PI's career is to build such
models. Further information about this project will be available at the PI's lab
page at http://evolutionary-research.net/people/loewe.