* 1149363
* CAREER: Retrieval-Enhanced Learning of Foundational Conceptual Knowledge
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Jeffrey Karpicke, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2018
* USD 866,808.00

This research applies recent findings about the effectiveness of retrieval
practice to science education to determine the impact on students' learning in
introductory undergraduate biology. Retrieval practice is the practice of having
students engage in active reconstruction of their knowledge and has been shown
to have powerful effects on meaningful learning and long-term retention The
project integrates the most robust and effective strategies characteristic of
retrieval practices with science concepts in biology to test for meaningful
learning and long-term retention of knowledge gains. The project assembles an
interdisciplinary Research Advisory Board that includes cognitive scientists and
science educators to help inform and guide the study. It involves approximately,
150-200 undergraduate introductory biology students in the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two aims include:&lt;br/&gt;-Identifying the
best ways to scaffold retrieval practice and use active collaboration to produce
meaningful STEM learning for students with different learning
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;-Establishing the effectiveness of scaffolded
retrieval practice strategies in a large introductory biology
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work connects areas of theory-driven
empirically-grounded psychology with instructional design. Aim 1 focuses on
multiple factors (e.g. cue generation, individual versus collaborative
retrieval, learning styles, and verbal or visual formats), while Aim 2 focuses
on whether retrieval practice is more effective if students engage in retrieval
under different scenarios. Data collection includes short-answer tests,
Pathfinder analysis, and surveys. Data analysis involves analysis of variance,
factorial designs, and post-hoc t-tests to perform pairwise comparisons and
estimates of effect sizes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes and impacts of
this research establish effective retrieval practice strategies for enhancing
conceptual learning of biology concepts, show individual differences based on
reading comprehension, identify the role of learning styles in retrieval, and
outline the feasibility and effectiveness of retrieval practices in increasing
students' success as they progress to higher-level courses in science.