* 1149811
* CAREER:  Exact and Approximate Algorithms for 3D Structure Modeling of Protein-Protein Interactions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Jinbo Xu, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,992.00

Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) play fundamental roles in all biological
processes including the maintenance of cellular integrity, metabolism,
transcription/translation, and cell-cell communication. High-throughput
experimental approaches have been developed to systematically identify PPIs.
However, these methods cannot produce atomic 3D models of PPIs, which hinder
studying PPI molecular mechanisms at atomic level and understanding cellular
processes at molecular level. Atomic structures of PPIs are also important for
rational drug design. High-resolution methods for PPI 3D structure determination
such as X-ray or NMR are time-consuming and sometimes technically challenging,
so computational method is urgently needed for PPI structure modeling.

Intellectual Merit: This proposal studies exact/approximate algorithms for 3D
structure modeling of PPIs, with the ultimate goal to enrich large-scale PPI
networks with high-resolution 3D structure models. The proposal will study 1)
simultaneous threading of all sequences of a target PPI to a complex template;
2) protein complex side-chain packing with a very large rotamer library and more
realistic energy functions; and 3) simultaneous interface threading and side-
chain packing to align distantly-related protein complexes. This proposal will
apply several elegant and powerful techniques such as graph minor theory,
probabilistic graphical models, dual relaxation and decomposition, which are not
well-known in the field, to understanding the mathematical structure of the
problem with more realistic and challenging settings and designing efficient
algorithms.

The expected outcome includes theoretical analysis of protein interfaces and
complexes by graph theory, efficient algorithms for PPI structure modeling and
publicly available software and servers. The resulting software can be used to
verify experimental PPIs and even predict novel PPIs missed by experimental
approaches. The software will benefit a broad range of biological and biomedical
applications, such as gene functional annotation, better understanding of
disease processes, design of novel diagnostics and drugs, personalized medicine
and even bio-energy development. The resulting algorithms and software will be
communicated to the broader community and also be further developed and
disseminated to industry by two companies.

Broader Impact: This work is expected to enrich and disseminate knowledge on
systems biology and structure bioinformatics, machine learning, graph theory and
optimization and further enrich the pedagogical literature. Contributions from
this work to computer science are: understanding of protein graphs using graph
minor theory and graph transformations and solving several computationally
challenging problems by combining techniques from graph theory and continuous
optimization. This research work will train minority students from two HBCU
schools, future K-12 science teachers and students attending the first online
bioinformatics program in Illinois. Students will receive training at the
intersection of biology and computer science. The proposed course materials and
book chapters will be freely available to the public.