* 1149992
* CAREER:   How Do Thermophilic Proteins Withstand High Temperature?
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Kingshuk Ghosh, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 03/31/2018
* USD 500,367.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit: Thermophilic proteins,
primarily extracted from organisms that thrive at very high temperatures,
denature at significantly higher temperatures than mesophilic proteins from
organisms that live at moderate temperatures. One of the long-standing questions
in protein science has been: How do selective pressures, such as environmental
temperature, impinge on the evolution of thermal tolerance in proteins? With the
advent of proteomic and systems level studies that encompass the complete set of
proteins in an organism, the question becomes yet more remarkable: How do cells
grown at high temperatures adapt their entire collection of proteins? While
existing studies are on individual sets of proteins, several experimental data
characterizing different proteomes demand new theoretical modeling and detailed
analysis at a much larger scale to unravel broad scale adaptive strategies that
different organisms may have utilized to withstand such temperature extremities.
Such large scale detailed modeling of numerous proteins will be combined with
experimental observations as part of this project. The novel multi-scale
research will enable computation of several important, hard to measure, yet
analyzed biophysical quantities that are central to protein function and
stability, ultimately dictating biology. Thus the relationship of microscopic
structural features to protein thermodynamics on a global scale will provide
essential clues to protein evolution and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will impact
multiple outreach efforts and new initiatives for education. Concepts of protein
science, directly related to this work will be integrated in these outreach
activities by incorporating in class material, workshop, engaging demonstrations
for general public awareness. Graduate curricula and courses will be designed
for the newly launched Molecular and Cellular Biophysics doctoral program at the
University of Denver in which quantitative modeling in biology including
concepts of protein folding, stability and evolution, will be showcased. Simple
concepts derived from this research in the form of puzzles, animations and
posters will be demonstrated at the science awareness night at the Elitch Garden
amusement park, attended by high school students and teachers. This amusement
park has a broad appeal across ethnic groups and income levels, and reaches
audiences underserved by more traditional outreach methods. These concepts will
also be integrated in a short-term training workshop for secondary educators
from local schools. Undergraduate students at the University of Denver will
carry out parts of the proposal for their senior theses, for which they will be
further trained in scientific writing and presentation skills. Results of the
research, and codes developed to interpret experimental data will be made freely
available online to the global protein science community. Besides immediate
impact on protein science, the research will also impact design of new enzymes
relevant in protein pharmaceuticals as well as biosynthesis of renewable energy
carriers.