* 1149539
* CAREER:  Architectural Support for CPU / GPU Hybridization
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Joseph Zambreno, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 466,312.00

One of the fundamental challenges facing the processor industry today is in
continuing to address performance and scalability demands given the constraints
of both energy and programmer efficiency. This CAREER project builds upon
recently-introduced fused designs, which incorporate conventional
microprocessors and graphics processors in the same package, in order to address
these challenges through the development of more programmable, flexible,
scalable, and secure hybrid architectures. Towards this long-term goal, this
project investigates techniques that minimize limitations of the traditional
coprocessing model, including performance bottlenecks, vulnerable shared memory
spaces, and inflexible resource management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this project explores thread divergence caused by complex control-flow and
memory access, thread migration between cores, hardware accelerator design for
tasks beyond traditional graphics processing, and adding security safeguards to
match what is currently available on conventional microprocessors. In addition,
this project also examines a variety of instruction set extensions, accelerator
architectures, and models of computation that have the potential to lead to
significant efficiency and programmer flexibility improvements. The expected
impact is that this CAREER project will one day bear fruit in the form of
another new segment of the computing industry, one that specializes in hybrid
architectures that can scale to thousands of independent threads, while
maintaining the capabilities of a traditional multi-user operating system and
middleware. Broadly speaking, by advancing the state-of-the-art in computer
architecture, this research will lead to improvements in consumer devices in
terms of size and form factor, energy efficiency and battery life, and
complexity and graphical fidelity of supported applications. Similarly, the
usage of these architectures to enable continued performance scaling has the
potential to have wide-ranging societal impact, through the advancement of those
fields (e.g. bioinformatics, climate modeling, business intelligence) that
utilize high-performance computing to enable innovative discovery. This project
also includes a focus on expanding an existing course that the PI has developed,
that takes a novel approach in introducing graphics processing and architecture
from a hardware design perspective.