* 1149447
* CAREER:  Linking Microbial Phylogenetic and Functional Gene Diversity to Microbial Mat Ecosystem Function Following Environmental Disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Robert Norman, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 739,000.00

Ecosystems are extremely complex entities generated and maintained through the
interactions of numerous abiotic and biotic factors. While many ecosystems have
been characterized based on overall ecosystem function, the role of
microorganisms is often overlooked or oversimplified due to technical and
conceptual challenges. This oversimplification has resulted in ecological models
that do not accurately account for the impacts of biodiversity on ecosystem
function during periods of environmental change. Given that the global
microbiome is the largest biological reservoir on Earth and forms the foundation
of all ecosystems, it is critically important to better understand how
environmental factors trigger changes in microbial community structure and
function and how these changes impact overall ecosystem function. To address
this knowledge gap, this project will utilize technological developments in high
throughput metagenomic and metatranscriptomic DNA sequencing to examine microbes
in a lagoon ecosystem over temporal scales following environmental
perturbations. The objectives of this study are to understand the environmental
cues that trigger taxonomic shifts (e.g. from rare to dominant), to examine the
functional redundancy within rare and abundant taxa, and to explore the link
between community gene expression and taxon-level traits and overall ecosystem
function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will help refine
ecosystem models by defining the links between microbial taxonomic and
functional gene diversity, environmental factors, and rates of ecosystem
processes. Furthermore, by understanding the role of microbial diversity in the
resilience of microbial mat communities in the lagoons, results from the
proposed studies may have a transformative impact on ecosystem science and
evolutionary biology. As a means of integrating cutting edge science into
education, a strong university, community, and international-level outreach
program will be developed to: (1) enhance graduate education by developing a new
molecular microbial ecology course; (2) enhance undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoc laboratory and field experiences; (3) provide local high school students
and teachers with lab and field-based experiences by the expansion of a previous
NSF-supported Young Genomic Scientists Program; (4) enhance environmental
awareness of the general public by generating a microbial mat exhibit to be
displayed at the nationally-renowned EdVenture Children?s Museum (&gt;200,000
visitors per year); and (5) enhance ecosystem awareness of Bahamian children and
science teachers.