* 1149445
* CAREER: Enable Robust Virtualized Hosting Infrastructures via Coordinated Learning, Recovery, and Diagnosis
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Xiaohui Gu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Large-scale virtualized hosting infrastructures have become the fundamental
platforms for many real world systems such as cloud computing infrastructures,
enterprise data centers, educational computing platforms, and data-intensive
computing systems. However, due to their inherent complexity and sharing nature,
hosting infrastructures are prone to various performance anomalies caused by
software bugs or hardware failures. The overarching objective of this proposal
is to systematically explore innovative runtime reliability management
techniques for large-scale virtualized hosting infrastructures. Our research
focuses on handling performance anomalies in distributed systems that are often
very difficult to reproduce offline. The PI plans to combine the power of online
learning, knowledge-driven first-response recovery, and in-situ diagnosis to
handle unexpected system anomalies more efficiently and effectively. She aims at
transforming the runtime system anomaly management from a trial-and-error
guessing game into an efficient knowledge-driven self-healing process.
Techniques developed in this project will generate significant impact on
improving the reliability and diagnosability of many real world hosting
infrastructure systems. The PI plans to develop new course modules and
programming courseware based on the research prototype developed in this
project. The prototype developed in this project will be applied to the Virtual
Computing Lab at NCSU, an educational computing platform for K-12, community
colleges and universities. She will also disseminate her results and collected
data broadly through publication and technology transfer. Developed software
artifacts and experimental datasets will also be released for public use.