* 1149350
* CAREER: Evolutionary genetics of mate discrimination in the fly Drosophila subquinaria
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2020
* Kelly Dyer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,044,000.00

A central goal of evolutionary biology is to understand both how new species
form and the processes that maintain boundaries between species. This study will
investigate the evolutionary genetic patterns of the early versus final stages
of reproductive isolation in the fly Drosophila subquinaria. Some females of
this species display increased behavioral discrimination both against males of a
closely related species as well as against certain males of their own species.
This research will test whether the ecological processes and genetic mechanisms
that reinforce boundaries between different species can result in behavioral
isolation among different populations of the same species. The methods will
integrate field studies, genetic mapping, and evolutionary genomic
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding will integrate research with
teaching and learning to provide research opportunities and to develop
educational materials that advance the understanding of evolutionary processes
at the broader level. Educational activities will translate the focal ideas of
the research into inquiry-based classroom exercises that will help students
understand why evolution is important in their daily lives through learning
about how it operates and the consequences of evolution in action. Graduate
students, undergraduates, and high school teachers will be involved in all
aspects of the scientific research, curriculum development, and public outreach.