* 1149829
* CAREER:   Establishement and Maintenance of an Environmentally-Acquired Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Nicole Gerardo, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 06/30/2018
* USD 818,252.00

Most animals, including humans, have specific associations with beneficial
bacteria that facilitate digestion or provide defense against harmful pathogens
and parasites. While some animals pass these bacteria directly from mother to
offspring, ensuring acquisition, other animals are born bacteria-free and then
must acquire these beneficial partners from the environment. Little is
understood about the process by which organisms establish and maintain these
specialized associations in the face of encountering millions of diverse
environmental microbes. Here, researchers use the relationship between broad-
headed bugs and Burkholderia bacteria to study the ecological, immunological and
evolutionary forces that shape host-microbe specialization. The project will
couple environmental sampling, molecular approaches and experimentation to
explore what benefits the bacteria provide to the host, what bacterial genes
facilitate establishment within the host, and how the host responds to the
introduction of alternative bacteria. This comprehensive approach will provide
insight into how both host and microbial properties shape the establishment and
maintenance of animal-bacteria associations. The project will train
undergraduate and graduate students as well as one postdoctoral fellow. The
researchers will also work with visual arts and biology instructors at both the
undergraduate and middle-school levels to bring science into the art classroom,
facilitating exploration of how art can be used to expose students to science.