* 1149239
* Impact of Atmospheric Trace Elements on the "Third Pole" Glaciers
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2017
* USD 588,746.00

The primary goal of this project is to identify the sources, fluxes, and
spatial/temporal distribution of atmospheric trace elements affecting the
glaciers of the Himalayan and the Tibetan Plateau (the so-called "Third Pole")
from the pre-industrial era (~1500 AD) to present time. An existing set of
unique ice cores retrieved from Guliya (Western Tibetan plateau), Naimona'nyi
and Dasuopu (Central Himalaya), Puruogangri and Dunde (Central and Northern
Tibetean plateau, respectively) will be analyzed for a suite of trace elements,
including Ag, Al, As, Bi, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, In, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb, Rb, Se,
Sb, Sn, Sr, Ti, Tl, U, V, and Zn, using inductively-coupled plasma sector field
mass spectrometry. These data will allow quantification of trace element fluxes
and discrimination, with an unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution, of
their natural background (e.g. crustal and volcanic constituents) components
from the anthropogenic components (e.g. fossil fuel combustion and non-ferrous
metal production).

The assessment of atmospheric trace elements deposition is of great interest to
modelers attempting to trace their sources, transport, and fluxes. The spatial
and temporal characterization of atmospheric pollution at high elevations in the
Third Pole region is needed because recent studies suggest that atmospheric
"brown clouds" deposition to the Himalayan glaciers may affect their energy
balance, resulting in an acceleration of ablation. Knowledge of the initial
quality of the meltwater, resulting from the ongoing shrinking of the glaciers
in the Himalaya, is also important for planning the availability of water
resources for millions of people who live downstream from these glaciers.
Ultimately all these studies serve as a source of fundamental information for
policy makers trying to mitigate the impact of trace metals in the environment.
This project will be developed in the framework of the Third Pole Environment
(TPE) initiative and will reinforce the collaboration between the Byrd Polar
Research Center at The Ohio State University and the Institute of Tibetan
Plateau Research in Beijing (China). The project will support the full
involvement of a post-doctoral scholar and a master's degree student in the
analysis and study of the ice cores. In addition, a specific outreach program
will be developed at the Byrd Polar Research Center: three selected high school
teachers and their classes will become familiar with the research activities.
They will have an opportunity to participate through videoconferencing which
will be recorded and posted online for others to view. Teachers and students
everywhere will benefit from this outreach program by having access to
educational materials developed in this framework, which will be submitted to
the National Science Digital Library and the Ohio Resource Center.