* 1149491
* CAREER:  Tracing the flow of gas from the cosmic web onto galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2018
* Daniel Pisano, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 05/31/2018
* USD 797,504.00

Current theories of galaxy formation predict that the gas supply of galaxies is
continuously replenished by the accretion of gas from the intergalactic medium
and the cosmic web. For low-mass galaxies in low-density environments, most of
this gas remains cool as it falls along filaments onto the galaxy disks. Dr.
Pisano will observe faint neutral hydrogen emission from these systems using
single-dish radio telescopes and next-generation radio interferometers. To date,
such observations have revealed gas clouds around many galaxies, but the
inferred accretion rates are too low to sustain star formation. By mapping the
diffuse gas around galaxies, this project will determine the gas accretion rate
onto local galaxies and, using the demographics of gas around galaxies plus
detailed observations of individual systems, will associated the hydrogen with
either a tidal origin or cold accretion for the first time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help address lagging student achievement in STEM
subjects amongst middle school students, Dr. Pisano and collaborators will
develop an open-ended, inquiry-based educational activity, "What are those
THINGS?" This activity will engage West Virginia middle school students in real
astronomical research using archival multi-wavelength data on the THINGS galaxy
sample followed by the opportunity to use the Skynet remotely-operable
telescopes to acquire their own original optical, infrared, and radio data for
their adopted galaxy. Throughout this activity, trained undergraduate and
graduate students will mentor the middle school students. As such, this activity
will provide inspiration and training to students of all levels to become the
next generation of astronomers and educators.