* 1149383
* CAREER: Real-Time Crowd-Oriented Search and Computation Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* James Caverlee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 01/31/2018
* USD 612,947.00

While long-lived communities have been one of the key organizing principles of
Web-based systems, there is widespread evidence of highly-dynamic, ad-hoc crowd
formation in emerging real-time socio-computational systems. These crowds are
dynamically formed and potentially short-lived, often with only implicit signals
of their formation and evolution. The goal of this research project is to
develop the framework, algorithms, and systems for lightweight crowd-oriented
search and computation so that stakeholders can distill high-quality information
from bursty social systems and actively engage with the crowds generating this
information. First, the project provides the foundation for crowd-oriented
search through new algorithmic advances for distributed crowd indexing and in an
investigation of the design principles impacting crowd-oriented search. Next,
the project develops self-tuning methods for assessing crowd quality, even with
huge demands on efficiency and in the presence of limited evidence of crowd
quality. Finally, the project explores methods for "closing the loop" in crowd-
oriented search, so that crowds may become part of in situ human-computational
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach efforts of the project
are tightly linked to the research goals through leadership workshops,
enhancements to the curricula, direct research training, and engagement with
emergency response experts and major companies. Distilling high-quality
information from bursty social systems and actively engaging with the crowds
generating this information will result in improved real-time decision-making,
impacting a wide range of stakeholders from areas such as epidemiology, law
enforcement, government, finance, politics, among many others. Further
information can be found on the project web page:
http://faculty.cse.tamu.edu/caverlee/csc/.