* 1149397
* CAREER: Securing Mobile Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) Against Stealthy Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Mina Guirguis, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2018
* USD 458,047.00

As Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) employing mobile nodes continue to integrate
into the physical world, ensuring their safety and security become crucial
goals. Due to their mobility, real-time, energy and safety constraints, coupled
by their reliance on communication mediums that are subject to interference and
intentional jamming, the projected complexities in Mobile CPSs will far exceed
those of traditional computing systems. Such increase in complexity widens the
malicious opportunities for adversaries and with many components interacting
together, distinguishing between normal and abnormal behaviors becomes quite
challenging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work in this project falls along
two main thrusts: (1) identifying stealthy attacks and (2) developing defense
mechanisms. Along the first thrust, a unifying theoretical framework is
developed to uncover attacks in a systematic manner whereby an adversary solves
Markovian Decision Processes problems to identify optimal and suboptimal attack
policies. The effects of the attacks are assessed through different
instantiations of damage and cost metrics. Along the second thrust, novel
randomization controllers and randomization-aware anomaly detection mechanisms
are developed to prevent, detect and mitigate stealthy
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this CAREER project will
ultimately provide concrete foundations to build more secure systems in the
areas of robotics, autonomous vehicles, and intelligent transportation systems.
The educational activities--as in curriculum development and hands-on laboratory
experiences--will provide students with the essential skills to build dependable
and trustworthy systems, while ensuring the participation of undergraduates,
women and underrepresented minorities. The outreach activities will expose high
school students to Computer Science education and scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;