* 1149048
* CAREER: Fast algorithms via a spectral theory for graphs with a prescribed cut structure
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,01/31/2019
* Ioannis Koutis, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 01/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Critical applications involving very large data sets require algorithms that run
fast and provide strong performance guarantees. Among the numerous examples are
the analysis of medical scans and the acquisition -via imaging- of connectivity
in neural systems, an important task in current computational neuroscience.
These problems are very often approached by first modeling the data as networks
-also called graphs- and then applying graph-specific algorithms to solve them.
Among many possibilities, algorithms that rely on certain algebraic
representations of graphs have become very appealing due to recent theoretical
progress that renders them very time-efficient. However, efficiency appears to
come at the cost of an occasionally inferior quality in the generated solutions.
Via the proposed extensions of the theory studying these algebraic
representations, the project will design new algorithms with strong guarantees
and wide applicability.

Spectral graph theory studies the connections between algebraic and
combinatorial properties of graphs. It is well known that these connections can
be far from tight. For example, two given graphs may have approximately the same
cuts, but significantly different eigenvalues and eigenvectors. As a result,
spectral algorithms for cut problems on graphs, albeit very fast, do not provide
good approximation guarantees. This project will extend aspects of spectral
graph theory to a spectral theory for cut structures, defined as sets of graphs
with approximately prescribed cuts. The central question of the new theory is:
What kind of spectral properties can be realized by graphs within a given cut
structure?

A goal of the project is to show that any cut structure contains graphs whose
eigenvectors provide tight information about its cuts. The project will also
study algorithms for the efficient computation of these special graphs, by
essentially modifying the spectrum of an input graph without significantly
altering its cuts. Then, the combination of spectral modification and classical
spectral algorithms will yield fast algorithms with enhanced approximation
guarantees. The project will draw from connections of spectral graph theory with
graph decompositions discovered in the context of oblivious routing algorithms.
In turn, it is expected that the project will have an impact on routing problems
too. In later stages the project will study the theoretical limits of spectral
modification. It will also examine the descriptive quality of the developed
theory in the performance of algorithms and other phenomena on interesting
classes of graphs, such as social or biological networks.

The project will freely disseminate prototype implementations of the new
algorithms and will apply them to computer vision and machine learning problems
in industry and academia. Applications will be pursued via selected
interdisciplinary collaborations. The balance between theoretical and applied
work will serve a broader educational effort at both the undergraduate and
graduate level, which will also include the introduction of new courses. A
significant part of the research will be carried out at the University of Puerto
Rico, and so the project is expected to have a significant impact in the
education of underrepresented minorities.