* 1149401
* CAREER: Biomechanical Phenotyping of Contractile Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Jianping Fu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 04/30/2017
* USD 449,115.00

CBET-1149401&lt;br/&gt;Fu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this CAREER
proposal is to investigate mechanical force-mediated biomechanical responses of
vascular smooth muscle cells, a key player in the context of mechanically
exacerbated vascular diseases. Although there have been studies characterizing
cellular responses of vascular smooth muscle cells to mechanical stimuli, the
precise mechanical characteristics of their responses (including their innate
contraction and cell stiffness modulation) remains largely elusive and
uncharacterized. Given the critical involvements of contraction and mechanical
stiffness modulations of vascular smooth muscle cells in regulating
hypertension-induced vascular pathologies, our research is set out to
specifically address this critical knowledge gap by leveraging our demonstrated
expertise in microfabrication and cell mechanics to generate novel
micromechanical tools to investigate force-mediated biomechanical phenotypic
changes of vascular smooth muscle cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomechanical
changes in vascular smooth muscle cell contraction and cell stiffness play an
important functional role in regulating adaptation and remodeling of vessel
walls in hypertension. Thus, a better understanding of the intimate interaction
between external forces and changes in biomechanical properties of vascular
smooth muscle cells will provide critical insights into how vascular smooth
muscle cells transduce these forces and ultimately pave the way to developing
drugs that specifically interfere with pressure-induced vascular pathologies. As
an integral part of this CAREER proposal, a comprehensive education plan will be
developed to target students from different educational levels and genders and
ethnicities. Technologies developed in the context of this CAREER proposal will
be used as vehicles for outreach activities targeting K-12 students in Ann Arbor
and Ypsilanti school districts. We will develop educational modules aimed at
altering preconceptions of science and engineering held by K-12 students. A new
interdisciplinary course in Biomechanics will also be developed as an outcome of
this CAREER proposal.