* 1149678
* CAREER: Integrating Chemical and Biological Catalysis for the Sustainable Production of Biofuels and Commodity Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Brian Pfleger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 410,535.00

CBET 1149678 - Pfleger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program supports a novel
approach to converting lignocellulosic biomass to fuels and chemicals that
bypasses enzymatic saccharification used in glucose centric processes. The PI
hypothesizes that potentially more economical biofuel and biorenewable chemical
processes can be developed by converting lignocellulosic materials to levulinic
acid instead of glucose, and then using a combination of synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering to develop microoganisms to efficiently convert levulinic
acid into the desired hydrocarbon fuel or chemical. Since levulinic acid can be
produced in high yields via the acid hyrolysis of lignocellulose biomass, this
route to biofuels and biorenewable chemicals avoids the costly enzymatic
degradation steps needed in traditional processes to convert biomass into
fermentable sugars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use synthetic
biology to metabolically engineer a bacterium to catabolize levulinic acid as
the sole carbon source for growth and the synthesis of drop-in hydrocarbon
fuels. The proposed work will elucidate a previously unknown biochemical
pathway, examine methods of engineering catabolism, and evaluate an alternative
biomass-to-chemicals process. The proposal builds upon past work to engineer
Escherichia coli to overproduce fatty-acid based products and integrates
established metabolic modeling, biochemistry, systems biology, and genetic
engineering approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of sustainable
chemical production processes will require the training of a new generation of
chemical engineers possessing the ability to apply metabolic engineering and
synthetic biology. To meet this challenge, the PI will redesign a laboratory
course in biochemical engineering, will continue the development of the iGEM
program (international Genetically Engineered Machines) as a model for
interdisciplinary research and education at UWMadison. Through iGEM,
undergraduate teams design, conduct, and communicate experimental research
projects in the field of synthetic biology, and will partner with the NSF-
sponsored Delta program to develop educational materials for introducing younger
students to the concepts of sustainability, bioenergy, engineering, and
synthetic biology.