* 1149252
* CAREER: Foundations for Heterogeneous Datacenter Design and Deployment
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Benjamin Lee, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 02/28/2018
* USD 460,209.00

Over the past 45 years, computer scientists and engineers have transformed
plentiful transistors into computational capability. At present, energy costs
jeopardize further capability scaling, especially in datacenters. Given
constrained datacenter power budgets, which are already at megawatt scales, this
project is developing new paradigms to design and deploy heterogeneous
datacenter architectures to improve energy efficiency by an order of magnitude.
Heterogeneity specializes hardware for particular applications and deploys a mix
of hardware for a mix of application needs. Specialization improves efficiency
as overheads from supporting general, arbitrary computation are reduced. To
realize heterogeneous efficiency, this project is rethinking design and
deployment. Rethinking design to reduce specialization costs, this project is
parameterizing hardware designs to facilitate their re-use, applying statistical
inference to explore design spaces, and clustering applications that have
similar hardware needs to increase each design?s market volume. Rethinking
deployment to reduce performance risk, this project is developing multi-agent
systems that transparently manage and allocate heterogeneous resources to meet
performance targets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to
impact the composition and management of datacenters that underpin cloud
computing. As access to cloud computing is democratized, diverse users will seek
computation. And this project is architecting energy-efficient infrastructure to
provide that computation. The design and deployment of heterogeneous
architectures requires a holistic view of computer systems. The project is
integrating research with curricular development, broadening students? views of
processor, memory, network, and storage. The project is engaging all students at
all levels of education and from all backgrounds, preparing future generations
for computer engineering and research.