* 1149931
* CAREER: Ultrathin Magnetic Ferrite Nanowires for Bioimaging
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,10/31/2019
* Yuping Bao, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 10/31/2019
* USD 493,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program at NSF, will investigate the
formation, structure-magnetic property correlation of the ultrathin (diameter, d
&lt; 4 nm), one dimensional magnetic nanowires. It will further explore their
potential as effective contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In
this CAREER proposal, a new "selective heating" method for the synthesis of
ultrathin magnetic ferrite nanowires will be explored. The key principle to this
new approach is to selectively decompose certain ligands of the precursor
complex based on an understanding of the precursor chemistry, creating a ligand
soft template for ligand-directed growth. The unique spinel structure of ferrite
nanowires makes doping an important parameter to tune their magnetic properties.
Therefore, doping effects on the morphology, structure, and magnetic property of
the ultrathin nanowires at extremely small scale will be systematically
investigated. Finally, the relaxivity of ultrathin iron oxide and doped ferrite
nanowires will be evaluated and further correlated with their structures and
morphologies, establishing a link among synthesis-structure-property-relaxivity.
The relaxivity is a key parameter to evaluate the effectiveness of a contrast
agent in MRI. The proposed studies will significantly advance the field by
unraveling the essential knowledge and design rules for synthesizing ultrathin
nanowires with controlled structural and magnetic properties for various
applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed studies will significantly advance our fundamental understanding of a
new wet chemistry approach to the synthesis of ultrathin nanowires. The
developed synthetic strategies and the underlying mechanisms can be readily
extended to the fabrication of other nanomaterials with similar dimensions.
Beyond bioimaging, these ultrathin magnetic ferrite nanowires have great
potential in gas sensing, photocatalysis, spintronics, and energy. The impact of
this CAREER proposal will be further enhanced through several educational and
outreach activities, including: (1) initiating a "Science Party for Kids"
program with a local (Rock Quarry) Elementary School to introduce science and
engineering concepts to students early; (2) promoting participation of
underrepresented groups in nanomaterials through research programs, lectures,
scientific demonstrations, and professional societies; (3) generating and
disseminating new scientific knowledge resulting from this CAREER proposal
through several avenues, such as peer-reviewed publications, seminars,
conference presentations, teaching, summer school lectures, and websites.