* 1149285
* CAREER: Design Virtualization for Mainstream Programming of Reconfigurable Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Greg Stitt, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2019
* USD 539,001.00

Although reconfigurable computing (RC) devices have been widely shown to have
significant performance and power advantages compared to other computing
devices, mainstream usage of such devices has been resisted due to increased
application design complexity caused by non-mainstream high-level synthesis,
complex low-level debugging, lengthy compilation times often requiring hours or
days, a lack of code portability, prohibitive device costs, among other
challenges. To address these problems, this study introduces RC virtualization
to reduce the semantic gap between high-level applications and physical RC
devices with hundreds of thousands of fine-grained resources. Whereas physical
RC devices must be fine grained for flexibility and cost effectiveness, the
proposed virtual RC devices, which are implemented atop such physical devices,
can be specialized to the needs of different application domains to hide
physical device complexity. As a result, the proposed virtualization enables
rapid RC compilation that can complete in seconds as opposed to hours. Rapid RC
compilation in turn enables mainstream design methodologies for debugging.
Virtualization also enables application portability across physical RC devices,
similar to how virtual machines achieve portable software code, in addition to
tool portability that enables third-party tools to target any RC system.
Finally, by combining virtualization with high-level synthesis from standardized
parallel languages for heterogeneous accelerators (e.g., OpenCL), this study
enables mainstream RC usage by enabling the design flow used by other mainstream
computing devices.