* 1149802
* CAREER: Development of Non-Additive Lipid Force Fields and Application to the Study of Charged Amino Acid Residues in Lipid Bilayers and the Role of Bilayer-Resident Water
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2020
* Sandeep Patel, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2020
* USD 833,661.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Living cells have an inside and an outside,
separated by a barrier called the cell membrane, primarily made of fundamental
units called lipids. Molecules (such as salts, ions, polar molecules) that are
happy (energetically stable) in water are not always happy in a membrane-like
environment. Surprisingly, however, numerous water-loving molecules are found in
the membrane or are known to cross the membrane environment quite easily. Cell
penetrating peptides are observed to readily enter cells. Since water-loving
molecules appear to reside within and transfer through the cell membrane, it is
natural to think that water goes along for the ride. Water has an important role
in these processes. Since it is impossible to see individual water molecules
with laboratory experiments, computer programs will be used to perform what are
known as molecular simulations. These computational methods, incorporating
mathematical descriptions of the physics of how biological molecules interact
with one another, follow the motions of individual molecules in time and space.
This allows researchers to explore the role of water associated with cell
membranes (bilayers) in the transfer of polar and charged molecules through this
environment. The view is at the atomic and molecular level! Novel methods will
be used that have been developed to describe the varying molecular properties of
water and permeating molecules as they move through sharply different
environments. The research will address the interaction between water and lipids
in the membrane. Specifically, does the water present in the local environment
of the permeating molecule support structural changes of the membrane that
stabilize the molecule in the "oily" lipid region? More broadly, understanding
the role of water in differing environments has implications in numerous
scientific and technological contexts (water-mediated self-assembly of
nanoparticles, colloidal suspensions and their role in the environment, etc.),
thus furthering our global understanding of this ubiquitous solvent and its
behavior across different scientifically and technologically important chemical
environments. Application of these novel methods on new computer hardware such
as Graphical Processing Units (GPU's) that are now becoming viable commodity
high-performance computing alternatives for routine computing will be
continued.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the inescapable
current and future requirement for cooperation between the quantitative and
qualitative scientific disciplines to further our understanding of fundamental
biophysical and biochemical processes, two educational/outreach goals will be
established. 1). A multi-disciplinary team consisting of a university professor
and two veteran teachers (of chemistry/physics and biology) will introduce
students at Newark High School (NHS; which serves a substantial population of
minority students and groups underrepresented in science, technology, and
engineering) to an introductory computational chemistry course that will
emphasize a philosophy of multi-disciplinary approaches, combining the skill
sets, tools, and knowledge of the fields of chemistry, biology, physics, math,
and computer science, to understanding fundamental biophysical phenomena. This
will expose students to practical computer tools and skills widely used in
academia and industry. 2). To support the mathematics preparedness of
undergraduate chemistry and biochemistry students at the University of Delaware,
and to spark greater student interest in the pursuit of research in such fields
as biophysics, chemical physics, and computational sciences, an introductory
computational chemistry course will be developed, using state-of-the-art
computers and programs, focusing on mathematics of chemistry to solve problems
of a chemical nature and to prepare students for the mathematical rigor of
Physical Chemistry courses. Such extra preparation and opportunities for
chemistry students to sharpen their basic math skills will make Physical
Chemistry a less burdensome, more enriching (and perhaps fun) experience for
students. Project goals serve to increase students' quantitative reasoning
skills at an early point in their careers, thus establishing a firm platform
from which to pursue numerous avenues of research relevant to future societal
needs.