* 1149307
* EAGER-ORCID: Investigating ORCID as an accelerator of science of science policy
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 09/30/2012
* USD 259,977.00

The ability to attribute the results of scholarship to individual scholars is a
fundamental enabler of a rigorous and data-driven science of science policy; it
enables the automated linkage of research inputs to research outputs in an
accurate and consistent manner. The research explores whether a new researcher
identification and profile system can provide the basis for an automated
attribution system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals are to refine and deploy a
profile system by working with a small number of US research institutions and
the federal government to explore how this system works in practice when used to
acquire and provide access to information about US researchers. This research is
suitable for the EAGER program because it is simultaneously high risk (there are
many ways in which a researcher identity system can fail, including technical,
institutional, and sociological) and high reward (it can fundamentally change
the way in which scientific activity is
documented).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The attribution problem is
extremely complex. There are technical challenges such as how to generate unique
researcher identifiers, match those identifiers with research outputs such as
publications and patents and maintain large numbers of researcher profiles in a
reliable and efficient manner. There are human computer interface issues, such
as privacy concerns and user-friendly claiming mechanisms. There are also
substantive social issues such as incentivizing and rewarding participation as
well as achieving network effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
researcher identifier and profile system to be developed and evaluated in this
project has benefits well beyond science policy. Researcher profiles can be used
to streamline grant application, publication manuscript, and employment
application processes. Researchers could use the approach to include all their
contributions to the scholarly record, such as peer review, data curation, and
software development. By making data about research and researchers more
visible, profiles can also help researchers locate potential collaborators and
develop networks. Research institutions can use such profiles to help them to
evaluate the research outputs associated with specific research teams,
departments, and/or institutions, and to support the job recruitment process. In
all cases, profiles will enable the identification of strong areas of research
and to track the publications of their faculty. Scholarly societies could use
profiles to enhance their public member profiles. Publishers could use profiles
to track authors and reviewers in their journal submission systems, with the
ability to screen effectively for conflicts of interest. Reliable linkage among
articles by the same authors and their collaborators could help promote the
discovery of related scholarly works.