* 1149372
* CAREER: G*: A Parallel System for Efficiently Processing Large Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2019
* Jeong-Hyon Hwang, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2019
* USD 496,648.00

Complex networks such as human social groups, transportation networks and the
World Wide Web are frequently represented as graphs. The goal of this project is
to construct a new system that both conveniently and efficiently executes
queries on collections of large graphs. To achieve this goal, the project
develops data storage and processing techniques that can effectively use a
server cluster.

The project's outcomes include (1) efficient data storage techniques that take
advantage of commonalities between graphs, (2) methods that allow simple
implementations of parallel graph processing solutions, (3) a framework that
accelerates queries on multiple graphs by sharing computations across graphs,
(4) techniques that store data on disks in a manner optimized for query
execution, (5) methods that optimize query execution by appropriately
distributing data over servers, and (6) techniques that mask server failures
while balancing recovery speed and required cost.

This project has significant impacts on many application areas where it is
critical to understand networks of various types. Examples include national
security, social and political studies, transportation and marketing.
Programming assignments and term projects based on this research are developed
for undergraduate/graduate courses on data management systems, distributed
systems and social network analysis. This project also offers research
opportunities to both high school and minority students through summer programs
at the University at Albany, State University of New York. The software,
experimental data and research papers that result from this project will be
disseminated through the project website
(http://www.cs.albany.edu/~jhh/research/G_star/).