* 1149313
* CAREER: Characterizing Critical Aspects of Mathematics Classroom Discourse
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Jessica Bishop, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 02/28/2013
* USD 146,081.00

The research in mathematics discourse has examined important issues in the
characterization of effective teaching ranging from teacher goal setting to
supporting student thinking. Much of this research has focused on describing the
elements of discourse that investigators have posited as contributing to
teaching and learning. This research study systematically expands on the
characteristics of mathematical discourse and examines and specifies
relationships between these descriptive elements across multiple content foci in
mathematics and across a range of teachers at the middle grade levels. The
principal investigator is conducting a microgenetic study based on examination
of video data from multiple routine classroom settings with teachers who
demonstrate varying levels of discourse across three curricular topics in
mathematics. A review of the research literature on classroom discourse, with a
focus in mathematics, supports the development of an analytic framework to
characterize the discourse of both teachers and students in the classrooms. The
discourse patterns from teachers at grades 5, 6 and 7 provide a comparison of
the discourse across upper elementary and middle grade classrooms.

The use of the analytic framework supports the development of metrics that can
reliably measure critical aspects of mathematical discourse. These metrics
examine both the function of the discourse in the classroom and the mathematical
intellectual work that the discourse supports. The researcher builds on the
analytic framework and resulting metrics to redesign courses offered to pre-
service and practicing teachers in the university teacher education program. The
resulting framework and redesigned teacher education courses will provide models
on which other teacher education programs might build. The redesign of the pre-
service and in-service courses effectively integrates the research into
education.