* 1149160
* CAREER:  The domesticated pigeon as a model for avian genetics and diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Michael Shapiro, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 985,643.00

Remarkably little is known about the number and types of genetic mutations that
control differences within and among species. This project takes advantage of
the diversity among the 350+ breeds of domestic pigeon - many of which show
spectacular diversity in color, feather, and skeletal traits - to identify the
genes that control variation in this species. Experimental crosses between
dissimilar pigeon breeds will be used to determine the number and chromosome
location of genes controlling interesting traits. Additionally, the genomes of
many different breeds will be surveyed to find the specific mutations that
control variation. Importantly, many of the traits that vary among pigeon breeds
also vary among wild species of birds and other animals; thus, new insights
gleaned from pigeons will yield a better general understanding of animal
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pigeon is already an important model
organism in biology and medicine, and this project will potentially expand other
research programs by providing new tools for genetic analyses. The educational
plan of this project will also have local, national, and global impacts. A
centerpiece of this plan is a new computer-based virtual pigeon breeder game
that will be installed on the Utah Genetic Science Learning Center's highly
successful website. These and other new educational materials will be targeted
at a diverse community and broad age range, promote critical thinking and self-
directed learning, and key components of this plan will be accessible via the
Internet to reach millions of people worldwide.