* 1149465
* TC: Small: THWART: Trojan Hardware in Wireless ICs - Analysis and Remedies for Trust
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Yiorgos Makris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 455,809.00

Towards enhancing trustworthiness of wireless integrated circuits, this project
investigates the problem of hardware Trojans in the analog/RF domain. Hardware
Trojans are maliciously-intended modifications to fabricated integrated
circuits, making them capable of additional functionality which is unknown to
the designer and user, but which can be exploited by the perpetrator after chip
deployment to sabotage or incapacitate it, or to steal sensitive information.
The motivation for this research is two-fold: First, partly because of design
outsourcing and migration of fabrication to low-cost areas across the globe, and
partly because of increased reliance on external intellectual property and
design automation software, the integrated circuit supply chain is now
considered far more vulnerable to such malicious modifications than ever before.
Second, wireless integrated circuits constitute an indispensable part of modern
electronic systems and their ability to communicate data (possibly encrypted)
over public channels makes them a prime attack candidate. To address this
problem, this project focuses on (i) delineating the threat and potential impact
of hardware Trojans in wireless cryptographic ICs, (ii) elucidating the
shortcomings of existing test methods in exposing them, (iii) developing
preventive countermeasures for obfuscating the chip design and complicating the
development of hardware Trojans, and (iv) devising efficient hardware Trojan
detection methods based on statistical analysis and machine learning. The
anticipated impact of this research lies in the attainment of a better
understanding of the hardware Trojan threat and in the development of
appropriate remedies, thus enabling secure deployment of wireless integrated
circuits and fostering technology trustworthiness.