* 1149078
* CAREER: Neural processes that influence the contents of working memory
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Susan Ravizza, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 04/30/2018
* USD 725,395.00

Working memory is the ability to store and manipulate information that is not
currently present in the environment, but exists in the mind. Working memory is
important to understand, because it is the foundation for reasoning,
mathematics, learning a language, and other cognitive processes that involve the
integration and manipulation of information stored in memory. With funding from
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Susan Ravizza of the Michigan State
University is investigating how people are able to keep important information
active in their mind and not deplete limited memory capacity in storing
unimportant information. The project focuses on two abilities that could help to
determine which information gets stored in working memory. One ability directs
attention to salient information in the environment, and Dr. Ravizza and her
laboratory are investigating if brain activity in a region called the "temporal
parietal junction" signals to orient attention to this information. Another
ability gates information, and the researchers are investigating if brain
activity in the basal ganglia "opens the gate" to allow important information
into working memory or "closes the gate," so that irrelevant information is
excluded from working memory. How these two brain components, attention and
gating, work together so that working memory capacity is used effectively is
being investigated as well. These studies are using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) of brain activity while people are in the process of
storing and recalling information. In addition to studying healthy participants,
analyses of individuals with Parkinson's disease, who have basal ganglia
dysfunction, are providing further insight into the basic mechanisms of working
memory performance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is investigating a brain
model of how information gains access to working memory through specific brain
mechanisms. The research is helping to explain why unexciting information is
more likely to be forgotten, and how attention to distracting information
reduces memory performance. Understanding the mechanisms by which task-relevant
information is stored in the presence of distracting information has increased
in importance. Given that distracting information is becoming more common in
environments such as the workplace, the car, and the classroom, the broader
impacts of this research are likely to be significant. For example, social
networking (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) during class could interfere with working
memory abilities that are needed to learn in the classroom. The results of this
research could suggest, for example, that strategies to improve memory should
target the ability to ignore distracting information rather than trying to
increase absolute storage capacity. This knowledge has potential to impact
education by promoting awareness of the detrimental effects of distraction and
could serve as the basis for informed policies regarding social networking in
the classroom or workplace. In addition, the studies of patients with
Parkinson's provide basic knowledge about the type of memory impairments
experienced with basal ganglia damage.