* 1149601
* CAREER: Improving the Development Process for Context-Aware Systems with Integrated Capture and Playback
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Mark Newman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2018
* USD 454,838.00

Cheap sensors, high-speed wireless networks, and mobile device technologies are
opening up new possibilities for human-computer interaction and are enabling
important applications in areas such as health care, collaborative work, and
sustainable resource use. Yet we still lack appropriate tools and methods for
the design and development of applications that take advantage of these
capabilities, hampering our ability to realize the technology's potential. When
working with "context-aware" systems -- i.e., systems that sense and respond to
the situations in which they are used, such as the user's current location,
concurrent activities, or social setting -- it can be especially challenging to
evaluate early-stage prototypes due to the difficulty of re-creating the
anticipated context of use during development time. As a result, designers are
forced to invest excessive effort into building robust, deployable prototypes
early in the development process, resulting in premature commitment to
inadequately explored design choices and an inability to apply best practices
for user-centered design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project
is to improve user-centered software development practices for context-aware
applications by providing support for the systematic capture and reuse of
contextual data throughout the development process. While previous efforts to
support context-aware development have sought to make it easier to take
prototypes into the field for testing, this approach seeks to "bring the field
into the lab" by providing continuously available representations of an
application's anticipated context of use. Such representations can be used for
exploring and validating design alternatives with as little effort as possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's RePlay system provides baseline support for the
capture and playback of sensor traces representing an application's context, and
will be extended through this research to include support for the capture and
use of large sensor trace datasets; rapid, parallel prototyping of both
interactive and infrastructure components of context-aware systems; and the
ability to re-create complex contextual conditions during controlled user tests
to an extent not currently possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
PI's educational mission is to prepare rising HCI professionals for the
constantly changing world of technology they will face throughout their career.
As part of this project, he will develop teachable methods for integrating data
capture, context representation, and novel forms of user testing into software
design and development practice. These methods will be incorporated into
existing design and evaluation courses at the graduate and undergraduate levels.
Broader impacts will be obtained by sharing course materials, along with the
tools described above, with educators and practitioners via the web. The PI also
plans to present tutorials and workshops on the use of capture and playback
tools during design at meetings and conferences hosted by professional design
organizations.