* 1149667
* CAREER:  Mechanisms of feeding behavior regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Anupama Dahanukar, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,179,282.00

Animals regulate the quality and quantity of their food intake to maintain
nutrient homeostasis. Although studies on regulation of feeding behavior have
focused on central feedback mechanisms that control appetite, some evidence
suggests that peripheral sensory activity is modulated under certain conditions.
That such modulation can be specific - carbohydrate deprivation causes increased
sensitivity to sugars and protein deprivation causes increased sensitivity to
amino acids - argues for the existence of mechanisms that target the activity of
receptors or cells that recognize specific categories of taste chemicals. In
insects, the levels of macronutrients in the hemolymph are known to sway the
responsiveness of taste neurons, however the molecular mechanisms by which this
occurs are poorly understood. This project investigates the hypothesis that
members of a large, divergent family of Gustatory receptor (Gr) genes are
regulatory targets of pathways that operate to sense internal nutritional needs.
In addition, genome-wide approaches will be applied to identify novel genes that
are differentially regulated by changes in nutrient demand. These studies will
determine the importance of Gr regulation under different physiological
conditions and establish a foundation for inquiry into the molecular
underpinnings of compensatory food selection and
intake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will generate broader impact
through an educational plan that provides hands-on research experience to
several early-career undergraduate students from under-represented groups
through a summer research program. The project will also provide training for a
graduate student and a postdoctoral scientist. Each year two undergraduate
students will be selected to participate in a follow-up research training
program during which time they will engage in genetic screens to identify loci
involved in regulating feeding behaviors. All participants will engage in near-
peer mentoring and annual assessment will be used to develop effective ways with
which to integrate research training with science education and career guidance.
The data generated from this project will be made available through scientific
publications and deposition in public databases.