* 1149756
* CAREER:  Modern Numerical Matrix Methods for Network and Graph Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2019
* David Gleich, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 04/30/2019
* USD 568,943.00

Connected data is a hallmark of the Internet age. We now have an unprecedented
ability to collect information i) on social relationships from websites like
Facebook; ii) on connections between ideas from hyperlinked repositories such as
Wikipedia; iii) on links between scientific fields from online cross-referenced
citation databases; iv) on interactions between proteins in biology; and v) even
on the connections in the human brain. Network computations, such as finding the
most important people, ideas, papers, or the most important connections, help
refine these raw collections of information into meaningful summaries.
Consequently, making these computations fast and efficient will help produce
scientific insights from the growing plethora of data
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A highly successful paradigm for stating network
computations is as the solution of a matrix problem. For instance, such an
approach was the heart of Google's celebrated PageRank algorithm for finding the
most important pages on the web. Modern connected data, however, is so large
that it has eclipsed the ability of even the best algorithms from the 20th
century to cope. Interesting network computations have become more complicated
as well. The investigator will study a new class of algorithms to compute
nonlinear functions of matrices, such as the matrix exponential. The matrix
exponential has many uses; for example, it underlies many new computations
designed to identify the most important relationships in neural networks.
Standard techniques for the matrix exponential involve examining all of the
connections at each step (and there could be hundreds or thousands of steps),
only to highlight a few pieces of information. A more recent paradigm, called
local computations, only utilizes the connections from a few entities (in the
matrix, they only look at a few rows or columns) at a time. The goal of this
research is to design new algorithms for the matrix exponential and other
functions of matrices in the local computations paradigm. These new algorithms
will be able to operate on the world's largest networks quickly (ideally in
seconds or minutes), and help application specialists study their data in new
ways. Three driving applications will be ranking and voting, link prediction,
and brain networks. The investigation will also include the study of higher-
order connections in networks that give rise to three or four dimensional
matrices -- commonly called tensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the software
developed for this research will be made available in a software package for
local computations of matrix functions. The investigator will present tutorials
on this software package to ensure that researchers across many disciplines can
utilize the outcome of this research. To ensure that this research reaches
students across many disciplines, the investigator will develop a graduate
course on the use of matrix methods for network computations. Finally, given the
growing importance of network data, the investigator will develop a module for
high school students to show how solving systems of equations, part of the core
high school curriculum, can be used to analyze information networks.