* 1149260
* CAREER: Discovering Common Human Brain Architecture
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Tianming Liu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 459,279.00

Is there a common human brain architecture that can be quantitatively encoded
and precisely reproduced across individuals? This CAREER project aims to
discover and represent common human brain architecture through a map of Dense
Individualized and Common Connectivity-based Cortical Landmarks (DICCCOL). Each
of the landmarks will be defined by group-wise consistent white matter fiber
connection patterns derived from diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data. In
parallel, large-scale multimodal fMRI and DTI datasets will be employed to
determine predictive relationships between DICCCOLs and functional
localizations. The resulting DICCCOL representation of common brain architecture
will be applied to create a universal and individualized brain reference system,
construct human brain connectomes, and elucidate the brain's functional
interactions. The education objective of this CAREER project is to create and
assess a fundamentally novel interdisciplinary higher education approach,
namely, transformative interdisciplinary group learning (TIGL). Students and
instructors from three courses that are related but emerge from different
disciplinary perspectives (Biomedical Image Analysis, Introduction to MRI
Physics, and Functional Brain Imaging) will work together in one classroom.
During these common sessions, the students will have synergistic learning
activities, engage in interdisciplinary group discussions, and design and
conduct interdisciplinary group projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery and
representation of common brain architecture will fundamentally advance
scientific understanding of the human brain. Broad dissemination of the DICCCOL
map and its prediction framework will transform numerous applications that rely
on structural/functional correspondences across individuals. The DICCCOL map
offers a generic bridge to compare and integrate neuroimaging data across
laboratories, which will stimulate and enable plentiful collaborative efforts.
While this project has a focus on brain imaging, the general methodology of
predictive modeling of structure and function is expected to influence many
other imaging domains. The TIGL approach will advance fundamental understanding
of interdisciplinary learning. The TIGL approach will be scaled up to other
institutions and disciplines, and will be widely disseminated. This continuous
effort will establish the TIGL approach as a general interdisciplinary education
methodology to increase the capacity of the next generation of scientists who
have an interdisciplinary mindset.