* 1149299
* CAREER: Deep sparse dictionary context models and their application to image parsing and neuron tracking for connectomics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Tolga Tasdizen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 409,406.00

The research objective of this proposal is to create novel computational
algorithms and image processing tools that will make it possible for biologists
to reconstruct large-scale neural circuits from electron microscopy volumes.
Electron microscopy is a key technology in reconstruction of neural circuits at
the level of individual neurons and synapses, also known as connectomics. While
an important motivation of connectomics is providing anatomical ground truth for
neural circuit models, the ability to decipher neural wiring maps at the
individual cell level is also important in studies of many neurodegenerative
diseases. State-of-the-art image analysis solutions are still far from the
accuracy and robustness of human vision and biologists are still limited to
studying small neural circuits using mostly manual analysis. The proposed
computational models will provide biologists a tool for segmenting individual
neurons and detecting other structures such as synapses in very large electron
microscopy volumes, and proof reading these automatically produced results in a
time efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconstruction of a neural circuit
from an electron microscopy volume involves pixel-by-pixel annotation of these
images into classes such as cell membrane, mitochondria and synaptic vesicles
and the segmentation of individual neurons in three dimensions. This task
demands extremely high accuracy. Even with 99% pixel accuracy, an acceptable
accuracy for many other applications, it is virtually certain that almost every
neuron in a volume will be incorrectly segmented due to their global, tree-like
structure and correspondingly large surface area. Therefore, lack of reliable
automated solutions is a critical bottleneck in the field of connectomics. In
this project, a novel hierarchical model will be created by combining the
representation power of sparse dictionaries and their ease of learning with an
inference and proof reading capability. Human experts will contribute to the
process by providing ground truth for supervised learning and proof reading of
automatically produced results. The combination of deep sparse dictionaries with
inference using connection weights from conditional probabilities can provide a
very fast way to learn hierarchical models. Several variants of the model will
be studied for understanding the relative importance of feature representation,
inference, symmetric connections, deep and lateral connections. The model will
be applied to general object classification and image parsing problems in
computer vision as well as connectomics datasets. Success will be evaluated on
real datasets annotated by experts.