* 1149837
* CAREER: Mining structure and dynamics of groups of nodes in real-world networks
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Jurij Leskovec, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 540,728.00

Social, technological, information and biological systems can be studied as
graphs, where nodes represent entities (i.e., people, websites) and edges
represent interactions (friendships, communication). The project aims to analyze
and discover explanatory and predictive models of networked systems, such as
large groups of people and societies, or large biological and technological
systems, in order to understand their structure and make predictions about their
global dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies the structure and
dynamics of communities of nodes, with the goal to invent novel network
community detection methods and build predictive models of behavior of groups of
nodes. The proposed research has three main thrusts: (1) Structure and discovery
of network communities, (2) Dynamics and "health" of network communities, and
(3) Supervised community detection in networks with rich node and edge metadata.
The research focuses on harnessing massive network datasets, as certain
behaviors and patterns are observable only when the amount of data is large
enough. The intellectual focus of the project is on increasing the expressivity
of the models to also include rich node and edge metadata and explore the
connections between the network structure and the attributes/features of nodes
and edges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan provides for rich research
experiences and helps students develop the interdisciplinary attitudes and
skills needed for this work through courses that look at real-world network
problems and data. An integral part of this proposal is public release of
datasets and computational tools for analysis of large networks. Additional
information about the project including publications, data sets, source code,
and educational materials can be accessed through the project website at
http://snap.stanford.edu.