* 1149591
* CAREER: A Parallel Computational Framework of Multiscale Geometric Modeling and Mesh Generation for Cardiac Biomechanics Application
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Yongjie Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 428,000.00

The overall goal of this CAREER project is to establish a novel parallel
computational framework of multiscale geometric modeling and mesh generation
that can be applied to cardiac biomechanics applications. This capability will
enable accurate, stable, efficient simulations of many biological processes such
as calcium (Ca2+) mediated signaling, excitation-contraction coupling and energy
metabolism in cardiac muscle cells, and lead to great advances in cardiac
biomechanics. In cardiac muscle cells, Ca2+ is best known for its role in
contraction activation. Alterations in Ca2+ distributions are now recognized to
be the primary mechanisms of cardiac dysfunction in a diverse range of common
pathologies including cardiac arrhythmias and hypertrophy. To predict and
analyze how Ca2+ dynamics and cardiac excitation-contraction coupling are
regulated, modeling of realistic geometries of large, complicated t-tubule
network and associated protein complexes is needed. However, previous studies
have been limited to simplified geometries. In this project, the PI focuses on
1) multiscale geometric modeling for protein complexes starting from atomic
resolution data in the Protein Data Bank; 2) parallel mesh generation with
topology ambiguity resolved and curvature-driven quality improvement; and 3)
model validation in adaptive finite element analysis of Ca2+ signaling in
ventricular myocytes with complicated realistic geometry. To handle such large,
complicated systems, multicore parallel meshing toolkits will be developed and
encapsulated with the simulation software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will attain the highest degree of accuracy, efficiency and robustness
in model development and simulation. It will significantly advance predictive
capability in cardiac applications, and the understanding of anatomical and
physiological properties at molecular and cellular scales. This parallel
computational infrastructure can also be used for other complicated systems,
providing engineers and scientists with novel technologies to construct accurate
computer models. Furthermore, this interdisciplinary project will integrate
research and education via novel educational tool and curriculum development as
well as outreach activities. Students will interact with collaborative
institutions to gain firsthand experience of real issues. Women, minority groups
and high school students will be included in the proposed research and education
activities through CMU's K-12 Programs. Education activities will be assessed in
conjunction with CMU's Eberly Center for Teaching Excellence.