* 1149882
* CAREER: New Directions for Metric Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Kilian Weinberger, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 10/31/2015
* USD 478,280.00

Quantifying similarity is a fundamental challenge in artificial intelligence and
machine learning which - if performed perfectly - would reduce many tasks to a
trivial nearest neighbor search. For example, determining whether an email were
spam would be as simple as searching a labeled database of emails and assigning
it the same label (spam or not) as the email considered most similar to it. But
how can one measure the similarity of two email messages? Does the same
measurement still apply when comparing medical images? How does our
understanding of similarity depend on the problem specification? Metric learning
optimizes distance functions specifically for a given task, taking into account
both the learning problem and the data. Initial successes with linear metrics
show great improvements on many "k-nearest neighbors"-based learning tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues four research directions that
strengthen the theoretical understanding of metric learning within the research
community, broaden its impact and significantly improve the current state-of-
the-art: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Are there non-linear transformations that lead
to equally elegant and efficient optimization problems as existing linear
metrics? As data sets grow and become increasingly complex, linear metrics are
no longer sufficient to capture similarity relations. By exploring the use of
non-linear metrics, this research can substantially improve the impact of metric
learning and the accuracy of similarity relations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Can
the impact of metric learning be extended to machine learning frameworks beyond
nearest neighbors? Designing new metric learning algorithms that explicitly
optimize distances for a broad variety of machine learning algorithms will
significantly increase the number of applications and learning methods that can
directly benefit from metric learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Can metrics be
learned from weak supervision? Removing the dependency on labeled data will
reduce the cost of metric learning and increase its applicability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Can one develop a solid theoretical framework to
explain preliminary empirical successes and to direct future research? This will
strengthen the theoretical understanding of metric learning within the research
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful resolution of the proposed problems
will lead to novel learning methods which will be immediately applicable to
ongoing high-impact medical research collaborations of the principal
investigator. In conjunction with these research directions, the principal
investigator will also pursue educational goals, including the co-development of
a K-12 curriculum module estimated to impact 2,500 high-school students. Many
topics in the proposed research plan have components ideal for introducing the
research process to undergraduate and graduate students, and the principal
investigator plans to use his research as a vehicle to instruct and inspire
future computer scientists and next-generation researchers.