* 1149328
* CAREER:   Virtual Microbe:   Biophysical Modeling of Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Kerwyn Huang, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2017
* USD 619,996.00

Intellectual Merit: Regulation of cell shape defined by a cytoskeleton, cell
wall, or the extracellular environment is carried out in individual cells and
tissues from all biological kingdoms. Robust, accurate bacterial growth requires
sophisticated choreography of the cytoskeleton and cell-wall synthesis to
control cell shape and maintain structural integrity, as changes in bacterial
cell shape have critical consequences for motility, immune system evasion,
proliferation, and adhesion. For most bacteria, the cell wall determines cell
shape, although the detailed mechanisms of growth and shape maintenance remain
elusive. This research will produce a versatile biophysical modeling framework
bridging the fundamental principles of cell-shape determination at the molecular
and cellular scales. Three critical biological challenges will be addressed: (i)
the integration of cytoskeletal mechanics and dynamics with cell-wall growth,
(ii) the incorporation of multilayered cell-wall growth to investigate the
growth patterns of thick-walled bacteria, and (iii) the elucidation of how cells
constrict during division. Each project will interrogate the roles of
intracellular spatial organization, mechanical forces, and kinetics to provide
theoretical predictions for experimentation. In total, this research aims to
discover the simple physical rules that allow cells to achieve robust, shape-
preserving growth across kingdoms. This approach should reveal general physical
principles of cell growth that fundamentally link the molecular structure of the
cytoskeleton, mechanisms of cell-wall synthesis, and the coordination of
organismal-scale behavior, empowering the deconstruction of the evolutionary
origin of cell shape and tissue polarity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The PI will construct a wiki containing introductory lectures on bacterial
morphogenesis available to the microbiology community and other educational
institutions worldwide. In addition, the PI will distribute a computational
platform for evaluating models of cell-shape determination, and will run an
annual workshop on its implementation to aid in development of other models.
This software will also serve as a platform for a high-school educational module
regarding elastic networks. The PI will continue to pursue elementary-school
outreach, undergraduate and graduate education, and campus-wide community
building. The PI's core class on the Physical Biology of Cells, the foundation
for the new Bioengineering undergraduate major at Stanford, integrates and
motivates chemistry, physics, mathematics, and computer science through
biological models. The PI's class on Computational Modeling of Microbial
Communities (registered jointly in Bioengineering and Microbiology) will utilize
project-based learning to motivate the students to employ computational modeling
of metagenomics, imaging, and transcriptomics datasets and to disseminate their
results. The PI will partner with a nearby group of ethnically and economically
diverse fifth graders; the students will collect ecological samples of local
microbial communities and visit Stanford to image their samples and to explore
the microbial world through hands-on learning. The PI has also demonstrated a
commitment to women and students from underprivileged socioeconomic backgrounds,
both from Stanford and from neighboring schools in the Bay Area, through
mentorship of undergraduates and graduate students and other outreach
activities. Collectively, these efforts will achieve considerable progress
toward a fundamental understanding of the unexplored frontiers of bacterial
morphogenesis and integrate physics and mechanics with traditional
microbiological approaches. Moreover, these theoretical approaches have direct
applicability to synthetic biology, cellular community design, and the control
of bacterial growth.