* 1149853
* CAREER: Representing, Understanding, and Enhancing Scenes at the Internet-Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2012,06/30/2016
* James Hays, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2016
* USD 486,222.00

CAREER: Understanding, Representing, and Enhancing Scenes at the Internet-
scale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photography has an enormous impact on society -- it
is our primary visual history and a medium for storytelling, entertainment, and
art. But our visual world is extraordinarily complex which makes it difficult
for computer vision to understand photos and for computer graphics to synthesize
visual content. However, the emergence of Internet-scale photo collections in
recent years enables new research directions. We use scene-based representations
to leverage Internet-scale data. Scenes (places or environments) are the context
in which all other visual phenomena exist and it seems possible to brute-force
the space of scenes -- with millions of scenes, we find qualitatively similar
scenes and create massively data-driven algorithms with capabilities that are
complementary to typical bottom-up graphics and vision pipelines. The underlying
principle of this study is that joint investigations of scene representations
and large image databases will advance the state-of-the-art in graphics and
vision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, we are investigating detail synthesis tasks
which alleviate camera shake, motion blur, defocus, atmospheric scattering, or
low resolution. Scene representations are robust enough to find matching scenes
in Internet-scale photo collections even in the presence of dramatic blurring.
These matching scenes provide a context-specific statistical model which can be
used to insert convincing texture and object detail. Second, we are studying
attribute-based representations of scenes. We use crowdsourcing to discover
attributes and build large databases for the community. Attributes are a
powerful intermediate representation for the next generation of big data imaging
research which can have broad societal impact through applications such as
robotics, security, assistance to vision-impaired, and vehicle safety. The
investigators also are developing a new introductory course for Brown students
to explore big data computing across scientific disciplines and are creating an
online community for visual computing education to benefit students interested
in photography and programming.