* 1149646
* CAREER: Development of Earth-Abundant Mixed-Metal Sulfide Nanoparticles for use in Solar Energy Conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Katherine Plass, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) program of the
Division of Chemistry will support the CAREER research and education project of
Prof. Katherine Plass of Franklin &amp; Marshall College. Prof. Plass and her
undergraduate researchers will develop new syntheses of inexpensive
nanoparticles designed to act as light-absorbers in photovoltaics. Specifically,
the Plass group will create solid solutions consisting of highly abundant
elements. This will afford nanoparticles with band gaps tunable from the near-
infrared to the ultraviolet region, thereby enabling construction of low-cost
nanoparticle-based multijunction photovoltaics. To create these compounds, the
team will design precursors that induce cations with different sizes and
affinities to react to form sulfides at similar rates. Surface chemistry and
film formation will be studied to create chemically stable nanoparticle films
that have the necessary high conductivities to efficiently collect
photogenerated charges. Finally, photovoltaic devices will be constructed using
these nanoparticles made from earth-abundant elements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will carry out the research, author
publications, and present results at national meetings, positioning them well
for entry into graduate school. The undergraduate researchers performing this
work represent the newest generation of well-trained scientists interested in
using chemistry to develop renewable energy. Alternative energy research in
general and this work in particular will be incorporated into undergraduate
classes and outreach activities with the North Museum of Natural History &amp;
Science aimed at the general public and local grade school students.