* 1150872
* CAREER: Floer Homology and Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2018
* Matthew Hedden, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2018
* USD 433,969.00

This project studies the topology and geometry of low-dimensional manifolds and
the knots and surfaces embedded therein. Specific goals include a classification
of knots in the 3-dimensional sphere which produce simple manifolds under
surgery, topological characterization of knots which bound complex curves inside
complex surfaces, and a deeper understanding of the structure of cobordism
groups of knots and 3-manifolds. Primary tools for this study arise in
symplectic geometry, gauge theory, and quantum algebra. Many of these tools come
in the form of algebraic invariants e.g. Floer homology theories or
combinatorial knot invariants such as Khovanov homology. The project also seeks
to further our understanding of the invariants themselves, and a central theme
is to determine the extent to which they faithfully represent the topological
objects which they shadow. The specific mathematical goals of the project are
complemented by concrete initiatives targeted at graduate and undergraduate
education, together with activities aimed at an international community of
topologists and geometers. For instance, a new graduate course will be designed
and implemented whose dual focus is on the development of topological breadth
and communication skills in a variety of scenarios. A summer school for
undergraduates and a broad-interest conference on topology will be organized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topology and geometry are mathematical fields
which study shapes and spaces, and low-dimensional topology focuses on those
shapes which are within or just out of reach of our vision. This project makes
fundamental contributions to low-dimensional topology. One of the key problems
that the project attacks is the mathematical theory of "knotting", an area which
attempts to understand and quantify the method by which ideal strings become
tangled and knotted in space. In addition to a fundamental role which knotting
plays in low-dimensional topology, its theory has deep interactions with many
seemingly unconnected areas of mathematics and physics, and even to areas such
as polymer science. One of the central aims of the project is to understand how
knots evolve over time. Imagine a movie in which a piece of string freely moves
in space, becoming more or less tangled over time. Further imagine that at some
frames in the movie more drastic phenomena occur such as the appearance or
disappearance of a new loop of string or the gluing of two segments of the
string together. Such a movie is called a "concordance", and using this idea one
can treat knotted pieces of string in much the same way that we treat numbers;
namely, one can add and subtract knots in an algebraic way. Understanding the
arithmetic of knots turns out to have deep implications for the study of
4-dimensional space, one of the most difficult and least understood areas of
modern mathematics. In addition to its specific mathematical aims, the project
will also contribute in a significant way to graduate and undergraduate
education and to a global research community through design and organization of
innovative courses, workshops, and conferences.