* 1150085
* CAREER: Enhancing molecular recognition biosensing with nanopore force measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Jason Dwyer, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 04/30/2018
* USD 407,977.00

1150085&lt;br/&gt;Dwyer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological function emerges from a
crowded, complex environment in which the exquisite&lt;br/&gt;progression of
intra- and intermolecular transformations is choreographed by the energy
landscape&lt;br/&gt;between interacting species. Molecular recognition exploits
highly evolved molecular sensitivity to this&lt;br/&gt;interaction energy to
allow biological systems to respond selectively to low-level molecular signals
in a&lt;br/&gt;noisy molecular background. The goal of this proposal is to
develop a technique that can probe these&lt;br/&gt;interaction energies,
enabling both the fundamental atomic-level understanding of molecular
recognition&lt;br/&gt;and its direct application for highly sensitive and
selective biosensing. The core of this proposal is the&lt;br/&gt;development and
application of nanopore force spectroscopy (NFS), a technique that enables
molecular&lt;br/&gt;interactions to be probed on the single molecule level.
Nanopores?molecular-scale holes in insulating&lt;br/&gt;membranes?enable single
molecule sensing without the cost or complexity of single molecular
optical&lt;br/&gt;techniques. While sensitive, nanopores lack robust native
chemical selectivity. Aptamer molecular&lt;br/&gt;recognition agents will be
combined with NFS to overcome this deficiency. In addition, NFS will
be&lt;br/&gt;developed as a tool to probe and exploit broad classes of receptor-
ligand interactions.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will progress from NFS-
based measurements of fundamental aptamer&lt;br/&gt;properties such as
conformational stability in the absence of target to characterizing
aptamer&lt;br/&gt;performance enhancements that leverage the unique molecularly-
constrained and chemically tunable&lt;br/&gt;NFS sensing environment. Following
these initial control experiments, NFS measurements of
aptamertarget&lt;br/&gt;interactions will be used to optimize experimental
conditions and then to explore the limits of&lt;br/&gt;aptamer-NFS sensitivity
and selectivity. The unique opportunities presented by the constrained
nanopore&lt;br/&gt;environment will then be explored through nonlocalized
surface functionalization in which surface charge&lt;br/&gt;is varied. This will
provide the basis for the subsequent development and characterization of site-
selective&lt;br/&gt;surface functionalization in the nanopore interior. The
insights that will emerge relating to chemistry in&lt;br/&gt;constrained
environments will be generally useful to the nanofabrication community. The
effect of local&lt;br/&gt;surface chemical modification of the solid-state
nanopores on aptamer-NFS will then be explored before a&lt;br/&gt;model drug-
screening assay will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
research is captured in the following points:&lt;br/&gt;(1) The development and
demonstration of nanopore force spectroscopy as a general method
for&lt;br/&gt;exploring and exploiting receptor-ligand interactions will (i)
introduce a new tool to the force&lt;br/&gt;measurement toolbox?one with unique
tunable nanoscale properties and (ii) dramatically extend&lt;br/&gt;the utility
of nanopore methods. In contrast to other force methods such as atomic force
microscopy&lt;br/&gt;(AFM), NFS constrains molecules in a well-defined,
molecular-scale environment allowing tuning of&lt;br/&gt;the nanopore-molecule
interactions as done by nature in an enzyme binding pocket.&lt;br/&gt;(2) The
development of chemically selective nanopore sensing by using ?artificial
antibody? aptamer&lt;br/&gt;molecular recognition agents in combination with NFS
will enrich nanopore biosensing capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;NFS, itself, can extend
the power and utility of aptamer sensing by providing a real-time,
direct&lt;br/&gt;measurement of aptamer-target interactions. Weak, nonspecific
interactions otherwise leading to&lt;br/&gt;false positives can be
rejected.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Inspired by the performance of site-directed
mutagenesis, the development of a site-selective solid&lt;br/&gt;state nanopore
functionalization method will allow the extensive prior body of work on
protein&lt;br/&gt;nanopore functionalization to be transferred to more robust,
tunable solid-state nanopores.&lt;br/&gt;(4) The successful NFS measurement of
the interaction between a DNA-bound small molecule and a&lt;br/&gt;protein will
serve as the proof-of-principle experiment that NFS is feasible for
straightforward drug&lt;br/&gt;screening.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
proposed research include:&lt;br/&gt;(1) The expansion of the force microscopy
toolkit to include a robust, inexpensive, easy-to-use single&lt;br/&gt;molecule
nanopore method in a platform suitable for deployment outside the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;(2) The training of science and engineering researchers to
become skilled science and engineering&lt;br/&gt;communicators. Active outreach
to increase the public?s understanding and appreciation of science&lt;br/&gt;and
engineering will target:&lt;br/&gt;a. the general public through various media
and community activities,&lt;br/&gt;b. public relations students whose careers
may include science and engineering communication,&lt;br/&gt;c. K-12 students in
a diverse, urban school through informal interactions and hands-on
activities,&lt;br/&gt;d. university undergraduates who will learn engineering
skills as they fabricate inexpensive&lt;br/&gt;diagnostic devices,&lt;br/&gt;e.
the researchers, themselves, through the emphasis on the importance of unifying
scientific and&lt;br/&gt;engineering activities to address human needs.