* 1150405
* CAREER: Stability analysis and control of uncertain network controlled system in nonequilibrium
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Umesh Vaidya, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

For uncertain network controlled dynamical systems operating away from
equilibrium, the proposed research will discover analytical methods and
computational tools for the a) prediction of instabilities in network systems
with multiple sources of uncertainties; b) identification of feedback mechanisms
and critical parameters responsible for the emergence of nonequilibrium dynamics
in networks; c) design of controller for a class of network control dynamical
systems. The theoretical discovery of this proposal is motivated with regard to
its application to the electric power grid, for the computation of stability
margin and for online transient stability analysis in power
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research is in
the unification and development of methods and tools from the ergodic theory of
dynamical systems and control approaches for the purpose of its application to
network controlled dynamical systems with uncertainty. The distinctive feature
of our proposed approach is that it treats several aspects of uncertainty
amplification specific to networked systems in a unified way. Namely, it allows
us to handle the uncertainty of the communication links, the uncertainty in the
system interactions, and the uncertainty in the networked system evolution. This
unified framework has allowed the PI to make two fundamental contributions for
the analysis and control of uncertain nonlinear systems over networks. The first
contribution is in the use of ergodic theory-based framework to provide linear
programming-based analytical and computational solution for stability
verification and control design of complex nonequilibrium dynamics in nonlinear
system. The second contribution arises in the derivation of fundamental
limitation results for the stabilization and observation of nonlinear systems
with uncertainty at the input and output channels. The PI propose to further
extend these methods to discover analytical methods and computational tools for
the analysis and control of network controlled dynamical systems with particular
focus on addressing two main challenges, namely uncertainty and self-emergent
nonequilibrium dynamics in the network systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The theoretical and computational tools developed in the proposal have
applications in the emerging areas of network systems, including biological and
social networks. Our results on identification of feedback mechanisms for the
emergence of complex nonequilibrium dynamics in network systems can be applied
to biological networks to help understand the consequence of genetic
modification, and for guiding experiments design for modifying such behavior.
For social networks such as disease spread, the proposed uncertainty-based
modeling framework and theoretical research can be used to provide conditions
for the prevention or spread of an epidemic. The interdisciplinary nature of
this project will provide ample opportunities to train graduate students in
leading-edge research that cuts across multiple disciplines. These
interdisciplinary components will be integrated into a larger educational effort
to offer engineering students a solid foundation and training in complex
systems, as well as in control and dynamics.