* 1150797
* CAREER: Experimental studies of turbulent inflow and wake relevant to marine hydrokinetic (MHK) energy conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Martin Wosnik, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2018
* USD 401,456.00

1150797-Wosnik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine hydrokinetic (MHK) energy conversion,
comprised of tidal/ocean current and wave energy, is likely one of the more
environmentally sustainable ways to generate electricity. The overall objective
of this project is to better understand the spatio-temporal structure of the
turbulent inflow and wakes at scales relevant to marine hydrokinetic energy
conversion. A suite of state-of-the-art experimental fluid dynamics
instrumentation will be employed for turbulence characterization, and both
laboratory and open water (tidal estuary) test facilities will be used. The
study will focus on tidal energy, however, the results are applicable to ocean
and river current energy conversion and wave energy as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: MHK energy conversion devices are
subjected to a wide range of turbulent scales. For example, the fastest tidal
currents often occur in regions of complex bathymetry, which creates complex
boundary layers and flow distortions in locations where MHK devices will be
sited. Initial tests have shown that the performance of MHK devices, as well as
structural fatigue and failure, are closely linked to turbulence. Downstream,
turbulence generated by MHK devices and their support structures can have an
effect on the environment and organisms in the water column. The robust Acoustic
Doppler Current Profilers (ADCPs) commonly used for open water measurements are
limited to low sampling rates due to their operational principle, which results
in insufficient spatial resolution for scales of turbulence relevant to MHK
devices. On the other hand, experimental techniques with higher temporal and
spatial resolution are typically limited to laboratory environments. For this
project, turbulent inflow and hydrokinetic turbine wakes will first be measured
in a large cross-section combined tow-wave tank comparing ADCPs, multi-point
Acoustic Doppler Velocimetry (ADV) and underwater high frame-rate Particle Image
Velocimetry (HFR-PIV), to establish baselines on how each instrument measures
spatio-temporal flow structures. Then turbulent inflow and hydrokinetic turbine
wakes will be measured at an open-water tidal energy test site comparing ADCP
and ADV. Data from the laboratory and the open-water deployments will be used in
mathematical modeling with low-dimensional model and stochastic estimation
techniques to predict turbulent flow states from ADCP profiles and ADV reference
measurements. The project will thus fill an instrumentation ?scale gap? that
currently exists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will produce
previously unavailable information on the spatio-temporal structure of MHK-
relevant flows. It will improve our understanding of the capabilities of the
different measurement techniques in an MHK environment and create general
predictive tools, which will make possible the study of other phenomena and
processes in the marine environment. The results of this research will enable
higher-fidelity resource assessment and more accurate energy conversion device
evaluation, yield previously inaccessible flow data for fluid-structure
interaction, generate data for device array layouts, facilitate environmental
impact assessments, and, ultimately, lead to improved designs. It will thus help
the United States? MHK industry to become successful. &lt;br/&gt;The integration
of research and education activities will be achieved through inclusion of
research in senior/graduate courses in Renewable Energy and Experimental Fluid
Dynamics, industrial research opportunities as part of graduate training,
outreach and continuing education, and participation in university open house
events, laboratory tours and demonstrations. The outreach will include
activities with the NH Seacoast Science Center and the NH Children?s Museum.
Underrepresented groups in engineering will be actively recruited through the
UNH Office of Diversity and student societies, to work on the proposed research
as undergraduate researchers and potential Ph.D. students. The project will be
used to attract students interested in the fields of renewable energy, flow
measurement and turbulence, and help train the workforce necessary for advancing
this new industry.