* 1150855
* CAREER: Interface-induced misfolding and aggregation of intrinsically disordered proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Eva Chi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Chi, Eva CBET - 1150855

Intellectual Merit

NON-TECHNICAL:

Despite the implication of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) in a number
of human diseases, the aggregation mechanism of IDP by which the disease
develops remains poorly understood. The objective of this proposal is to gain a
fundamental understanding of how interfaces in the cellular environment can
affect the misfolding and aggregation of IDPs. The PI will investigate the
aggregation of two IDPs implicated in Alzheimer¡¦s disease (AD), the amyloid-£]
(A£]) peptide and the tau protein. Successful completion of the proposed
research will advance current understanding of not only the interfacial effects
on the structural dynamics of an important class of proteins, but also of the
mechanism and thermodynamic driving forces underlying the pathogenesis of
neurodegenerative diseases.

TECHNICAL:

The PI proposes a novel aggregation mechanism in which an IDP first forms an
aggregation-competent intermediate that is partially folded and proceeds through
a structurally contracted transition state. This step is followed by the
assembly of intermediates to form larger aggregates. The PI hypothesizes that
interfaces can induce IDP structural compaction, lowering the activation free
energy of aggregation and template nucleation. The PI further hypothesizes that
these interfacial effects are significantly amplified under conditions that
mimic the cell milieu, namely, macromolecular crowding and the presence of
osmolytes. The PI hypothesizes that attenuating the binding of A£]'n peptide and
tau protein to biological interfaces can inhibit their aggregation and toxicity.
To test these hypotheses, the PI proposes the following three objectives that
build on her research group¡¦s unique strengths in thermodynamics of protein
aggregation, biophysical analysis of proteins in solution and at interfaces, and
biochemistry. The PI proposes to accomplish the following three research
objectives: 1) to evaluate the likelihood and affinity of four tau proteins to
partition to two interfaces, the air/water interface and the lipid membrane
interface, and characterize changes in tau structure and aggregation kinetics
accompanying the binding of the proteins to the interfaces; 2) to study the
effect of molecular crowding and osmolytes on A£]'nand tau¡¦s surface activity,
membrane interaction, and aggregation to test if interfacial forces stemming
from excluded volume and preferential exclusion can modulate interface-templated
IDP aggregation; 3) to investigate whether attenuation of the binding of
A£]'nand tau to lipid membranes can ameliorate their aggregation and toxicity.

Broader Impacts

The proposed research, deeply rooted in molecular thermodynamics and interface
science, represents a novel approach to studying the aggregation of IDPs. The
analysis of intermolecular interactions and interfacial forces that govern the
assembly of IDPs represents a fundamental scientific challenge that is of great
importance in biology and medicine. Understanding of the mechanism and
thermodynamic driving forces of IDP aggregation gained from the proposed study
is of paramount importance in advancing the current knowledge of the molecular
mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of Alzheimer¡¦s disease. Determining the
aggregation mechanism of IDPs could potentially lead to therapeutic strategies
for treating such neurodegenerative diseases.

In terms of education, the PI is committed to furthering her contribution to the
establishment of New Mexico¡¦s first Biomedical Engineering undergraduate and
graduate degree programs through new course development and student recruitment.
The PI is also strongly dedicated to expanding and augmenting the existing
outreach efforts at the University of New Mexico to rural Native American
elementary schools and introducing a new hands-on demonstration module focusing
on the molecular aspects of protein structure and denaturation to Albuquerque
High School students. The PI will continue mentoring efforts to Native American
students from the Southwest Indian Polytechnic Institute helping them make a
successful transition to the University of New Mexico. The cumulative and long-
term impact of the proposed educational and outreach efforts will be increased
enrollment and retention of students in bioengineering, particularly
underrepresented minorities and women, which will spark economic vitality and
meet future work force demands in New Mexico and beyond.