* 1150325
* Expanding Cross-Disciplinary Dialogue in the Postdoctoral Community
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Cathee Johnson-Phillips, National Postdoctoral Association
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2012
* USD 49,958.00

The National Postdoctoral Association (NPA) will organize and host a 1.5-day
workshop at the National Science Foundation in Arlington, Va., to expand
dialogue in the postdoctoral community towards: (1) learning more about the
postdoctoral experience in fields of study where postdoctorate study is not very
common and (2) providing professional development opportunities for the
postdoctoral participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NPA will invite postdoctoral
scholars (postdocs) in the social, behavioral, and economic sciences, in
computational science/cyber-infrastructure, and in other related fields of study
to attend. Postdocs have not been a tradition in these sciences as in the life
sciences, where completing a postdoc has become a requisite to career success.
The NPA will also invite other relevant parties to participate, including
representatives from appropriate professional societies. The NPA is called upon
by Federal agencies and institutions across the country to provide a national
voice for postdocs. It is crucial that the NPA learn more about the challenges
faced by postdocs in fields of study where postdoctorate training is not common
in order to better represent them and to make informed recommendations for best
practices to improve retention of these postdocs in academic research. Some of
the expected outcomes of this workshop are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. That a
written report of the proceedings of the workshop will be widely disseminated to
the postdoctoral community and other relevant parties through the
NPA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. That the participants will build or strengthen
their network of support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. That lessons learned from this
workshop will have a broader impact and provide insights as well as concrete
recommendations for supporting new scientists across all
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
is little data/information available regarding the experiences of postdocs from
these fields of study. Learning more about the social, behavioral, and economic
sciences postdoctoral community is essential, as this population has been
steadily increasing. Learning more about the postdocs in the computational
sciences/cyber-infrastructure is also essential. The field of
cyberinfrastructure is a relatively new cross-disciplinary field that provides
sophisticated tools for all disciplines and so has the potential to involve
postdocs from many and varied fields of study. Any information that can be
gained from this workshop will be valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NPA
leadership engages on a regular basis with the most recent scholarship on
postdoctoral scholars' experiences. The NPA will be able to create an informed
and understanding platform for the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will result in a written report of the
proceedings that will be widely disseminated by the NPA, on its Web site, at its
meetings, and through its contacts. The information gained from this workshop
will have a broader impact and provide insights for the national postdoctoral
community across all fields of research.