* 1150271
* EAGER: MyDesignSpace: Discovering Design Patterns from Holistic Ideation Web Tool
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Jami Shah, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 12/31/2013
* USD 49,950.00

The research objective of this EArly concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) is to create a framework for a web based holistic ideation system that
invites users at large to attempt to solve their design problems using the tool.
The goal is to collect massive amounts of data from diverse set of users over an
extended period of time to explore deeper issues and solution strategies
employed by real designers. As part of an ongoing project the investigators have
created a framework for holistic ideation by mixing and matching disparate
ideation mechanisms matched to diverse ideation states commonly encountered in
design. This is transformative in two ways: it builds a bridge between intuitive
and logical approaches and it creates an entirely new mode of research for
design creativity. But for this approach to bear fruit, massive amounts of data
need to collected and analyzed to determine ideations paths, use and user
scenarios and corresponding level of effectiveness. The Testbed will provide a
uniform and structured way of collecting data on creative design which will lead
to a better understanding of creative processes and the influence of thinking
styles and problem complexity on these processes through empirical studies
conducted at a fine granularity level (ideation mechanisms). A holistic approach
will introduce students to both logical/experiential and intuitive strategies
which has a greater probability of acceptance. Studying ideation paths in
conceptual design has not been previously explored and researched in a formal
manner. The main impediment is the lack of a proper foundation for
characterizing such paths. The holistic ideation framework will facilitate
several different ideation methods/strategies and track success rates based on
ideation paths using heat maps employed today by companies such as
Google.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research has the potential for
impacting design practice, design research and engineering education. This
project explores the feasibility of new software to support people in being more
creative and evaluates their performance through user studies. Such systems will
become partners rather than tools. Through user interaction, they will sense the
ideation state and suggest possible strategies at a given state. In this role
the tool becomes a virtual facilitator with virtual group members that generate
provocative stimuli and contribute technical insights. Particularly for novices,
such as engineering students, it is important to provide access to experiential
knowledge through a multitude of resources. Results will be broadly disseminated
through conferences and journals, as well as through the developed website.