* 1150531
* CAREER: Cryogenic Interferometers in the Quantum Regime for Gravitational-Wave Science
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Thomas Corbitt, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 996,036.00

This award supports tabletop experiments to study methods for mitigating quantum
noise in gravitational-wave interferometers. An experimental setup limited by
both radiation pressure and shot noise in a low noise cryogenic environment will
be developed. To achieve this in a small scale prototype, micro-fabricated
mechanical resonators (of order 100 nanograms) will be used as one mirror of a
high finesse optical cavity inside a low vibration cryostat, cooled to below
10K. A series of experiments will then be performed to verify models of quantum
noise, and to test methods for its reduction. Specifically, a homodyne detector
will be used to perform a variational readout of the resonator's position, to
exploit the ponderomotive squeezing, and to evade the radiation pressure noise
at a single frequency. A filter cavity will then be introduced to evade the
radiation pressure noise in a wide frequency band. Advanced LIGO and other
second generation gravitational wave detectors are expected to be limited by
quantum noise across the majority of their detection frequency band. At low
frequencies, the test masses are driven by radiation pressure and at high
frequencies, shot noise limits the phase precision of the measurement. Together,
the radiation pressure and shot noise represent a significant limit on the
sensitivities of future gravitational-wave detectors. Collaboration with other
groups within the LIGO Scientific Collaboration will provide access to a source
of squeezed vacuum states, which will be used to directly reduce the radiation
pressure noise. Alternative topologies, such as the speedmeter and dual-carrier
readout, will also be explored. By using a combination of optical trapping and
cooling, the mechanical resonators will be placed into low noise states, with
decoherence rates less than their oscillation frequency, allowing for the
resonators to be placed in non-classical states, as a test of quantum mechanics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will substantially enhance the on-
campus research activities of the experimental gravitational physics program at
Louisiana State University. Because of LSU's proximity to the LIGO Livingston
Observatory, and the PI's other research activities within the LIGO project,
there will be substantial personnel and intellectual overlap between LIGO
commissioning, other on-site work, and R&amp;D activities. Integration among
these activities will strengthen the LIGO project and reduce risk, as well as
advance the frontier of gravitational-wave science. Students and post-docs with
experience in both small scale lab experiments and large scientific
collaborations will be trained. The nature of this work naturally leads to
collaboration between the GW community and the fields of quantum optics and
quantum information. The thermal noise characterization experiments will have
wide ranging applications to many systems limited by thermal noise. A summer
research and education program aimed at undergraduate juniors will be developed,
with the goal of encouraging and helping underrepresented groups in the region
enter and succeed in graduate school within the LIGO Scientific Collaboration.
This program will contain both a research and an education component, and will
work strongly with existing programs including the LIGO Science Education
Center, Southern University Baton Rouge's Timbuktu Academy, and the outreach
group in the LIGO Scientific Collaboration to develop the educational program
and to attract students.