* 1150994
* CAREER: Integrated Assessments of the Impacts of Decentralized Land Use and Water Management Practices in Urban Ecosystems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2012,09/30/2017
* Franco Montalto, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 409,984.00

1150994(Montalto) This project will advance knowledge about poorly understood
hydrologic processes that occur on vegetated and impervious land parcels in
dense urban environments, and their relationship to ecosystem services. Special
attention is paid to the watershed-scale implications of deliberate micro-scale
redirections of water in ultra-urban settings, e.g. green infrastructure (GI)
projects. The research makes use of existing sensors in GI monitoring sites that
the PI has assembled with other resources, but which are not currently
integrated into a network. A new relational database will link this collection
of sites and sensors and support complex and highly specific data retrieval
queries, with significantly more sites and sensors to be made available by
project collaborators. The results of these queries will advance knowledge about
the hydrologic outcomes that can be expected from different GI treatments
implemented in different contexts. The database will enable efficient
longitudinal (e.g. between sites), and/or vertical (e.g. between sensors)
discoveries regarding the hydrologic performance of GI. Without this database,
such queries would be nearly impossible to perform efficiently. Because the GI
systems included in the database receive runoff from different sized source
areas, the database will also facilitate potentially transformative
investigations into the effects of scale on urban hydrology. Agent models will
provide simulation platforms within which to explore the relative importance of
different hydrologic, climatological, and social uncertainties in predicting
emergent watershed-scale ecosystem services, in different urban neighborhoods.
With "hydrologic response rules" derived directly from data stored in the
relational database, the models will enhance ability to accurately depict urban
scale hydrologic fluxes under different innovative management regimes. Community
members will be actively involved in the agent-model building process. The
research will yield findings relevant to technical practitioners (engineers,
urban designers, water utility representatives), natural scientists (ecologists,
hydrologists, biologists,) as well as to planners (community groups, municipal
sustainability directors), and a range of interdisciplinary academic
researchers. The research is structured to provide opportunities for the
participation of a diverse set of undergraduate and graduate students, community
members, and government and non-profit partners. The Citizen Science program,
recruiting at least 50% from demographic groups traditionally underrepresented
in science, will engage residents of five study neighborhoods in data collection
activities, and is intended to become a model for two-way learning between
university researchers and the urban community. A Sustainable Water Resource
Engineering (SWRE) Field Training (FT) Program will provide a forum for
encouraging the participation of undergraduate students in research. The FT
projects will be used to create a database of innovative water projects and SWRE
teaching modules which will be available to the public on the PI?s institutional
website. New urban ecohydrologic data sets will be streamed in real-time to a
Drexel server that will be linked to the CUAHSI Hydrologic Information Service
through web-services. This new infrastructure will make the data assembled and
organized as part of this project accessible to the larger hydrologic research
community. Semi-annual meetings with a Scientific Advisory Committee will ensure
dissemination of the research findings. Collaborations have also been forged
with a) the USEPA-NRML offices in Edison, NJ, taking advantage of a recently
signed MOU between EPA and NSF, and b) the Baltimore Ecosystem Study, one of one
of two urban nodes in NSF?s Long-Term Ecological Research network. Through the
project, the PI will also continue collaborating with researchers from Columbia
University, with whom he is already working as part of the NOAA-funded
Consortium on Climate Risks in the Urban Northeast.