* 1150404
* CAREER:  Increasing the Effectiveness of Mineral Additives in Concrete Through Novel Particle Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* M. Tyler Ley, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 01/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will develop a strong
research program to increase the use of supplementary cementitious materials
(SCMs) as construction binders in concrete through new levels of chemical
characterization. Since SCMs are unwanted material streams from different
industrial processes, there is much variability in the materials. The research
will use novel particle characterization techniques developed by the PIs
research group to better understand, quantify, improve and increase the use of
SCMs as construction binders. The objectives are: i) characterize SCMs by
coupling particle size and chemistry, through 3D particle chemical mapping,
rapid investigation with autonomous scanning electron microscopy, and bulk
chemistry, ii) quantify the short term and long term performance of SCMs as
concrete binders through strength, permeability, chemical shrinkage and heat of
hydration changes over time, iii) understand the mechanisms by which different
chemical phases in the SCM impact performance as a concrete binder.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concrete is the second most used commodity in the world.
The use of SCMs in concrete has the ability to improve the strength, durability,
economy and sustainability of concrete. Current use of SCMs in concrete is
limited because of the high variability of the material. This research will
provide new fundamental knowledge of chemical phases, their distribution, and
how these phases react with hydrating cement paste. Ultimately these
interactions will be used to understand how this impacts the properties and
performance of the concrete containing the SCM from a few hours to over a year.
Furthermore, the techniques established in this research will be useful for a
number of applications that require complex particle characterization and
allowing time resolved measurements of their reactions and structural changes in
different environments. These methods can be applied to biomaterials,
pharmaceuticals, geo-materials, polymers, industrial waste products. The
educational activities will also increase the awareness level of STEM fields
with underrepresented elementary students through the establishment of an after
school mentoring program and the creation of online teaching modules.
&lt;br/&gt;