* 1150851
* CAREER: Quantum Chemistry for Predicting and Quantifying Photoinduced Nonadiabatic Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Joseph Subotnik, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Joseph Subotnik of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by an award from
the Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division
to develop new methods in quantum chemistry specifically to be used for modeling
nonadiabatic dynamical processes.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, Professor Subotnik
and his research group are pursuing three different goals:&lt;br/&gt; 1. New
formulations for diabatic states to minimize inter-state coupling and provide an
optimal basis for understanding nonadiabatic transitions;&lt;br/&gt;2. Novel
algorithms to compute excited state energies and wave function response
properties, specifically using local correlation techniques and other
omputationally inexpensive techniques applicable to big systems;&lt;br/&gt; 3.
New approaches to produce and analyze derivative couplings between adiabatic and
diabatic states, with a heavy focus on their their dynamical properties
(including electronic momentum).&lt;br/&gt;All of the techniques above in
electronic structure theory are necessary tools for modeling photo-induced
nonadiabatic dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a broad
impact in the field of photochemistry and energy science, especially with
regards to electron and energy transfer. Currently, modern research in solar
energy focuses on capturing sun light to produce electricity, and we urgently
need tools to predict new materials for maximizing the efficiency of solar
cells. This research proposal will provide many of those tools for future
applications. Subotnik will also participate in the undergraduate MERCURY
conference for computational chemistry, in order to connect with undergraduate
researchers and teach them how to develop quantum chemistry packages, so they
can also make contributions in this emerging field.