* 1150528
* CAREER: Highly-ordered Electrode/Catalyst Assembly in Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells for Enhanced Catalyst Utilization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Vibha Kalra, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 479,438.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuel cells are seen as promising, environmentally
desirable alternatives to fossil fuel powered applications, particularly for
transportation. Significant investments have been made in this area, but
economical fuel cells remain a target. A key factor that has limited the
progress in broad deployment of fuel cell devices is the high cost of the
incorporated platinum catalyst nanoparticles. In this Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program award, Professor Vibha Kalra of Drexel University,
Philadelphia, PA will attempt to change this situation using a unique nanofiber-
based catalyst layer in proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells. The catalyst
will be fabricated via a process called electrospinning. Electrospinning is a
simple fiber formation technique that uses strong electric field to accelerate
and thin a polymer solution/melt jet, resulting in fibers with nanoscale
diameters (50-500 nm). The project will involve experiments and multi-scale
simulations to first understand and tailor the internal assembly in the proposed
catalyst layer followed by a detailed investigation of the effect of this
nanoscale assembly on performance in fuel cells. The aim is to develop an
intertwined network within the catalyst layer, such that the catalyst (platinum)
nanoparticles have simultaneous access to all reactants for the electrochemical
reaction to take place efficiently. This will maximize the electrochemical
surface area and consequently the utilization of catalyst nanoparticles, thereby
resulting in lower total catalyst cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated
educational objective of this project is to help students at K-12, undergraduate
and graduate levels, particularly women and those from under-represented
minorities, to appreciate the power of science and engineering in general and to
inspire them to contribute to society through continued research in materials
and renewable energy. A comprehensive K-12 outreach program will be developed by
Prof. Kalra, involving workshops and research experience for students and
teachers in the Philadelphia area, where currently 80% of students are
minorities. The integrated educational activities will generate interest in
materials and energy research among a much larger audience at various education
levels.