* 1150760
* CAREER: Discovery and Dissemination of Neuromechanical Principles of Swimming, Walking and Running in Granular Media
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Daniel Goldman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2017
* USD 776,024.00

In this project the PI will develop a neuromechanics of locomotion on dry and
wet granular substrates. This will be used to address how effective movement
results from the interaction of body morphology and posture, muscles, Central
Pattern Generators (CPG), and sensory systems with the physical features of
complex environments like solidification and fluidization. The PI will study
three organisms -- sandfish lizards, zebratailed lizards, and salamanders --
that respectively swim, walk and run effectively within and on granular
substrates. These organisms will be chosen as representatives of effective
locomotion in a given substrate: the sandfish swimming in sand, the zebra-tailed
lizard sprinting over a diversity of granular terrain, the salamander walking in
mud. The salamander also embodies features thought to be representative of early
tetrapods. The project will use high speed imaging (both visible light and
x-ray), granular force platforms, and electromyography (EMG) to record
kinematics, dynamics, and muscle activity. The PI will develop controlled
granular substrates using fluidized beds which will allow both creation of
repeatable initial conditions and rapid perturbations to generate
neuromechanical control hypotheses. Robotic models of organisms to test
hypotheses will be built as well. The models will have relevance to organisms in
the present and will be a step toward development of quantitative hypotheses of
the evolution of movement on land. Understanding of the physics of soft
materials like mud and wet sand will be enhanced. The work also has clear
implications for robotics; in the modern world, in which disasters are common
and affect many lives, there is a pressing need for devices that can explore
complex shifting terrain. The PI will use the robots from the locomotion
research to create hands-on robot modules to teach science by: 1) Developing and
teaching a course in hands-on experimental science for undergraduates
emphasizing principles of mechanics, electronics and biology. 2) Bringing K-12
teachers to Georgia Tech in the summer to learn to use hands-on locomoting robot
kits. 3) Developing "Robotics Inspired Science Education" (RISE) nights to
utilize robots to generate interest and teach principles of science to the
public.