* 1150813
* CAREER: Social Closeness, Helping, and Neglect: Examining the Roots of Favoritism in Rural Bangladesh
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Daniel Hruschka, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 514,368.00

Dr. Daniel Hruschka (Arizona State University) will undertake research to
advance understanding of the cultural roots of cooperation and favoritism. In
the last decade, new research has revealed how perceived social closeness
fundamentally transforms people's willingness to help certain people and to
neglect others. Based largely in industrialized countries, current findings
raise key questions about how cultural context changes the relevance of social
closeness for decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using interview,
observational and survey methods to ground concepts of social closeness in local
context and innovative experimental tools to measure social behavior, the study
will ask three main questions: (1) How do people discriminate between socially
close and non-close others in different religious and socioeconomic contexts?
(2) How do religious and economic factors change the effect of social closeness
on the willingness to help and to share? (3) What are the proximate
psychological mechanisms by which social closeness influences helping and
sharing? To answer these questions, the project will compare four rural
communities in Dinajpur, Bangladesh that differ in terms of religious background
and economic uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to
a number of policy areas that depend on how people resolve dilemmas between
helping friends and family and being fair to a broader public, including issues
of favoritism and corruption, civil governance, and charitable giving. The
multidisciplinary project will train undergraduate and graduate students in
study design, sampling, observational techniques, interview construction, data
collection, behavioral experiments, and qualitative and quantitative data
analysis. Middle school curricula will be disseminated through innovative
programs at the Santa Fe Institute designed to engage youth in laboratory
activities and social scientific approaches to studying pressing social issues.
The project will also build research and training capacity at LAMB Project for
Integrated Health and Development in Dinajpur, Bangladesh.