* 1150732
* CAREER:  Incorporating Patient Heterogeneity and Choice into Predictive Models of Health and Economic Outcomes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Maria Mayorga, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 04/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award investigates how to
obtain better predictions of the effectiveness of population-level health
interventions. The research strategy is to create consumer choice models that
incorporate patient heterogeneity into predictive models of health and economic
outcomes. The patient plays a key role in conditions that are chronic and not
immediately life threatening, but that in the long term can be harmful through
associated co-morbidities. This research builds on collaborations with health
sciences experts to take an interdisciplinary approach. Consumer choice models
will be transformed into models for patient choice. This allows for individual
patient preferences to be considered (e.g., time-preferences, willingness-to-pay
for treatment) which may depend on socio-demographic patient attributes. These
new patient choice models will be embedded into predictive models of health
outcomes (smoking cessation and maternal drinking) and long term treatment
effectiveness studies will be conducted at the population level. The educational
plan includes advising and mentoring activities that work with discovery-
oriented "creative inquiry" projects involving multi-level student
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
allow health science experts to move from efficacy to effectiveness
characterization by explicitly considering individual patient preferences. These
new models may also be used in predictive health models of other policy-relevant
issues. Ultimately, the inclusion of patient choice will result in more accurate
estimates of treatment effectiveness and more accurate predictions of health and
economic outcomes. This allows policy makers to choose the most efficient
intervention strategies, with a richer information set than can be provided by
clinical trials alone. Middle school students studying in technology programs
will be introduced to the field of industrial engineering and engage with
undergraduate research teams. Graduate students will mentor participating
undergraduates, resulting in a pipeline of students who will be prepared to
undertake technical careers in the healthcare service industry and in academia.