* 1150826
* CAREER: Mechanstic Studies Involving Late Transition Metal Complexes for Catalytic Carbon Dioxide Conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Nilay Hazari, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

In this CAREER award funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Nilay Hazari of the Department of Chemistry at Yale
University will develop transition metal catalysts for the conversion of carbon
dioxide into organic building blocks. In particular monomeric Ni and Pd
complexes that promote the formation of new C-C bonds from carbon dioxide will
be targeted. This could result in the development of a functional group tolerant
catalyst that can convert carbon dioxide into carboxylic acids, which are highly
useful in synthetic chemistry. The broader impacts of this program include the
development of a program that will encourage local high school students to visit
different research laboratories at Yale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The catalytic
conversion of carbon dioxide into more valuable compounds is an important
problem due to the potential of this greenhouse gas as a readily available and
inexpensive source of carbon in the construction of more complex molecules.
Currently, there are relatively few practical methods for converting carbon
dioxide into useful chemicals and the development of new catalysts for carbon
dioxide conversion could have important impact on sustainable chemistry. In this
work carboxylic acids which are present in many organic compounds will be
synthesized from carbon dioxide. In addition, alongside the training of both
undergraduate and graduate students, a program will be introduced which allows
local high school students to visit chemistry laboratories.