* 1150670
* CAREER: Particle Magnetophoresis in Ferrofluid Microflows for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Xiangchun Xuan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 02/28/2018
* USD 407,654.00

1150670 PI: Xuan

Magnetic field-induced particle manipulation is simple and cheap as compared to
other techniques (e.g., electric, acoustic, and optical) that are applicable to
microfluidic devices. It is non-invasive and free of fluid heating issues that
accompany nearly all other techniques, and is therefore well suited to handling
bioparticles. However, traditional magnetic control requires the particles to be
manipulated being magnetizable, which renders it necessary to magnetically label
bioparticles. Ferrofluids have been recently demonstrated to implement
nonmagnetic particle and cell manipulations in microfluidic devices with no
magnetic tagging. The success of these devices relies on a comprehensive
understanding of particle magnetophoresis in ferrofluid flows. Moreover, the
potential of such ferrofluid-based magnetic techniques is far from being fully
explored. The research objectives of this CAREER proposal are to develop a
fundamental knowledge of particle magnetophoresis in ferrofluid microflows, and
to explore the diverse manipulations of nonmagnetic particles in
ferromicrofluidics, with the goals of establishing a new research direction in
particulate and multiphase processes and developing a new technology for label-
free cell handling in lab-on-a-chip applications. A comprehensive education plan
will be integrated with the research goals of this CAREER proposal toward
ultimately establishing a Clemson research and education program on
microfluidics fundamentals and lab-on-a-chip applications. The proposed
education and outreach activities include the development of a self-learner
style web-based minicourses series, the development of a K-12 outreach program
with an emphasis on minority students and students from families living in
poverty, and the training and mentoring of graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students with an active involvement of women and underrepresented
minorities.

The proposed research represents the first comprehensive study of
magnetophoretic transport and manipulation of nonmagnetic particles in
ferrofluid microflows. It will complement the current knowledge of particle
magnetophoresis in microchannels, and advance the design and control of magnetic
microfluidic devices. The demonstrated label-free manipulations of nonmagnetic
particles in ferrofluid microflows will find direct near-term applications in a
wide range of technological solutions such as flow cytometry (via three-
dimensional focusing), filtration (via trapping), biosensing (via
concentration), and continuous-flow sorting (via separation). The proposed
research will essentially benefit every engineering application of particle
magnetophoresis in many areas such as biomedicine and environmental monitoring.
It will also impact several scientific and technological communities including
microfluidics, transport phenomena, polymer sciences, and bioengineering. The
proposed integration of research into education will advance discovery while
promoting learning through the development of research-based education materials
and the training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
research. Practical skills gained in the laboratory and in presentations will
prepare students for future careers. The dissemination of research results into
the community through both archival publications and the proposed open
minicourses and outreach to local high schools, especially underrepresented
groups, will enhance scientific and technological understanding and benefit
society.