* 1150700
* CAREER: Decentralized Monitoring and Control for Large-Scale Smart Structures with Wireless and Mobile Sensor Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Yang Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 405,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to discover a series of decentralized substructure-based monitoring and
control approaches using wireless and mobile sensor networks. Building upon
theoretical foundation in system dynamics and optimization, this fundamental
research in decentralized approaches has a potential of practical implementation
in developing smart large-scale structural systems. The basic research in
structural monitoring and structural control includes two aspects: (i) On
structural monitoring, substructure-based finite element model updating and
system identification strategies will be created to enable decentralized
synthesis of sensor data at high spatial resolution. The decentralized model
updating and system identification strategies are to be investigated using
climbing and flying mobile sensors that provide dense and flexible deployment.
(ii) On structural control, decentralized substructure-based formulations will
be discovered to cast the decentralized structural control problem into a convex
optimization problem that can be solved with highly efficient numerical
techniques. The decentralized control strategies will be validated through
large-scale shake-table experiments using a wireless sensing and control network
with real-time feedback.

The protection and monitoring of structural safety is a highly complex issue
faced by today?s civil engineers. This research will enable accurate monitoring
and effective protection of the nation?s civil structures, and thus, can
generate significant societal and economic impact. The proposed fundamental
research has immense opportunities for application, which includes monitoring
and control for not only civil structures, but also various mechanical and
aerospace structures. The K-12 education plan includes one-day outreach
activities containing multiple interesting modules, including lecture and video,
hands-on competition, and live demonstration of mobile sensors. The promotion of
diversity is placed at highest priority, emphasizing K-12 outreach in metro
Atlanta area with large African-American student population. In addition, the
international collaboration and student exchange program will further
disseminate research and education outcomes generated from this project.