* 1150854
* CAREER:Injectable Biomimetic Scaffolds to Direct  Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocyte Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Elizabeth Lipke, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 406,000.00

1150854/ Lipke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term research goal is to
develop a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms by which biomimetic
materials can drive electrophysiological maturation of stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes (SC-CMs). This CAREER research plan uses a novel hydrogel
microsphere encapsulation system to provide pluripotent stem cells with specific
cues to direct their differentiation into cardiomyocytes and assesses the
functional electrophysiological properties of resulting SC-CMs at the single
cell and tissue levels. Using current differentiation methods, SC-CM maturation
typically does not progress beyond a prenatal phenotype and overall
electrophysiological properties vary greatly. Therefore, the objective of the
PI?s research plan is to test the following hypotheses: (1) biomimetic scaffolds
can be used to increase the homogeneity of SC-CMs and decrease variability in
electrophysiological properties both within and between differentiation batches;
(2) localized release of signaling molecules, including nitric oxide, can be
used to enhance SC-CM maturity; (3) electrophysiological properties of SC-CMs
will depend on the differentiation environment they are provided including
variations in copolymer formulation, culture time, and initial stem cell
concentration; and (4) SC-CMs will enhance electrical propagation through
engineered cardiac tissues by directly coupling with more mature neonatal
ventricular-derived cardiomyocytes. The following educational goals are
integrated with the PI's research objective: (1) maintain a 1:1 ratio of
undergraduate to graduate student researchers in her laboratory; (2) engage
cardiac nursing students in learning about stem cell and cardiac regeneration
research so they are better prepared to educate patients; (3) incorporate
cardiovascular research-related content and projects into her coursework; (4)
inspire K-12 students to pursue science and engineering careers through
conducting K-12 outreach (5) support women and minority retention in science and
engineering through organizational activities and one-on-one
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The PI's focus on
characterizing and directing SC-CM electrophysiology is unique, particularly for
SC-CMs differentiated in scalable systems or encapsulated in biomaterial
scaffolds, and the anticipated results will provide a valuable foundation for
others in the field. Knowledge gained from these studies will be applied to the
design of injectable biomaterial scaffolds and engineered cardiac tissues to
improve electrophysiological integration, which is essential for cardiac
regeneration. Establishing a fundamental understanding of how to uniformly
progress SC-CM electrophysiological maturity and using this information to
develop differentiation systems that control batch-to-batch variability is
critical to reducing SC-CM's potential to cause deadly arrhythmias. In addition,
obtaining sufficient numbers of homogeneous cells to form tissues is
challenging. The interdisciplinary nature of this research draws on and furthers
our knowledge of fundamentals in several fields including transport phenomena
and thermodynamics, electrical signal processing, and developmental
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Heart disease is the number one
cause of death in the United States each year for both men and women. Improving
the ability to repair damaged or diseased hearts will provide patients the
opportunity for both a longer and potentially better quality of life. The
results of the PI's research will provide the foundation for educational
materials that will be integrated into her core undergraduate courses and upper
level cell and tissue engineering course. Cardiac nursing students, who in their
careers will be important health educators, will also come to the PI's lab to
learn about stem cell and cardiac regeneration research. Mentoring undergraduate
researchers will continue to be a priority the PI, and she will expand her
efforts to engage students from underrepresented groups. To engage K-12 students
in this research and foster their interest in pursuing a career in science and
engineering, the PI will use existing, successful frameworks including Auburn
University's Youth Experience in Science (YES) camps and Getting Under the
Surface (GUTS) program.