* 1150330
* EAGER:  Cyberinfrastructure for Manufacturing Systems: Needs and Opportunities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* S. Jack Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will evaluate
the limitations of the current Internet structure and protocols, and begin to
characterize what changes or enhancements are needed so that future
manufacturing systems can be set up as quickly and easily as today's e-commerce
systems.A cyberinfrastructure for manufacturing systems does not yet exist, and
it is not clear how the current Internet Web-based service structure could be
applied to manufacturing systems. The project will evaluate several different
frameworks, standards, and architectures that have been developed both for
Internet/e-commerce systems and for manufacturing systems. Commonalities between
the two as well as significant gaps will be exposed. The project will lead to
new understanding of the fundamental limitations of the current Internet web-
based service structure when applied to manufacturing systems. Gaps in the
current state-of-the-practice will be identified, and future directions for
research and development will be outlined that would enable better
interoperatiblity, openness, and scalability of manufacturing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyberinfrastructure has the potential to create a
paradigm shift in the design and operation of manufacturing systems. A
manufacturing cyberinfrastructure with the right functionality can enable the
creation of virtual manufacturing communities, distributed across diverse
physical locations, connected digitally by the Internet and physically by
logistics. This cyberinfrastructure can facilitate emergent efforts to produce a
new product on a small or large scale. The results of this research have the
potential to enable small-scale businesses to break into new markets.