* 1150393
* CAREER: Application of Reversible Covalent Linkages in Organic Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Kian Tan, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 02/28/2017
* USD 550,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemistry Synthesis program is supporting the
research of Professor Kian Tan of Boston College. Professor Tan will be applying
his expertise in the area of catalysis towards the development of site and
enantioselective reactions. The focus is to develop organic catalysts that
recognize specific functional group motifs. The selectivity of the catalysts
will be achieved by developing catalysts that incorporate a substrate-binding
site. Similar to an enzyme, the organic catalyst uses binding of a substrate to
the catalyst to properly orient the desired functional group near a catalytic
residue, yet achieves this goal with a much smaller structure. The first part of
the proposed research focuses on catalysts that recognize 1,2- and 1,3-diols.
Upon identifying the catalysts, they will be applied to the functionalization of
polyfunctional molecules. In the second part, catalysts will be developed that
exploit the use of binding selectivity in order to control site-selectivity.
Inherently less reactive sites on molecules could be functionalized in
preference to more reactive sites. These types of transformations will allow for
potentially more efficient syntheses of complex molecules. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Professor Tan will also initiate an educational program that promotes
chemistry education at the high school level. The program involves providing
content specific mentorship to new high school teachers (0-3 years experience).
Improving teachers content knowledge and ability to relay complex information
will provide a better education for generations of high school students. The
program will include both high schools in the Boston area and will also be made
available to Boston College graduates who are pursuing careers in chemistry
education. Improving the teaching quality at the high school level will not only
aid those students who go on to pursue a scientific career, but will also help
make the public more scientifically literate. Furthermore, the research
developed in this proposal will have a direct impact on the pharmaceutical, fine
chemicals, and agricultural industries, which will improve the quality of life
of the greater public community.