* 1150439
* CAREER: Adjoint-based control of human phonation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Daniel Bodony, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

1150439 Bodony

The human voice comes from a complex interaction between the flexible vocal
folds and the transient glottal jet induced by air forced by the diaphragm
through the glottis. Traumatized vocal folds disrupt speech and little is known
how to efficiently recover the lost voice. First-principles, three-dimensional
simulations of the dynamic vocal folds coupled to the unsteady, turbulent motion
of the air past them, and resulting acoustic field from the nose and mouth, will
guide voice recovery methods by quantitatively determining the acoustic source
and by utilizing a new multi-physics optimization methodology to find effective
methods of recovering lost voice via vocal fold augmentation. Realistic
geometries taken from newly acquired static and dynamic MRI data, along with
corresponding acoustic measurements, will provide validation. Results from
predictive and controlled vocal fold simulations will provide new and complete
information on human voice production, guidance for restoring the voice after
its loss, and low-order, approximate dynamical models of phonation and its
sensitivity to vocal fold modification.

The numerical datasets, their reduced order descriptions, and the validation
data will provide a reliable database on which to build cross-cutting biomedical
investigations of brain-speech coupling using functional MRI as well as showing
a path towards patient-specific vocal fold restorative surgeries. The new
adjoint-based optimization methodology is applicable to a broad class of flows
beyond phonation, including optimization of highly flexible bio-inspired
engineering systems, biological sonation, and boundary layer control.

The work will also be the central theme in a multi-level education program. The
fluid-structure optimization methodology will be incorporated into graduate
level instruction while simplified fluid-structure interaction algorithms will
be brought into an undergraduate course on numerical algorithms through mini-
projects using problem-based learning. Summer undergraduate research experience
through NSF and NASA programs will be used to attract and retain engineering
students from under-represented groups. Further, human phonation and biological
sonation will be central themes in STEM K-12 outreach programs: one based at the
University of Illinois and one part of a larger, national STEM effort. The
outreach programs are aimed at high school students and culminate with the
students building a mechanical larynx and seeing for themselves the process of
phonation.