* 1150430
* CAREER: An Integrated Research and Educational Plan to Develop Selective Pyrolysis Reactors and Improve the Capacity of Students to Work in Multidisciplinary Teams
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Manuel Garcia-Perez, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2017
* USD 400,006.00

(Garcia-Perez)1150430

Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: Distributed fast pyrolysis units
located close to biomass resources could convert between 60 and 75 % of
lignocellulosic materials into crude bio-oils of which 40 % could be further
transformed into transportation fuels via hydrotreatment in rural or centralized
bio-oil refineries. In spite the importance of these reactors, the available
knowledge on kinetics and transport phenomena in lignocellulosic materials has
not been properly integrated for the design of pyrolysis reactors. The mechanism
of lignin pyrolysis reactions responsible for the production of precursors of
transportation fuels (mono phenols and lignin oligomers) also remains poorly
studied. This proposal will advance the understanding of lignin pyrolysis
reactions and the associated transport phenomena to support the development of
multi-scale mathematical models for the design of selective pyrolysis reactors
and take advantage of the problems associated with the design of these reactors
to developed multidisciplinary team working skills in K-12, undergraduate and
graduate students.

The research component involves integrated experimental and simulation tasks
that will allow for the identification of conditions maximizing the production
of precursors of transportation fuels from the pyrolysis of lignocellulosic
materials. The approach proposed to design selective Auger pyrolysis reactors
requires a detailed understanding of the kinetics of primary and secondary
reactions, the evaporation and cracking of liquid intermediates, heat and mass
transfer at the cell level, particle size and solid residence time distribution
and a model to describe the behavior of single biomass particles.

The proposed project will advance the understanding of lignin depolymerization
reactions stressing on the role of lignin liquid intermediates as precursors for
the production of lignin oligomers. A multi-scale mathematical model will be
developed to design selective Auger pyrolysis reactors. For the first time this
model will integrate (1) new kinetic models for lignin pyrolysis, (2) a model to
describe the effect of the evolving biomass cell structures on the effective
axial and radial thermal conductivity and mass diffusivity and (3) a single
particle model that takes into account axial and radial heat and mass transfer
and secondary reactions to identify the conditions which maximize the production
of precursors of transportation fuels.

Broader impact: The kinetic parameters of lignin pyrolysis that will result from
this project, in conjunction with kinetic information reported in the
literature, will support the development of multi-scale models to design and
evaluate more selective pyrolysis reactors. This contribution is significant
because the expected gains in the production of precursors of transportation
fuels from lignocellulosic materials could significantly increase the production
of bio-fuels and reduce the nation's dependency on imported oil. The development
of a systematic methodology to design pyrolysis reactors will be a significant
contribution to future research on the design of other thermochemical reactors
such as gasification and torrefaction reactors. Thus, the outcome of this
project is not only expected to fundamentally advance the field of biomass
thermo-chemical conversion but also have broad and highly positive societal
impacts.

An educational plan to develop multidisciplinary team working skills in K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students working in the development of selective
pyrolysis reactors will be implemented and assessed. Thus the educational
component of this proposal will also have a wide reaching impact because it will
be conducted in such a way that will contribute to the teaching of K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students to work in multidisciplinary teams while
developing teaching modules, experimental set-ups and designs of selective
pyrolysis reactors.