* 1150210
* CAREER:  Smooth Group Actions - Persistence and Prevalence of Chaotic Behavior
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Danijela Damjanovic, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 01/31/2015
* USD 107,470.00

This project will address several important questions concerning higher-rank
smooth group actions: characterization of actions that cannot be obtained from
classical dynamical systems (diffeomorphisms and flows) via classical
constructions; the prevalence of chaotic behavior in the space of partially
hyperbolic higher-rank actions; the extent to which global hypoellipticity of
the sublaplacian for conservative actions gives a general set-up for stability
under perturbations; the search for new nonalgebraic examples of weakly rigid
higher-rank actions. The creation of a bridge between findings on algebraic
higher-rank actions that rely on analytic tools and the more dynamical approach
used for general smooth actions is crucial for an improved understanding of
rigidity phenomena. For algebraic higher-rank actions, the project will study
connections between cohomological obstructions obtained geometrically and those
obtained analytically from the induced action on representations. Part of the
strategy is to work towards answering these questions by focusing on
representative examples. The principal investigator's main interest is in
actions by groups that have higher rank but that lack rich geometric or
algebraic structure (e.g., abelian groups, nilpotent groups, solvable groups).

Persistence of dynamics under perturbations is an old question in science. We
completely understand the future and the past only for sufficiently simple
systems, which are merely approximations of observed phenomena. Chaotic behavior
was initially considered to be a pathology. However, it turns out to be a source
of stability. Studies showing that it is a healthy heartbeat that demonstrates
the presence of chaos are not surprising, provided that one accepts the fact
that nature prefers stability. For systems that fall under the heading "group
actions" the relation between chaos and stability is even more dramatic: weaker
chaotic behavior tends to imply stronger stability for the system. Group actions
can be thought of as systems with multidimensional time. As such, they are
useful models in biology (neural networks), chemistry (quasi-crystals), and
computer science (multidimensional data storage). In particular models, chaos
appears in different guises. It is a goal of this project to explore conditions
under which systems with diverse chaotic behavior preserve their dynamical
properties under perturbations. This topic is especially amenable to introducing
students to research in the area of dynamical systems. Through the study of
simple models, students can develop intuition, learn what the open problems are,
and make their own contribution to the actual research by performing specific
computations. This is the rationale for the project's outreach component, which
is aimed at high-school girls and the goal of which is to introduce mathematical
research and insights into academic careers to female students at an early stage
in their intellectual development.