* 1150567
* CAREER:   Toward the Creation of Custom Bacterial Organelles from Engineered /Salmonella/ Pdu Bacterial Microcompartments
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Matthew Francis, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 05/31/2017
* USD 528,191.00

Traditionally, bacteria have been thought of as simple "bags of enzymes" with no
significant internal structure. However, some bacteria contain a set of proteins
that come together to form compartments, termed bacterial microcompartments,
that are much like the organelles in more complex organisms. With this project,
researchers will use one such microcompartment to create a separate, customized
environment in the bacterial cell "much like a reactor in a factory" for the
production of useful chemicals. Challenges that will be addressed by this
research include determining what proteins are required to form the
microcompartments, and how best to sequester reactions and chemicals within the
resulting structures.

Broader Impacts Synthetic biology is a growing field with great potential for
the development of biologically-based manufacturing. This synthetic biology
research project will directly impact society by enabling eco-friendly methods
for the production of useful chemicals that are currently derived from petroleum
or via reactions with potentially harmful chemicals. Graduate students on the
project will be trained in the field of synthetic biology, and results of the
research will be presented at conferences and published in peer-reviewed
journals. Furthermore, the investigator and a team of student volunteers will
communicate the potential and challenges of synthetic biology research to public
audiences of all ages and backgrounds at the Bay Area Science Festival, Science
Cafés, and service organization meetings. An annual workshop will also be
organized to educate the volunteer students on how to describe their research to
non-scientists in a clear manner a valuable skill often lacking even in students
at the graduate level. The goal of these outreach efforts is to raise the
science literacy of the general public at all age levels.