* 1150098
* CAREER: Supporting Computational Algorithmic Thinking (SCAT) - Exploring the Development of Computational Algorithmic Thinking Capabilities in African-American Middle School Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Jakita Thomas, Spelman College
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2017
* USD 434,567.00

The Supporting Computational Algorithmic Thinking (SCAT) project at Spelman
College includes activities that develop computational thinking and encourage
middle school, African-American girls to consider careers in computer science.
Over a three-year period, the girls attend summer camp sessions of two weeks
where they learn to design interactive games. They participate in workshops,
field trips, and game-design competitions. Experts in Computational Algorithmic
Thinking as well as undergraduate, computer science majors at Spelman College
guide the middle-school students in their design of games and exploration of
related STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on the development of
Computational Algorithmic Thinking is an integral part of the project. The
researcher is investigating how middle-school girls develop computational
thinking and problem solving skills. Game design has been shown to be an area
that is attractive to adolescents and it requires extensive problem solving and
computational algorithmic thinking. Within the context of designing games
individually and within groups, the researcher is assessing how the girls
develop computational algorithmic thinking, and what difficulties they
experience. Researchers are also assessing how the project experiences influence
the students' self-perceptions of themselves as problem solvers. At the same
time, the girls engaged in educational experiences where they are expected to
gain knowledge in mathematics, programming, and reasoning, as well as game
design. Research data consists of artifacts that the students have created,
observations, participant journals, and
interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational Algorithmic Thinking is an
essential skill for most STEM careers. African-American women are
underrepresented in many STEM fields and especially in computer science. The
goals of the project are to prepare girls with these essential skills and to
increase their confidence in participating in STEM education. The project is
also exposing participating girls to a wide variety of STEM careers. In
addition, the materials, lesson plans, and activities generated in the project
are available to be used, without charge, by other groups interested in
designing similar programs.