* 1150406
* CAREER: Investigation of Biomechanics of Avian Gastrulation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Evan Zamir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 05/31/2017
* USD 0.00

1150406 Zamir

Intellectual Merits The primitive streak is the "organizing center" for a
fundamental process in early development of reptiles, birds, and mammals called
gastrulation. During gastrulation cells from the outside of the embryo travel
inward through the embryo, itself, which eventually leads to the formation of
the internal organs. Without the evolutionary advent of gastrulation, the animal
form might still be stuck at the flatworm stage. Gastrulation depends on a
critical process known as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, which represents
a fundamental switch in cell behavior from preferring a cohesive interconnected
state between individual cells to one in which cells prefer to move about
independently. It turns out that this switch, which is normal and healthy during
early development, can be devastating to humans when it turns on again in the
case of some malignant tumors. Indeed, this is the switch that is one of the
primary causes of cancer spreading known as metastasis. It is now known that
this switch is also one of the primary drivers of fibrotic disease processes.
The objective of this project is to study the biophysical mechanisms underlying
the switch during gastrulation using the bird embryo as a model system. Our
overall hypothesis is that localized upregulation of actomyosin contractility is
a required driving force that underlies maintenance of the primitive streak
during gastrulation and is critical for the cellular switch. To better
understand the specific role of actomyosin contractility in these processes, the
investigators will use a combination of high-resolution time-lapse microscopy,
quantitative bioengineering analyses, and biochemical/molecular perturbations.
The long-term goal of the research is to understand how mechanical forces
regulate and control this switch, and to use this knowledge to treat diseases,
such as cancer and fibrosis, as well as to construct and shape living tissues de
novo that can be used for applications in tissue engineering.

Broader Impacts This project will result in the advanced training of
undergraduate and graduate researchers with unique analytical skills based on a
multi-disciplinary, integrative approach involving experimental and theoretical
aspects of cell and developmental biology and engineering. Students from
underrepresented groups will be recruited to participate in the research
program. GIFT (Georgia Internships for Teachers) brings teachers from all over
metro Atlanta to work during the summer in science and engineering labs at
Georgia Tech, so that they may gain a better understanding of scientific
research and develop innovative lesson plans to bring with them back to their
classrooms. As part of an ongoing partnership with the GIFT program, the
investigators have developed a cohesive, hands-on curriculum, which conforms to
Georgia state teaching standards, and is designed to teach broad principles of
biology to high school students. The educational component of this project will
make a significant impact not only on the students and teachers who are directly
involved, but successful implementation of the plan will involve disseminating
the curriculum to the wider metro Atlanta area, and eventually, statewide
throughout Georgia.