* 1150332
* CAREER: A Multidisciplinary Framework for Innovative Design of Wind Turbines
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Kivanc Ekici, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Kivanc Ekici&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Tennessee-
Knoxville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: A Multidisciplinary Framework for
Innovative Design of Wind Turbines&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With renewed emphasis
on energy independence, there is an increased need to improve the reliability,
efficiency and performance of current and future power generation technologies.
It is clear that the wind turbine technology will play a vital role in ensuring
the nation's energy independence. However, structural failure of wind turbine
blades leading to high maintenance costs and intermittent operation is common,
and accurate prediction of unsteady aerodynamic forces acting on wind turbine
blades remains elusive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is critical to focus attention
on the development of novel high fidelity analysis and design techniques that
are 10 to 100 times faster than what is currently available. This project will
integrate research and education to investigate and devise novel methods for
wind turbine design technology with greatly decreased computational cost, while
educating next generation of wind energy engineers. The project will improve
complex multi-physics understanding by establishing an elegant approach for
innovative wind turbine designs. The education component of the plan will focus
on training students who translate the proposed research into real-world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate unsteady aerodynamic modeling and rapid design of wind turbines
by developing and applying two very efficient computational methods - a "multi-
frequency" harmonic balance method and an adjoint method - which will be used in
an optimization algorithm to design innovative wind turbines with improved
aerodynamic, aeroelastic, and aeroacoustic characteristics. Furthermore,
sensitivity information will be used to quantify uncertainty in unsteady flow
predictions. Design optimization methods developed for wind turbines are
directly applicable to turbomachinery used in aircraft engines and land-based
power generators. Current designs may be improved for increased fuel efficiency,
better aeromechanic characteristics, and increased safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The educational and outreach
plan includes development of a wind engineering course and a wind turbine
aerodynamics and aeroelasticity course. Other activities include training of
next-generation researchers, involving undergraduate students in cutting-edge
research, and participating in summer outreach programs that target high school
teachers and K-12 students. Outreach efforts will be augmented by collaborations
with an established Professor of Teacher and Science Education and the College
of Engineering's Office of Academic and Student Affairs. Finally, an executable
version of computational tools developed in this project will be made available
to interested parties for research use.