* 1150687
* CAREER: Surface-Enhanced Nonlinear Spectroscopy: Mapping Electronic Excited States, Probing Surface Adsorbate Structure, and Ultrasensitive Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Jon Camden, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 04/30/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This CAREER award by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program supports
Professor Jon Camden at the University of Tennessee Knoxville to develop surface
nonlinear spectroscopy as a analytical method for probing the two-photon
properties of molecules, surface adsorbate structure, and ultrasensitive
detection. A method for measuring absolute SEHRS enhancement factors is
presented and subsequently utilized to elucidate the respective roles of
chemical and electromagnetic enhancements in SEHRS. The wavelength dependent
nature of the molecule-plasmon coupling and of resonance enhanced hyper-Raman
will provide information on the complex interplay of molecular excited states
important in two-photon processes. Detailed comparisons between experiment and
theory are pursued, which will benchmark new electronic structure methods for
the calculation of nonlinear molecular properties. The studies will demonstrate
SEHRS to be a powerful, routinely applicable, and ultrasensitive analytical
tool. Further, this work will provide the basis for future studies of surface-
enhanced nonlinear spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
scientific objectives of this proposal, the PI seeks to increase the number of
high-school students pursuing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) majors in college. The PI will collaborate to provide curricular
enrichment to local public high-schools through the creation of ASPIRE teams
(Aspiring Scientists Participating in Research and Education). ASPIRE teams will
deliver hands-on laboratory experiments to local high school classrooms once a
month during the regular school year, for a total of six activities. The
activities are aligned to meet the requirements of Tennessee State curriculum
and introduce students to the properties of nanoscale materials. Regular
assessments are used to refine the activities and gauge their impact.