* 1150062
* CAREER: Metric Geometry Techniques for Approximation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Yury Makarychev, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,988.00

Combinatorial optimization problems are of great importance to numerous
applications. They arise in operations research, machine learning, VLSI design,
computational biology and many other areas. Many optimization problems however
are NP-hard and thus cannot be solved exactly in polynomial time unless P=NP. It
is natural therefore to look for approximation algorithms, efficient algorithms
that find only approximate solutions. Design and analysis of approximation
algorithms is a very active research area. Various approaches for solving
combinatorial optimization problems have appeared in the last three decades.
However, despite significant progress, many important problems are still open.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to advance the application of
metric geometry techniques for solving combinatorial optimization problems,
investigate new methods for designing approximation algorithms, and develop
tools for analyzing the performance of approximation algorithms on real-life
instances. This research project will be both theoretically important and
practically relevant and it will lead to development of approximation algorithms
for important applied problems that occur in many fields of science and
engineering. Specifically, the PI will work on the following
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Traditionally most research has focused on
analyzing the worst case performance of approximation algorithms. However,
practitioners observe that instances of combinatorial optimization problems that
arise in practice are often not as hard as worst case instances. The PI will
study semi-random models for various combinatorial optimization problems, and
develop approximation algorithms that perform well on semi-random instances.
This can perhaps explain what we see in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Recent
research in the hardness of approximation initiated by Khot identified Unique
Games Problem as a combinatorial obstacle to the development of approximation
algorithms for many problems. The PI will study algorithmic techniques for
solving the Unique Games Problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* The PI will study lift-
and-project hierarchies of linear programming (LP) and semi-definite programming
(SDP) relaxations, analyze their integrality gaps, and design subexponential
approximation algorithms that use these hierarchies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
There is a close connection between some areas of theoretical computer science
and pure mathematics. To settle down some problems in combinatorial
optimization, we need to resolve closely connected open problems in analysis.
The PI will explore several problems with deep ties to computer science and
mathematics.