* 1150427
* CAREER: Long-time asymptotics of completely integrable systems with connections to random matrices and partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2019
* Irina Nenciu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The research side of this project focuses on understanding the long-time
asymptotics for a diverse set of models from analysis and mathematical physics.
In particular, the principal investigator will concentrate on three projects:
(1) the continued study of a discrete version of the defocusing nonlinear
Schroedinger equation, in particular, its connections with orthogonal
polynomials on the unit circle, Lie-Poisson algebras, and its continuum limits;
(2) the study of properties (e.g., expected diagonalization times) of certain
random matrix ensembles when considered as initial data for integrable flows
such as the Toda lattice and the QR-algorithm; and (3) the study, using Riemann-
Hilbert methods, of long-time asymptotics for integrable systems, namely, the
Toda lattice and the Korteweg-deVries equation, and for certain nonintegrable
perturbations of these systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research topics of
this project fall in the wide areas of mathematical physics and partial
differential equations, with a particular emphasis on questions related to such
well-established mathematical areas as completely integrable systems, random
matrices, and their applications to certain numerical algorithms. Partial
differential equations emerge in a variety of physical contexts as mathematical
models for the time-evolution of certain physical quantities. A particular class
of such equations are the so-called completely integrable systems, which are
characterized by the fact they satisfy a sufficiently large (in a sense which
can be made precise) number of conservation laws. The theory of completely
integrable systems has a long and distinguished history. Over the past thirty
years, in particular, interest in the field has been fueled on the one hand by
the fact that many of the equations known to be completely integrable are
obtained as models of fluid dynamics, and on the other hand by the close
connections that have been discovered with many fields of pure mathematics, such
as Lie algebras or symplectic and Poisson geometry. One of the fundamental goals
of the current project is to expand and deepen the understanding of these
connections and to widen the class of models to which the techniques of
completely integrable theory apply. Hence one aims to describe as fully as
possible the solutions to these models and hopefully to gain thereby insights
into real-life phenomena. An essential part of the proposal is its educational
component, which is centered around the organization of an annual summer school
for advanced graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s on various topics of current
research interest at the juncture of analysis, partial differential equations,
and numerical analysis. All talks in the summer school will be delivered on
preassigned articles by the participants. Beyond its broad mathematical impact,
the project will allow the principal investigator to expand other educational
activities as well. She will support the work of graduate students through
advanced courses, seminars, and student research workshops, and she will work
with local chapters of the Association for Women In Mathematics (AWM) in the
Chicago area to promote the advancement of women in mathematical careers.