* 1150150
* Collaborative Research: Planning grant: E2textiles: Ethno Electronic Textile Designs for Broadening Participation in Computing for American Indian Youth, Teachers, and Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 07/31/2014
* USD 100,064.00

The University of Pennsylvania and Arizona State University will investigate how
American Indian youth, communities, and pre-service teachers learn and design
with computational textiles. Computational or e-textiles,textile artifacts that
contain embedded computers or are computationally generated, are promising
portals into youths' existing interests in new media and design and connecting
them to computer science education by using indigenous communities' existing
craft practices and thus strengthening school-community relationships. The
EthnoEtextiles project expands e-textiles in new directions by integrating the
following successful developments and NSF work: (1) a computational construction
kit, the Lilypad Arduino, that can promote the type of technology fluency
missing in students' creative explorations with technology; (2) teacher
professional development approaches that encourage culturally relevant and
reflective teaching with technology; and (3) workshop models that create
connections among youth, members of their community, and their cultural
heritage. The purpose is to develop relationships and workshop models for youth
and teachers that can become a platform for larger systemic and sustainable
initiatives in computer science education for American Indian youth, teachers,
and community members. The proposed project will contribute to our growing
understanding of teaching and learning with electronic textiles in computer
science education and help diversify participation by reaching traditionally
underserved communities of American Indian peoples.