* 1150593
* CAREER: Collective Quantum Phenomena of Matter and Light by Design
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Hui Deng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 12/31/2016
* USD 568,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This program studies novel collective
quantum phenomena using a new semiconductor cavity system with strong matter-
light couplings. It builds on the recent advancement in both photonic crystals
and polaritons - strongly coupled semiconductor exciton-photon modes. The new
cavity structure integrates a designable photonic-crystal mirror to enable not
only flexible control of the polaritons, but also coherent coupling of multiple
polariton systems, thereby opening a new path in polariton research beyond
condensation physics. Physics of perplexing collective quantum phenomena will be
elucidated by new controls over the quantum gas. Novel quantum phenomena will be
sought after by purposeful design of the fundamental properties of the system.
Manybody Hamiltonian will be investigated and modeled with coupled-polariton
lattices. The research will improve our fundamental understanding of matter-
light interactions and collective quantum phenomena, and will provide an
experimental platform at the research frontier interfacing cavity-quantum-
electrodynamics, manybody physics, and quantum simulation. Public lectures,
international summer schools, and K-12 science competitions will be held to
disseminate the knowledge and cultivate interest in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
mechanics is the language for the microscopic world of single or few particles
like photons and atoms. When the number of particles grows large, interactions
destroys quantum correlations among the particles and the system enters the
classical world. In some special cases, however, quantum correlations survive
among a macroscopic number of particles in a macroscopically large system
leading to remarkable collective quantum phenomena and their applications.
Examples include lasers, superconductors, and Bose-Einstein Condensation of
atomic gasses used in precision measurements. This CAREER program will create,
control and simulate novel collective quantum phenomena in a uniquely designable
and scalable system, on a solid-state platform, with a built-in matter-light
interface, at temperatures many orders of magnitude higher than required by,
e.g., atomic gases. This will be accomplished by developing a new cavity
structure for a matter-light hybrid quantum gas: the semiconductor microcavity
polaritons. The research will consist of a synergy of computer-aided design and
modeling, nano-fabrication, and advanced spectroscopy and quantum optical
measurements. Through the cutting edge research, young scientists will be
recruited and trained as the future leaders in science and technology. The
knowledge of abstract quantum phenomena and their connection to people's daily
lives will be communicated to a broad audience via public lectures and
international summer schools. Physics competitions and demos will be organized
to cultivate interest in science among K-12 students. The creation of collective
quantum phenomena on a technologically practical platform will lay the
groundwork for future quantum technologies, such as quantum light sources with
ultra-low energy threshold, ultrafast opto-spintronics devices, and quantum
simulators.