* 1150281
* CAREER: Innovations in Markov Chains: Metrics, Duality and Liftings
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2020
* Thomas Hayes, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2020
* USD 430,817.00

Markov chain simulation is a very general technique applied to a wide spectrum
of problems in the physical sciences. From explicit simulations of physical and
dynamical processes, such as fluid dynamics and spin systems, to algorithms for
sampling from probability distributions over enormous sets of combinatorial
objects, Markov chains are ubiquitous. This project will seek to improve the
design and analysis of such algorithms, leading to faster running times.

Understanding the performance of a Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm involves
proving bounds on how quickly it approaches its limiting, or "stationary",
distribution. Due to the inherent randomness in any Markov chain simulation,
there is often no reliable empirical criterion for measuring this convergence;
rather, one must rely on theoretical guarantees. The PI will focus on the twin
long-standing problems of how to redesign Markov chains to actually converge
faster, and of proving better convergence guarantees, both of which allow us to
safely terminate MCMC simulations sooner. Over the course of this work, these
goals will be approached using techniques from three main thematic groupings:

1. In the "Coupling Method" for proving convergence bounds, one seeks to show
that two copies of a Markov chain can be "made to approach each other" under
some metric on the state space. To improve this kind of analysis, the PI seeks
to find better metrics, i.e., better definitions of the distance between two
states.

2. Several different mathematical notions of duality have played important roles
in the analysis of Markov chains. For example, the duality between the spin
system and the cluster characterization of the Ising model, a standard model of
magnetic materials, the high-temperature/low-temperature duality for the Potts
model on a planar graph, and strong stationary duality, which underlies a
recently introduced technique called the Evolving Sets method.

3. The PI will attempt to convert reversible Markov chains into non-reversible
"lifted" Markov chains, by adding additional "momentum" information to the
states. These lifted chains allow sampling from the original distribution, but
can run quadratically faster.

The project will include the creation and deployment of a free web resource,
"Markov Chains Central," which will include a collection of new and existing
laboratory applets for simulating and experimenting with Markov chains and
various measures of convergence. These applets will help students visualize
Markov chains and understand them through experimentation and play. The project
also features an integrated educational plan, which provides for wide
dissemination of generated knowledge and educational materials. This work will
support undergraduate and graduate student research and mentoring. Effort will
be made to maximize involvement of women and minority students.