* 1150292
* CAREER: Hippocampal and prefrontal mechanisms underlying the temporal context of episodic memory
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Norbert Fortin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2018
* USD 725,000.00

Across the animal kingdom, episodic memory is a remarkable and highly adaptive
ability. Episodic memory refers to the capacity to remember the events in one's
life, including details about the specific location and time in which each
experience occurred. Although it has been extensively studied, the brain basis
of episodic memory remains poorly understood. This project addresses this
important issue using a rodent model of episodic memory that focuses on the
capacity to remember "when" specific events occurred (i.e., the order of events
in a sequence and the time elapsed since an event occurred). More specifically,
this project focuses on characterizing the role of the hippocampus and
prefrontal cortex using high-precision techniques, such as localized brain
inactivation and recording the electrical properties of single brain cells while
rats are engaged in memory tasks. This project will identify the distinct roles
that the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex play in remembering when specific
events occurred. Furthermore, the results will also likely shed light on how the
two brain structures interact during information processing. A concurrent
objective of this project is to develop effective educational practices and
materials to promote early science training and awareness in groups
underrepresented in science, and to support the development of young scientists
in the laboratory and classroom. All developed educational tools will be openly
shared on the lab website (http://fortinlab.bio.uci.edu) as well as online
repositories of educational information such as Multimedia Educational Resource
for Learning and Online Teaching (merlot.org) and OER Commons (oercommons.org).