* 1150192
* EAGER: Mobile Application Security through Remote Sandboxing and Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Sajal Das, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2014
* USD 199,986.00

The last few years have witnessed an explosive growth in the number of personal
mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets. This growth has been followed
by an even more exceptional increase in the download of mobile applications, as
well as in the related security threats. In this context, the cloud computing
paradigm can be leveraged to improve mobile application security. The
fundamental idea is to install the mobile application on a remote server in the
cloud infrastructure rather than on the device. Then the application can be
accessed with techniques similar to remote desktop computing. This approach is
referred to as remote sandboxing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major advantage of
this scheme is that it is very suitable to efficiently offer advanced security
features. To this end, remote sandboxing is complemented with a framework for
cloud-based security services tailored to mobile applications. The framework
supports heterogeneous mobile devices and platforms, and provides methods to
improve the resource utilization of the cloud infrastructure. Furthermore, it
provides energy-efficient and reliable support for remote networking of mobile
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remote sandboxing framework will enable a new
cloud delivery model, where security services specific to mobile applications
are offered to the users. It will also benefit cloud computing by improving
efficiency in resource allocation and management, as well as by fostering
research on security. Finally, the research will promote the awareness of
security threats and privacy issues affecting personal devices, and include
activities targeted to undergraduate and K-12 students.