* 1150616
* Doctoral Dissertation Research  Domesticating the Ocean: The Work of Conservation in Southwestern Okinawa
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Michael Dove, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 03/31/2013
* USD 1,709.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: &lt;br/&gt;Domesticating the Ocean: The Work of
Conservation in Southwestern Okinawa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine environments
are important to manage in order to ensure biodiversity and human well-being.
New technologies and policies to ensure these goals have pursued in varied
settings, yet little is known about how they translate into to socially
responsive and ecologically robust conservation practices. To address this
issue, this research investigates the relationship between biodiversity-
enhancing technologies, marine conservation, and perceptions of the ocean in
southwestern Okinawa. There, international conservationists use marine
technologies developed by national industries to manage the ocean, with
significant impacts on the physical appearance of the seascape and its social
meanings for coastal residents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use
ethnographic, interview, and archival research methods to investigate how
conservationists, researchers, and marine laborers imagine and construct the
ocean environment. The PIs will examine how new methods of management change
long-standing perceptions of the ocean, and how scientific and nonscientific
ideas about the ocean are integrated and reconciled. This research will provide
new theoretical knowledge about the practices and consequences of international
conservation, how different kinds of knowledges are reconciled, and how
conservation practices are liked to national identities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research findings will be disseminated to a wide range of
audiences, in both English and Japanese. These findings will help scholars and
policymakers to better understand how changes in attitudes toward and the
management of environments take place, and how management can be improved.