* 1150682
* CAREER:  Integrating DNA and Inorganic Surfaces for Functional Materials Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Yaroslava Yingling, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2018
* USD 444,872.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is to
develop a fundamental understanding of the structure and properties of DNA-
functionalized surfaces and to formulate rules that will facilitate the design
of new functional materials for biosensors and enhance our ability to control
and direct the materials assembly processes. Surfaces functionalized with DNA
are used for biosensing or for the self-assembly of biological, organic and
inorganic moieties. DNA density and structure on the surface, choice of surface
material and curvature, and type of surface immobilization can significantly
influence the properties of DNA-functionalized surface and the behavior of DNA-
based material assembly. This study will utilize molecular modeling techniques
to formulate a theoretical description of the correlation between DNA structure,
surface design and properties of DNA-functionalized
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will facilitate
progress in materials for DNA microarrays and biosensors, DNA based targeted
drug delivery, DNA nanomaterials assembly, and DNA directed surface assembly and
patterning. The proposed research program will be closely integrated with the
educational activities and will provide new education opportunities in
disciplines related to DNA and functional surfaces for high school, graduate and
undergraduate students. The results from this research will be integrated into a
new course addressing nanoscale simulations and modeling. This project includes
an outreach module on materials design for high and middle school students.