* 1150376
* CAREER: Integration of Prior Knowledge and Patient-specific Observations in Vascular Growth and Remodeling Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Seungik Baek, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 01/31/2018
* USD 448,368.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to combine a computational model of a vascular disease with patient-specific
clinical data in order to develop an integrative approach to make clinically
relevant predictions. The system investigated integrates prior knowledge and
uncertainties in modeling and in clinical measurements. The goals are (i) to
develop computational methods that integrate vascular disease models, prior
knowledge, and patient-specific observations to predict vascular growth and
remodeling for the individual patient and (ii) to demonstrate the utility of the
proposed approach in clinical management of abdominal aortic aneurysms. In
particular, results from this investigation will be applied to predict the
stability of proximal neck dilation after endovascular aneurysm repair and
estimate the stress and rupture potential in the wall of the aneurysm.
&lt;br/&gt;Vascular disease is the primary cause of death in the US and western
countries. Providing new technologies for precise estimation of the stage of
such diseases and reliable predictions of the outcomes of clinical treatment,
this CAREER project will have significant impact on medical care, social
welfare, and economics. If successful, this project will illustrate how to
transfer an advanced, but deterministic, computational model to clinical
applications. This will promote new collaboration between biomedical engineers
and physicians by providing a systematic tool that they can integrate with their
expertise. The education plan focuses on integrating previously developed
individual education and public outreach programs to provide K-PhD students and
general public research experiences in biomedical engineering and to promote
participation of minority and underrepresented students in biomedical
engineering research and education. Specifically, an interdisciplinary summer
program will offer a diverse environment for high school, undergraduate,
graduate students, and high school teachers to team up and create innovative
ideas for biomedical research, public outreach and K-12 curricula.