* 1150925
* CAREER: Reliability as an Emergent Property of Transportation Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Lei Zhang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to investigate how individual travel behavior (e.g., route choice, trip
scheduling, and selection of transportation mode) and transportation-related
organizational decision-making (e.g., investment and pricing decisions) impact
travel reliability (percentage of on-time arrival at destination). This research
tests the hypothesis that minor behavior changes at the individual or
organizational level leads to significant changes in travel reliability. The
theory explains how individuals and organizations actually make transportation-
related decisions, recognizing that they do not have perfect information or
unlimited computational capabilities. The empirical portion of the research
addresses a gap in the transportation science literature by employing smart
phones as mobile GPS sensors to collect travel behavior
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will provide decision-
support tools that could help transform transportation systems operations and
planning practices. These tools will enable transportation agencies to assess
strategies that induce individual and organizational behavioral changes (e.g.,
increased transit ridership, improved trip departure time choice, better route
diversion decisions, and more cost-effective transportation investments) that
could mitigate traffic congestion and improve travel reliability. Over the long
run, a more efficient and reliable transportation system will stimulate economic
growth, enhance quality of life, and support emergency response. As this
research breaks traditional disciplinary boundaries between the behavioral
sciences and systems engineering, it also sets the stage for a new research
direction that focuses on optimizing transportation system performance based on
how choices are actually made, not how they should be made. This project will
involve high school undergraduate, and graduate underrepresented students in
various research tasks. Research findings will be broadly distributed through a
K-12 Transportation Education Web Portal, an open-access Wiki site, and other
professional and community outreach efforts.