* 1150589
* SBIR Phase II:  Software-as-a-Service Customized Machine Translation for Commercial Language Service Providers and Their Clients
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Alon Lavie, Safaba Translation Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2015
* USD 700,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase-II project develops
advanced&lt;br/&gt;technology capabilities for constructing and deploying
client-adapted&lt;br/&gt;automated language translation systems within
commercial settings that are&lt;br/&gt;used by globalizing enterprises and the
language service provider companies&lt;br/&gt;(LSPs) that provide translation
services to such enterprise clients. The&lt;br/&gt;developed technology
leverages databases of previously-translated material in&lt;br/&gt;order to
produce client-adapted high-quality fully-automatic translations
for&lt;br/&gt;commercial language service providers (LSPs) and their enterprise
clients.&lt;br/&gt;This approach provides a scalable and less-costly solution
for&lt;br/&gt;creating and deploying client-specific customized Machine
Translation (MT)&lt;br/&gt;engines. Once deployed, these customized MT systems
expand the capabilities&lt;br/&gt;of clients to translate volumes of content
that are not feasible to translate&lt;br/&gt;using current
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project lies in the impact&lt;br/&gt;that it will have on the broad commercial
translation industry. The&lt;br/&gt;technology developed in the project is
likely to significantly reduce barriers&lt;br/&gt;to wide-spread adoption of MT
technology by the broad LSP industry and their&lt;br/&gt;enterprise client-base.
The 2010 commercial translation market is a $26&lt;br/&gt;billion industry,
growing at a healthy pace. Current commercial MT offerings&lt;br/&gt;are
expensive and too difficult to deploy for most enterprises and
service&lt;br/&gt;providers. Free web-based translation services serve casual
users, but do not&lt;br/&gt;meet the quality and security needs of enterprises.
The technology developed&lt;br/&gt;in this project and the cloud-based delivery
model support scalable,&lt;br/&gt;easy-to-integrate MT services, which are
highly attractive to a broad range of&lt;br/&gt;potential clients. This approach
will support cost-effective content generation into&lt;br/&gt;multiple target
languages at a massive scale, a capability that is essential&lt;br/&gt;for
globalizing US enterprises in order to compete in the information-
rich&lt;br/&gt;market place of the 21st century.