* 1150462
* CAREER:  Passive Seismic Protective Systems for Nonstructural Systems and Components in Multistory Building
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Claudia Marin, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2019
* USD 503,290.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to protect through isolation devices and energy dissipation mechanisms critical
equipment and components within essential multistory buildings during earthquake
events. This objective will be accomplished through theoretical analysis and
real-environment, full-scale laboratory tests. Specific research tasks are aimed
at (1) examining the ability of passive systems settings to protect critical
equipment and components; (2) identifying optimal characteristics of the
protective measures; (3) identifying and evaluating the applicability of
performance limits of the passive systems under different types of ground
motions; (4) validating the equipment-passive systems arrangements using the
NEES facility at the University at Buffalo SUNY; and (5) implementing a
framework for analysis, design, and implementation of the protective measures.
This project aims to fill current gaps in knowledge regarding interrelationship
among multiple variables controlling the behavior of equipment and components
within multistory buildings during an earthquake. The expected contributions
include the validation of high-performance platforms that permit straightforward
predictions of performance of equipment and components, and cost-effective
implementations of protective measures. The research and education plans include
both industry cooperation for systems implementation and a comprehensive
education program aimed at promoting participation of underrepresented groups in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implementing the seismic protective options
emerging from this research will reduce the vulnerabilities during and after an
earthquake of essential facilities, such as hospitals, data centers, emergency
response centers, power plants, transportation management centers, and
telecommunication centers. The envisioned seismic protective options are
flexible mechanisms tailored to control or avoid earthquake damage on a
building's essential equipment and on its components, by reducing accelerations
and by controlling deformations and displacements. The research will directly
address critical needs of the earthquake engineering community by validating
high-performance options to protect equipment and components of essential
facilities. The resulting guidelines for analysis, design, and implementation
will promote and facilitate the adoption of seismic protection for equipment and
components to be used in essential facilities. The research has the potential to
significantly advance current nonstructural qualification practices and
fragility testing methodologies. The multi-faceted education program of this
project aims to increase participation of underrepresented groups in STEM by
bringing together students from Howard University to provide industrial exposure
and interdisciplinary experiences for students, inspire K-12 students to pursue
science and engineering careers by conducting outreach activities in the
Washington, D.C. area, motivate undergraduate and graduate student interests in
K-12 outreach, and integrate research and coursework.