* 1150348
* CAREER:Fluid Dynamics of bacterial aggregation  and formation of biofilm streamers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Arezoo Ardekani, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 229,788.00

1150348 Ardekani

Biofilms cost the U.S. billions of dollars every year due to human and animal
infections, product contamination, and biofouling of membranes. Deep subsurface
biofilms can be used for enhanced oil recovery and carbon sequestration in
addition to bioremediation of contaminants in groundwater. Despite widespread
implications of biofilms, the underlying hydrodynamics of bacterial aggregation
that eventually leads to formation of biofilm streamers are currently unknown.

Intellectual Merit: Properties of bacteria-produced extracellular polymeric
substances consisting of a filamentous network of macromolecules surrounded in a
fluid play an important role in biofilm formation. In order to understand
biofilm formation and growth, the dynamics of bacterial aggregation at
ecologically relevant spatiotemporal scales in the presence of flow while
interacting with extracellular polymeric substances must be studied. This is a
challenge largely unanswered to date. The proposed research will employ state-
of-the-art three-dimensional computational fluid dynamics and experimental
techniques to transform our understanding of bacterial aggregation due to flow
field, bacteria shape, bacteria motility and rheological properties of
extracellular polymer. The literature shows that rigid particles ranging in
sizes from microns to centimeters robustly aggregate in different flows of
viscoelastic fluids. The proposed research investigates a hypothesis that motile
microorganisms in viscoelastic fluids undergo strong hydrodynamic forces that
result in their aggregation to the surfaces and/or each other. The fundamental
knowledge about the aggregation of bacteria in the presence of flow in such
complex fluids can transform our understanding of these microbial processes and
advance the ability to control biofilm formation.

Broader Impact: The implications of this research extend to important
biological, environmental, and oceanographic applications. Understanding of
bacterial aggregation and formation of biofilms is crucial for human health and
environmental control. Additionally, the ability to systematically investigate
the interaction of bacteria using computational fluid dynamics, while capturing
its detailed 3D response in complex fluids, is essential for correctly
predicting the future state of the pathogen colonization in mucosal tissues and
tracts. The proposed activity will significantly contribute to interdisciplinary
training of the next generation of scientists and engineers. This grant will
provide support for training of two graduate students fostering the development
of state-of-the-art tools in the PI's laboratory. A new graduate course will be
developed to integrate the research into graduate education. This
interdisciplinary research will be used as a platform to attract diverse groups
such as women and underrepresented minorities. The PI will lead an engineering
education partnership with the Engineering and Technology Magnet Program for the
South Bend (Indiana) Community School Corporation at Riley High School that
focuses on restoring an aquatic ecosystem of a local creek by controlling
Escherichia coli levels. The work will include hands-on experiments and projects
for the students with the purpose of reinforcing basic principles of engineering
analysis and design. By taking advantage of established articulation
relationships, female and underrepresented minority undergraduate students from
the all women's Saint Mary's and two Historically Black Colleges will be trained
in experimental and mathematical aspects of the proposed research.