* 1150316
* CAREER: Development of High-Performance Lignocellulosic Composites for Building Envelopes: Authentic Learning About Sustainable Materials Through Research-Based Inductive Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Vikram Yadama, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 412,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will develop a systematic
analytical solution to accurately design, build, and evaluate corrugated-core
lignocellulosic sandwich panels for building envelope components as a potential
solution for net zero energy construction. Components of a building envelope
influence its structural and hygrothermal performance and determine a buildings
consumption of operational energy; alternative designs and materials that reduce
a building's operational energy will meet our nation's goal of market-ready,
net-zero buildings. Model based on composite plate theory will account for
bidirectional undulations of a corrugated-core in designing a lignocellulosic
sandwich panel. The model will define the forming limits for designing the
complex core of a sandwich panel. Project will also evaluate fullsize sandwich
panel structural and hygrothermal performance for residential wall applications.
The long-term educational goal of this CAREER project is to prepare new
generation of engineers cognizant of sustainable building materials from
lignocellulosic fibers and equipped with the knowledge to design and manufacture
bio-based composite products for building envelopes in a net zero energy
construction.

Forty percent of US primary energy was consumed in the buildings sector, of
which homes accounted for 54 percent and commercial buildings accounted for 46
percent. Residential buildings contribute 17 percent to the total US greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions measured in carbon dioxide equivalents, of which space
heating and cooling account for 37 percent of GHG emissions. The US federal
government has a goal of market-ready, net-zero energy commercial buildings by
the year 2015 and residential buildings by 2030. The study proposes to advance
the science of sustainable buildings through new design concepts using panelized
systems for residential construction to meet structural and energy requirements
of the building codes. Performance of multi-functional, lightweight, 3-D
lignocellulosic panels will be superior to currently used materials as building
envelope components and allow innovative panelized construction which will
reduce the consumption of operational energy of our future homes and stimulate
the home building industry. Considering an increased demand for green building
materials (13 percent annual growth predicted in next five years), value-added
products that complement commodity-based infrastructure will contribute to
revitalizing segments of the forest products industry.