* 1150792
* Synthesis of Sustainable Polymers by Silylium-Catalyzed Polymerization of Renewable Feedstocks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2015
* USD 386,127.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Eugene Chen of Colorado State
University will develop highly reactive, self-healing silylium catalysts and
related main-group frustrated Lewis pairs for the synthesis of sustainable
stereoregular and optically active polymers from renewable feedstocks. The
proposed research seeks to accomplish three important project goals. First,
chiral silylium catalysts will be developed that will enable site-controlled
synthesis of stereoregular and optically active sustainable polymers. Second,
counteranion studies will be employed to render high-speed and stereoselective
polymerization by silylium catalysts. Third, the novel Lewis pair
polymerizations mediated by silylium and isoelectronic alane-based Lewis pairs
will be investigated as a new technique for sustainable polymer synthesis. The
broader impacts of this research involve training graduate and undergraduate
students, enhancing research infrastructure by bringing together an
experimentalist-theoretician collaborative group, and heightening society's
awareness of the roles that chemists can play in promoting the development and
use of bio-derived raw materials

Plastics are long chain organic molecules and are found in many facets of
everyday life, including food packaging, structural materials for automotive and
aerospace transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. At present,
plastics are derived predominantly from petroleum based resources and the
majority of the commercial catalysts are based on transition metals. This
research focuses on developing efficient alternatives to metal catalysts and new
synthetic routes into technologically important or advanced plastics using bio-
derived feedstocks.