* 1150665
* CAREER: Structure-property Relationships Arising From Interfacial Coupling in Bi-phasic Ceramic Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Jennifer Andrew, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 488,223.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project focuses on a class of composites
referred to as multiferroics, which combine magnetic and electrical insulators,
and can enable new electronic applications including multi-phase computer
memory, tunable microelectronics, and electromagnetic interference filters.
Composite materials are made up of at least two distinct components with
differing composition and physical properties. The constituent materials are
chosen with properties that do not occur in a single component material, but are
desirable in a final product. However, in order for composite materials to have
enhanced properties compared with their constituent phases, the interface
between the two constituents must be understood. This project is developing new
methods to fabricate ceramic composite materials with controlled interfaces.
These materials will allow for an entirely new way of correlating the
macroscopic composite properties with interfacial properties. The specific
education objectives are to employ a team-based approach to 1) introduce and
expose graduate and undergraduate students to novel materials research that
addresses application based needs, 2) leverage existing outreach experience to
encourage and improve high school graduation rates in at-risk youth, and 3) to
educate graduate and undergraduate students in a multi-institutional and multi-
disciplinary environment through collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: Many material properties are mutually exclusive, and are therefore
unlikely to exist in single-phase materials. This property dichotomy includes
strength and toughness, high electric permittivity and high magnetic
permeability, and soft and hard magnetic properties. However, increasing
performance in many real-world applications relies on combining these
properties. Currently, most complex oxide composites, or heterostructures, are
prepared in thin-film form on substrates. These substrates induce changes in the
local symmetry, which alter the properties of the films. The primary goal of
this project is to synthesize free-standing composite bi-phasic nanoparticles
and fibers to study the effects of interfacial properties, including area and
nature (e.g., epitaxy) on composite properties. By fabricating composite
materials without the use of substrates the structure-property relationships
that arise from coupling in these systems is being established.