* 1150213
* CAREER:   Upon Which Selection Can Act: Quantifying How Mutation and Environment Generate Genotypic &amp; Phenotypic Variation in an Emerging Ecological &amp; Evolutionary Genomic
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2023
* Sarah Schaack, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,111,619.00

Mutation is the ultimate source of genetic variation. Although a great deal of
theoretical and applied biology rests on understanding the rate at which it
occurs and its effects, few estimates exist and the variation among individuals,
populations, and species is largely unknown. This project will quantify mutation
rates and their effects on a genome-wide scale using Daphnia, a group of animals
that has long served as a sentinel for population biology, community ecology,
and environmental toxicology. The detailed analysis will include estimating
mutation rates at multiple scales, including i) among the major categories of
mutation which differ in their mechanistic causes, ii) between genomes
(mitochondrial and nuclear), and iii) within and between species exhibiting
different characteristics. It will be partnered with an analysis of measurable
(phenotypic) effects of mutations on traits such as longevity, growth rate, and
fecundity among these same groups and in variable environments. Special
attention will be paid to a particularly exciting source of mutation in the
genome-transposable elements. All biological and genomic resources developed
will be made publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Pursuing excellence in research and teaching is often seen as
a trade-off, yet strategic approaches can enrich both endeavors. Knowledge
gained from real-life scenarios and hands-on experience is often more compelling
with longer lasting impact. These projects will be part of an integrative
program of basic research (involving students, post-doctoral researchers, and
collaborators), teaching and curriculum development (including the development
of new courses and tutorials), and outreach (through domestic and international
workshops, as well as public lectures). The benefits of this research include 1)
deepening our understanding of key parameters in biology, 2) generating shared
biological, genomic, and bioinformatic resources, 3) building science capacity
through collaborating with the next generation of American and international
scientists, and 4) educating the public about the central role of genetics,
genomics, and evolution by sharing new discoveries as they occur.