* 1150212
* CAREER: Channel Coding Paradigms for Next-Generation Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Lara Dolecek, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* richard brown
* 02/28/2018
* USD 408,795.00

We are now in the midst of a technological revolution of massive data generation
and processing. Equally massive data storage is required to support this
technological boom. New solutions cognizant of operational constraints of
storage systems must be invented to curb the skyrocketing cost of data storage.
Fundamentally common to all storage technologies are channel coding schemes.
Results from coding theory have been used with phenomenal success in storage
systems. Practical coding schemes have helped make computer storage ubiquitous.
However, currently available coding schemes have hit a performance wall:
existing codes are designed for simple channels, and do not match the needs of
new storage technologies where the data must be packed as densely as possible on
increasingly adverse mediums. Such performance provisioning not only violates
fundamental information-theoretic laws but directly increases the cost of a
storage system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research fundamentally rethinks
channel coding methods with applications to storage systems. This project
creates a coding-theoretic foundation that embraces, rather than ignores,
adverse physical and operating conditions to increase the capacity of the
upcoming storage technologies. Rich combinatorial structure of non-binary
channel codes is explored and exploited over four research thrusts: (a) analysis
and design of structured non-binary low-density parity-check codes, (b) theory
and practice of non-binary non-symmetric error correcting codes, (c) non-binary
methodologies for overcoming synchronization errors, and (d) theory-based rapid
code prototyping using novel algorithms for fast simulation, FPGA
implementation, and publicly available on-line evaluation tool. This research
project contributes to the development of a competitive American workforce
through active and carefully tailored research engagement of high-school,
undergraduate and graduate students.