* 1150660
* Optical and environmental control of excited state dynamics: electrocyclic ring-opening and molecular switches
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Roseanne Sension, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/29/2016
* USD 502,750.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Roseanne Sension of the University of
Michigan along with her graduate students plan to use ultrafast spectroscopy to
study the ring-opening reactions of systems central to a number of natural and
synthetic photoswitches. Most of these systems contain a six-member ring that
opens to form a helical chain-like molecule. In the work planned here the
properties of light pulses, the nature of the environment, and the chemical
substitution pattern around the ring will be used as parameters to understand
the molecular and chemical basis for control of the ring-opening reactions. The
investigations will also explore the way in which optical pulses may be sculpted
to control the dynamics and thus the yield of the ring-opening reactions central
to these photoswitches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work exposes graduate and
undergraduate students in physics and chemistry to state-of-the-art research in
chemical physics and optical physics. The results of the research are integrated
into the undergraduate physical chemistry curriculum through involvement of
researchers in curriculum development and through the use of "molecular movies,"
simulations of molecular dynamics based on the results of ultrafast
spectroscopic measurements, which connect macroscopic properties to the dynamics
of chemical systems.