* 1150397
* PECASE:  Advancing Treatment of Pelvic Floor Disorders through Discoveries in Elasticity and Viscoelasticity of Uterosacral and Cardinal Ligaments
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Raffaella De Vita, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2018
* USD 478,277.00

1150397&lt;br/&gt;De Vita&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pelvic floor disorders (PFDs)
such as urinary incontinence, fecal incontinence, and pelvic organ prolapse
represent a major public health concern in the United States affecting one third
of adult women. These disorders are determined by structural and mechanical
alterations of the pelvic organs, their supporting muscles and connective
tissues that occur mainly during pregnancy, vaginal delivery, and aging. The
national cost burden imposed by PFDs is alarming in terms of direct health care
costs, lost productivity, and decreased quality of life. It is projected to
increase dramatically by 2050 with the increase in the aging population in the
United States. New research forecasts that the number of adult women affected by
PFDs will increase from to 28.1 million in 2010 to 43.8 million in 2050. The
alarming cost burden and projected high incidence of PFDs emphasize the critical
need for research in engineering and science that leads to the development of
new treatment strategies. This CAREER project aims at determining the elastic
and viscoelastic properties of two major ligaments supporting the uterus and
vagina: the uterosacral ligaments (USLs) and cardinal ligaments (CLs). Rigorous
mechanical experiments will be performed on USLs and CLs to completely
characterize their important role as supportive structures of the uterus and
vagina. Mechanical testing will be then coupled with synchrotron X-ray
diffraction imaging in order to reveal the collagenous micro-structure of USLs
and CLs with unprecedented details. The results of the experiments will be used
to develop reliable structurally-based constitutive models for USLs and CLs and
assess their predictive capabilities. These models will be derived within a
nonlinear integral representation theory, which encompasses the quasi-linear
viscoelasticity and the modified superposition principle, and has the potential
to successfully capture expected nonlinearities in the mechanical response of
the USLs and CLs.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project will potentially
transform surgical reconstruction methods and post-operative rehabilitation
protocols for female PFDs by offering new knowledge about the structural and
mechanical properties of USLs and CLs. Currently, the USLs and CLs are either
adjusted in ad-hoc manner or replaced using synthetic tapes for enhancing the
suspension of the uterus and vagina. This innovative research will be crucial in
establishing science-based guidelines and specific protocols for the treatment
of PFDs ultimately providing better care for millions of adult women afflicted
by these disorders. The PI has a unique blend of analytical skills and
experimental prowess that makes her especially qualified to conduct the proposed
research. The Biophysics Collaborative Access Team at the Argonne National
Laboratory will provide the PI with the necessary expertise and training to use
the synchrotron X-ray facilities. Through the collaboration with the Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center, the PI will
keep herself abreast of the challenges in female pelvic medicine and
reconstructive surgery and contribute firsthand to the care and management of
PFDs.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. In this project, research and education are
seamlessly integrated to enhance the students' curriculum and increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering. The
education program creates new partnerships between Virginia Tech and the
community in the region, increasing the leadership role of the PI's home
institution in the state's societal and educational initiatives. Undergraduate
and graduate students will participate in the proposed research and education
components of the project. A new graduate course on nonlinear mechanics of
biological systems will be developed and an undergraduate course will be
significantly revised to include laboratory hours in experimental biomechanics.
Interactive mini-lectures complemented with hands-on activities in biomechanics,
prepared in formats understandable by non-scientists, are proposed to enrich the
science curriculum at the Blacksburg Middle School and engage the visitors of
the Science Museum of Western Virginia. Summer camps and mentorship will be
offered to high school students with disabilities in order to facilitate their
transition to college. Lunch and group meetings for women faculty in engineering
will be organized to create a supportive environment and mentoring
relationships. The findings of these research and education efforts will be
disseminated on the web, published in peer-reviewed journals, and presented at
national and international conferences.