* 1150230
* CAREER: Computational Reconstruction of K12 Science (CoRe-Science): Integrating Computational Thinking and Modeling with School Science
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Pratim Sengupta, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 727,790.00

This five year CAREER project (CoRe-Science: Computational Reconstruction of K12
Science) seeks to address the following research question: How does the design
of agent-based programming languages and modeling platforms need to change in
order to support deep curricular integration of computational thinking,
programming and modeling with middle-school curricular science in the domains of
physics and biology, without necessitating a radical restructuring of student
and teacher preparation? This project has following objectives: a) To develop
ViMAP, a new, multi-agent-based, visual programming language and modeling
platform specifically for integrating computational programming and modeling
with middle school curricular science in kinematics and ecology; b) To
seamlessly integrate ViMAP and accompanying learning activities with existing
project-based middle-school curricula in kinematics and ecology; and c) conduct
empirical studies to identify how students develop computational thinking in the
context of learning to model and use models for investigation (and vice versa),
and to identify trajectories towards competency in computational thinking and
modeling. The team will conduct classroom implementations of the CoRe-Science
units in several urban public middle schools. The topic areas of kinematics and
ecology were selected because they are important in light of national science
education standards; they are experienced as extremely difficult by learners;
they are amenable to agent-based modeling approaches; and prior work has
prepared the PI to develop high-quality curricular materials on these topics.
Besides the technological innovation, the products of this project are research
findings, such as: a) empirically tested design principles for programming
languages for K12 curricular integration, and b) the process, nature and role of
computational thinking in the development of students' conceptual understanding
in the two domains. In addition, classroom ready curricular units in kinematics
and ecology, including the ViMAP programming and modeling platform, accompanying
learning activities, and teacher support materials will be deployed and
disseminated through a broad network of educational
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few decades, computational
thinking and modeling has emerged to be a key element of scientific and
engineering expertise. Infusing computational thinking and the use of
computational tools into the middle school curriculum in appropriate ways can
promote this cross-cutting expertise. However, integrating general purpose
computational programming with K12 curricular science has been shown to be
challenging, and CoRe-Science seeks to address this issue by developing a new
visual programming language and modeling environment specifically for scientific
modeling for middle school students, and seamlessly integrate it with an
existing science curriculum for middle school physics and biology. The products
include new learning technologies that can be widely disseminated, and research
findings based on empirical studies, that should be the basis of a framework to
inform the future development of similar systems.