* 1150509
* CAREER: Importance of Late-Sound-Field Properties and Listener Envelopment to Room Acoustic Quality and Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Michelle Vigeant-Haas, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 02/28/2013
* USD 422,814.00

The overall research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project is to investigate the relationship between late-sound-field acoustics
and perceived overall acoustic quality (OAQ) in performing arts venues. Late-
sound-field acoustics are particularly important to the perception of listener
envelopment (LEV), the sense of being immersed in the sound field. However, no
universally accepted measure of LEV currently exists. The specific objectives of
this project are to: A) Develop a quantifiable measure of LEV, B) Explore how
this new LEV measure varies for auditoriums of different sizes, and C) Determine
the relative significance of LEV and other established room acoustics
characteristics to OAQ. The research will employ a combination of two methods:
simulated sound-fields and binaural recordings evaluated by human subjects, and
experimental measurements obtained in a total of nine American and European
concert halls with varying size and OAQ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this work will provide the acoustical design and research community with an
accurate methodology to measure LEV and will determine the relative importance
of LEV to OAQ, as compared to well-accepted room acoustics measures. These
results will allow for more efficient design of music performance venues and
reduce the need for costly renovations. This project will increase the number of
US students participating in room acoustics research and will provide research
opportunities at a primarily undergraduate institution. These opportunities will
improve the quality of the educational experience of undergraduate students,
particularly females, and will also promote their professional development.
Grade-school students will be exposed to the topic of sound, as well as a female
role-model, in conjunction with the Connecticut Science Center's outreach
program. In addition, self-contained acoustics experimental and learning kits
will be created in collaboration with the Acoustical Society of America for
middle-school student science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for the
award is being provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering's
Europe and the America programs and the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation Division's Dynamical Systems within the Directorate for Engineering.