* 1150647
* CAREER:   A 'holistic' approach toward scalable quantum optical networks in semiconductors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Kai-Mei Fu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 783,527.00

In this work we investigate a new qubit system ideal for realizing an optically
connected quantum network: single acceptor-bound holes (A0) in III-V quantum
wells (QW). This system has the potential to combine millisecond long spin
coherence times with strong, homogeneous optical transitions in a
nanofabrication-ready material. Far-field super-resolution optical techniques
will be developed in order to isolate single impurity-bound excitons (A0X), with
the goal of reaching optical resolutions on the order of the effective mass Bohr
radius. These techniques will be combined with ultrafast optical spin control to
study the effect of QW confinement and nearby surfaces on the optical and spin
coherence properties of the A0-A0X system. Knowledge gained from these studies
will guide research on integrating single impurities into optical nanocavities.
The longer term goal of the project is to realize optically-connected few qubit
devices in a scalable architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A quantum information
network based on photons and spins would enable quantum simulation, secure long-
distance quantum communication, and quantum computation. In this work we study
single impurities in semiconductors as potential quantum bits for such a
network. Nanoscale low temperature imaging techniques will be developed to
isolate single impurities. Ultrafast optical techniques will be used to study
the impurity qubit lifetime. The longer term goal of the project is to realize a
few qubit network in which spins are connected through on-chip optical devices.
The research program will involve, teach, and train undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral associates in experimental physics, quantum optics,
and nanoscience. In addition to training undergraduate students, graduate
students and postdocs in quantum optics, physics and nanotechnology, an integral
part of the broader impact of this program includes community outreach at a
local elementary school. University of Washington physics and electrical
engineering students, working closely with a Sansislo elementary school science
teacher, are engaging 4th-5th grade students in weekly science activites aimed
at understanding light.