* 1150969
* CAREER: Synthesis of Novel Classes of Depolymerizable Polymers with Well-Defined Response Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Scott Phillips, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Scott Phillips of the Pennsylvania State
University will create new classes of polymers that depolymerize in response to
specific applied signals. The approach is to synthesize polymer backbone
structures that can depolymerize under specific chain end initiation conditions
and then to characterize the physical organic chemistry aspects of the
depolymerization process. Next, various protecting groups will be attached to
the polymer chain ends, and initiation of the depolymerization reactions after
chemical stimulus will be studied. The education plan involves (i) giving
demonstrations and lectures to chemistry and physics classes at high schools in
southeastern Pennsylvania, (ii) recruiting students from these schools to
participate in summer research programs at the Pennsylvania State University,
and (iii) recruiting educators from high schools for a separate summer research
and professional development program at Penn State. Other broader impacts of the
research involve the potential impacts of these new polymer classes on sensing
and diagnostic sciences and the longer term potential uses of polymers that can
be chemically reused.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastics are found in many facets of
everyday life, including food packaging, structural materials for automotive and
aerospace transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. This work will
explore fundamental chemistry related to how plastics decompose into constituent
molecules. The results from this project could lead to new design principles to
make plastics that can be recycled or reused chemically and to make new
materials for sensor or diagnostic applications.