* 1150080
* CAREER: Scheduling and Resource Allocation in the Cloud using Graphical Models and Randomized Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Yi Lu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2017
* USD 447,865.00

Scalability is crucial for cloud computing to be widely adopted. Failure to
scale has resulted in the demise of the social networking giant MySpace, the
inability to support a user load greater than 10% of system capacity, a $4.5
billion annual power expenditure on data centers and a lack of any sophisticated
measurement and monitoring systems in the cloud. The size of a cloud, which
often consists of tens of thousands of machines, compels the use of low-
complexity algorithms, which, when naively designed, cause significant
performance degradation as the system grows large. Existing algorithms are often
designed for exact, optimal solutions for smaller in-house systems and do not
scale due to their centralized high-complexity nature.

This research overcomes the limitation of existing work by designing a suite of
low-complexity algorithms for web services, data management, and measurement and
monitoring in the cloud, which are exactly optimal only as the system size grows
to infinity, but very close to optimal in finite and large systems. The
algorithms are designed to address the challenges with dynamic scaling, multi-
tenancy and data-intensiveness in the cloud, and for different application
workloads including search, social networks and map-reduce. The research draws
upon and contributes to the fields of graphical models and randomized
algorithms, both of which exchange sparse information locally to achieve complex
global objectives in large systems. The project also includes significant
outreach programs in the form of workshops and lab open-houses, to promote
undergraduate research, and the participation of women and under-represented
minorities.