* 1150223
* CAREER:  Modeling and Design of Composite Swarming Behaviors
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Nicolaus Correll, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 02/28/2018
* USD 545,645.00

This project, developing models for complex swarming behaviors by incrementally
starting from the properties of an individual agent, which includes noisy
sensors and actuators and stochastic behavior, and validating the models by
systematic experimentation with physical systems, will bridge the gap between
analysis by simple primitives and their composition into complex swarming
behaviors. Specifically, this research will consist of a comprehensive study of
containment, partitioning, and re-configuration swarming primitives, and then
show how they can be composed into complex swarming behaviors such as pattern
recognition, sensor-based motion, and adaptive shape change. These primitives
and behaviors have been chosen because they challenge existing modeling
approaches and lead to independent contributions addressing grand challenge
applications by themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by the robust and
scalable operation of bees, termites, ants and multi-cellular organisms, the
funding of this proposed work will lead to a methodology to compose stochastic
swarming behaviors in a principled way using probabilistic models. These models
will be grounded in the probabilistic behavior of an individual agent's sensing,
actuation, communication and computational properties by modeling the system at
multiple levels of abstraction going back and forth from physical
experimentation, kinematic models, and stochastic simulations to macroscopic
difference equations. By grounding the models in physical experiments, models
will be able to serve as design tool for not only the computational, but also
the physical properties of an individual agent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: A principled methodology for modeling and designing swarming systems
will create the foundation for designing and deploying swarm robotic systems for
search and rescue, environmental response, precision agriculture, and
surveillance, among others. At the same time, the ability to design swarms might
also shed light on the workings of biological and chemical systems, such as
social insects, multi-cellular systems, and self-assembly, enabling the design
of complex multi-cellular systems with arbitrary functionality. Finally,
algorithms and systems resulting from this research lend themselves to artistic
installations, drawing a broad public into the fascination of swarming systems
and nurture an understanding for the distributed nature that is common to all
living systems. The proposed research will be deeply integrated with education.
Specific offerings developed in this integrated research and education plan
include: a modular robotic activity that introduces computational thinking to
4th graders, a crash-course on embedded systems geared at 1st year students from
under-represented groups, a comprehensive robotics curriculum for upperclassmen,
and an interdisciplinary graduate seminar on "Swarm Intelligence" and "Self-
Assembly" that will actively involve students from other disciplines and
encourage them to apply the proposed multi-level modeling methodology to their
research.