* 1150861
* CAREER: Microfluidics for Cell Cryopreservation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Adam Higgins, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2017
* USD 400,000.00

This NSF CAREER award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering
program supports the development of technology for cryopreservation of cell-
based therapeutics. Cell-based therapies have the potential to treat a wide
variety of medical conditions, ranging from neurodegenerative diseases to
cancer, and cryopreservation enables long-term storage of living cells, which
would greatly facilitate supply chain management for cell therapy products. This
proposal addresses two major deficiencies in current cryopreservation
technology. The first is the inconvenience of removing cryoprotectant additives
(CPAs) after thawing. As an example, the current procedure for removal of CPAs
from red blood cells takes over an hour, making it impractical to use
cryopreserved blood in emergency situations. The second deficiency relates to
toxicity during vitrification, a cryopreservation strategy based on the use of
high CPA concentrations to suppress ice formation. Vitrification is particularly
promising for cell types that respond poorly to conventional freezing
procedures, such as granulocytes. However, for vitrification to reach its full
potential, new strategies are needed to minimize toxicity, particularly during
CPA addition and removal. Thus, both of these deficiencies are primarily caused
by inadequacies in current CPA addition and removal
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses a novel mathematical
optimization strategy to predict CPA addition and removal procedures that
minimize toxicity and protocol duration, while simultaneously avoiding osmotic
damage. The resulting procedures involve continuous changes in the extracellular
solution composition that are not possible to implement with the centrifugation-
based operations that are currently in use. This project proposes the use of
microfluidic processes to impose precise control over the time-varying
extracellular solution composition, enabling implementation of the
mathematically optimized CPA addition and removal procedures. This work is
expected to dramatically decrease the time required for CPA removal, which will
greatly facilitate the use of cryopreserved cells for cell-based therapies, and
it will reduce toxicity during CPA addition and removal, which will open new
possibilities for vitrification of valuable cell types such as
granulocytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the integrated education
and outreach efforts is to foster the development of a diverse science and
engineering workforce with a deep understanding of mass transfer. To this end,
the objectives are to (1) develop new software tools for teaching mass transfer
that allow students to conduct "virtual experiments" involving cell membrane
mass transfer and microfluidic separation processes, and (2) recruit and retain
Latinos in science and engineering careers by engaging Latino undergraduate and
high school students in summer research projects and through participation in
OSU's Latino summer camp, which serves students from grades 3 to 12.