* 1150708
* CAREER: Neural Investigations of Feedback-based Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Elizabeth Tricomi, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 04/30/2018
* USD 795,883.00

Performance-based feedback is widely used to aid learning by providing
information about response accuracy. In addition to this informational role,
feedback also plays an important motivational role. Earning the reward of
positive feedback and avoiding the punishment of negative feedback can become
salient goals to motivated learning. With the support of the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Elizabeth Tricomi of Rutgers University is investigating how the
motivational significance of feedback influences neural processing and
consequent learning. She is conducting functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies of learning from positive and negative feedback. One set of
experiments is investigating how the amount of cognitive effort expended on a
learning task influences feedback-related brain signals. A second set of
experiments is investigating how motivational factors may differentially affect
positive and negative feedback signals in the brain, and how this affects the
relative contributions of learning from errors and from positive reinforcement.
Changes in motivation to learn or to perform well may change the value that
learners place on the feedback they receive. Therefore, the results of these
studies will provide insight into how motivation influences value-related neural
activity in the brain's "reward circuit," and how this brain activity may in
turn influence the amount learned from the feedback.

In trying to understand how to best tailor educational practices to the needs of
the individual, a variety of influences on learning and performance other than
ability need to be considered. Because motivation is one key factor in
determining how successfully information will be acquired and used,
understanding the neural mechanisms by which motivation influences learning
processes is important. This project is providing a significant advance in our
current understanding of how the motivational and informational components of
feedback combine to facilitate learning. The results are expected to have
implications for educational practices, in the classroom and beyond. In addition
to the research component of the project, an educational component incorporates
effective teaching and learning strategies, such as student-centered learning,
into the classroom at both the graduate and undergraduate levels. Furthermore, a
monthly professional development workshop for graduate students is promoting the
retention of women in the sciences.