* 1150082
* CAREER: Towards a high-resolution quantification of the North American rock record: integrating field data, citizen science, and participatory education for macrostratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Shanan Peters, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 06/30/2019
* USD 863,448.00

CAREER: Towards a high-resolution quantification of the North American rock
record: integrating field data, citizen science, and participatory education for
macrostratigraphy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth's rocks contain most of our
material, energy and water resources and they serve as the primary long-term
archive for many important physical and biological processes, including organic
evolution, the causes and consequences of global climate change, and rates and
styles of mountain building and landscape evolution. Although there exists a
large body of knowledge on the distribution and character of rocks and the
resources they contain, there is currently no framework for consolidating this
information, for placing it into a larger context, or for analyzing it
quantitatively. This is unfortunate because the processes that form and destroy
rocks are discontinuous and selective in time and space, resulting in a complex
and heterogeneous distribution of materials at Earth's
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macrostratigraphy uses rock packages compiled
separately at different geographic locations as a framework for integrating
diverse Earth science data sets and for quantitatively analyzing the rock
record. Macrostrat (macrostrat.org) currently consists minimally of the ages,
thicknesses, general rock types, names, and many economic uses for &gt;21,521
rock units from &gt;830 geographic locations in North America. This CAREER
research will use the data currently in Macrostrat as a scaffolding upon which
to build a much more rigorous and complete body of knowledge on the distribution
of rocks, their material properties, and their resource potential here in North
America. A three-front approach will be taken to accomplish this task. First,
data for new locations will be compiled from the literature and entered into the
Macrostrat database. Second, a powerful new web application will be built upon
Macrostrat and this will be used to enable the participation of geologists at
state geological surveys, academic institutions, and the energy industry.
Finally, existing locations will be updated with modern data from the literature
and the field. The resultant new data compilation will not only enable the
specific hypotheses concerning the geological history of carbon burial and
patterns of sedimentation outlined in the proposal to be tested, but it will
also serve as a platform for characterizing existing resources and formulating a
new generation of questions in many domains of Earth
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing where rocks occur today and when they
formed in Earth history is so central to geoscience and resource discovery that
it is hard to overestimate the broader impacts of assembling new, comprehensive
quantitative data on the rock record and then making those data publicly
accessible via intuitive and location-aware web applications. The motivations
for building such web-applications stem from the fact that (1) many primary
field observations are of great analytical value, particularly in combination
with macrostratigraphic context, (2) many citizens who are not trained in
science are nevertheless often curious about their immediate environment, and
(3) some types of geological field data can be produced by nearly anyone,
including students and engaged citizens, when they are provided with location-
based context for their own observations. One of the most important end results
of this project will be a new set of research and teaching tools that can serve
needs of professional geologists while at the same time more constructively
engaging students and 'citizen scientists' in the scientific process.