* 1150351
* CAREER: Thioamides as Minimalist Chromophores to Monitor Protein Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Ernest Petersson, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2017
* USD 575,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Sciences Program funds Professor E. James Petersson of the
University of Pennsylvania for a CAREER award to carry out research entitled
"Thioamides as Minimalist Chromophores to Monitor Protein Dynamics." This
project involves the study the molecular details of protein motions. The goal of
the research program is to develop novel, "non-invasive" probes that will be
used to monitor changes in protein structure with increased levels of structural
resolution. A long-term goal is to create experimentally-constrained molecular
dynamics trajectories (essentially atomic-scale movies) of protein motions. The
probes themselves consist of single-atom O-to-S substitutions to the amide bond
that links every amino acid in a protein. The probes have a very small size, so
that unlike many current probes, they will not perturb the motion they are meant
to study. Once fully developed, this probe has the potential to provide
detailed, time-resolved information on the motions of individual amino acids in
the protein. Understanding concerted changes resulting from large numbers of
non-covalent interactions is a problem not only for Biochemistry, but for nearly
all scientific study at the nanometer scale. In the course of developing
thioamides for motional studies, a greater understanding of this relatively
unexplored functional group will be obtained, with regard to both electronic and
physical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural rearrangements in proteins
are often important to cell signaling and protein misfolding in disease.
Thioamide probes can be of utility to any member of the biological community
wishing to study protein motion and may improve community's ability to design
molecular motors from first principles. The broader impacts of this work include
training undergraduate and graduate students in a multidisciplinary laboratory
environment that makes use of organic synthesis, physical chemistry, molecular,
and cellular biology to investigate biological phenomena. Other activities
supported by this grant include the creation of a Future Faculty program to help
to train students and postdoctoral scholars with academic aspirations. The is
actively engaged in educational outreach activities targeted toward middle
school students, an age group where scientific interest is often gained and
lost. Mentoring students as budding research scientists occurs by engaging
students in the design of experiments and publication of results. Mentoring them
as budding teachers occurs through their involvement in intramural and
extramural educational activities. This project is receiving co-funding from the
Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.