* 1150807
* CAREER: The Role of Grain Boundary Character in Corrosion Behavior: Linking Atomic Scale Interfacial Structure to Precipitation and Failure Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Mitra Taheri, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2017
* USD 433,162.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to develop an understanding of the atomic scale grain boundary structure
dependence of corrosion enhancing precipitation in fcc metals. Corrosion has a
devastating effect on many industries, including nuclear, naval ship structures,
and off-shore wind turbines. Grain boundary engineering has been shown to
improve boundary dependent properties including creep, intergranular stress
corrosion, embrittlement, and fatigue. However, questions remain about the
anisotropic nature of both the segregation and precipitation relevant to all
sensitization dependent failure in fcc materials. This project will focus on
understanding the dependence of grain boundary structure on the precipitation
that causes corrosion damage. The results generated from this study will serve
as a predictive tool for developing future alloys resistant to deleterious
intergranular precipitation in extreme environments. The work will use an
experimental approach to analyze the combined effects temperature, environment,
and grain boundary type on corrosion-causing precipitation mechanisms, which
will ultimately yield a clearer understanding of corrosion in a wide range of
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to advance the
fundamental understanding of mechanisms of fcc metal failure under corrosion,
one of the most important structural materials in use today. Philadelphia has
~80% minority student population, so the opportunity to bring underrepresented
groups into STEM fields is enormous. The PI plans to develop a program, named
"TURBINE" (Transforming Underrepresented Research Basis in Engineering), for
local high school minority and female students to learn about future careers in
energy-related fields to spur an interest in research and development and
engineering education/training for a future economy both in Philadelphia and
globally.