* 1150523
* CAREER: Innovations in Microscale Plasticity and Failure Mechanics to Enable  Microforming Processes, with Bending and Hydroforming as Paradigms
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2019
* Ioannis Korkolis, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2019
* USD 433,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant aims at enhancing the
understanding of deformation and failure of microtubes (diameter &lt; 1mm) with
few (&lt;10) grains through the thickness. Such components abound in
microelectronic, microfluidic and biomedical applications. Their mechanical
behavior is dominated by the limited number of through-thickness grains, which
renders the continuum approximation unsuitable. In this research, stainless
steel 304 and CuZn 30 brass microtubes will be inflated under internal pressure
and axial load and taken to failure, using a testing machine to be created for
this purpose. These experimental findings will then help establish a
microstructurally-informed, crystal plasticity constitutive model, with the aid
of the research partner in South Korea. Finite element simulations of the
experiments will be coupled with this material model to capture the deformation
and failures observed. Subsequently, two micromanufacturing processes (microtube
bending and hydroforming) will be examined using a combination of experiments
and analysis. A microtube bending device will be created for the purposes of
this project, while an existing apparatus in Cologne, Germany, will be used for
the microtube hydroforming experiments. The performance of the numerical and
constitutive models established above will be examined in light of these
experiments and will be improved as needed, to capture the failures observed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will contribute to the
scientific understanding of grain-dominated deformation and failure of
materials. It will enable the broader implementation of microtube bending and
hydroforming in innovative microelectronic, microfluidic and biomedical
products, benefiting the American industry. The award will also provide two
graduate students with the opportunity to perform research for a total of 18-24
months in Germany and South Korea, preparing them well for the globalization of
research and industry. Lastly, training and integrating minorities will result
in a more diverse, fair and internationally competitive workforce.