* 1150389
* CAREER: Microflow of highly viscous fluids: mixing and dissolution processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Thomas Cubaud, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 441,649.00

1150389&lt;br/&gt;Cubaud&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-viscosity fluids represent a
broad class of materials that are essential to many aspects of energy
technologies and life. We know from everyday observation that viscous fluids are
sticky and thick. They tend to attach to surfaces and they form filamentous
structures when manipulated. Their large viscosity coefficient makes them slow
and difficult to displace, and blending them with other materials requires a
long time. Today, the limited supplies of fossil energy resources require the
development of innovative methods for finely handling viscous materials and
gaseous byproducts over multiple length scales. This project combines
educational and research activities designed to expand the scientific
foundations for new and improved manipulations of highly viscous fluids at the
small scale. Novel strategies will be deployed to rapidly mix and enrich thick
materials using high-pressure microfluidic devices. Two research thrusts are
proposed. The first involves blending low- and high-viscosity miscible fluids in
continuous flow configurations. The formation of viscous stratifications and the
stability of lubricated threads against diffusion, inertia, and viscous buckling
phenomena will be experimentally and numerically modeled in confined
microgeometries. The second investigation focuses on microscale dissolution
processes of carbon dioxide with viscous fluids. Segmented microflows of
dissolving gas bubbles will be examined for impregnating viscous substances and
unlocking the fundamentals of carbon sequestration in porous-like media. This
work will lead to the development of predictive models and improve our
understanding and practical use of liquid/liquid and liquid/gas multiphase flows
in the presence of diffusive interfaces at the small
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project will provide a
comprehensive and unifying picture of the flow behavior of viscous fluids with
miscible lubricants. A series of carefully designed experiments, theoretical
arguments, and numerical modeling will generate a reliable and systematic
knowledge concerning the emerging properties of high-viscosity microflows and
viscous buckling instabilities. Carbonated multiphase flows will be
characterized at the pore level over a wide range of fluid properties and
operating parameters. This work will expand the frontier of understanding in
fluid dynamics and open up a new era of fluid processing
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This program will offer
substantial educational opportunities for a diversity of students, including
underrepresented, high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The PI will
dedicate his efforts to educate and train students to cutting edge research in
fluid science. Results developed during this project will be incorporated into
the PI's outreach and teaching activities at every level. This work will help
improve continuous flow-based mixing apparatuses for high-viscosity fluids and
offer new expertise for the microflow management of petrochemical products and
viscous biomaterials, the recycling of used oils, and the capture of carbon-
based byproducts.