* 1150952
* CAREER: Single element nanophotonic force transducers using subwavelength optical waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Donald Sirbuly, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 03/31/2017
* USD 454,590.00

The objective of this program is to uncover a novel single element force sensing
platform that is based on force-sensitive plasmonic coatings embedded in the
sharp decaying evanescent field of a sub-wavelength optical waveguide. By
linking plasmonic materials such as gold nanoparticles to the optical waveguides
via compressible polymer coatings, a highly sensitive force transducer can be
fabricated. The transducer works by utilizing a dielectric-plasmon coupling
effect to provide sub-nanometer optical feedback on the position of the
plasmonic material in the evanescent field. By leveraging the size, tunable
elastic properties of the polymer coating, and wavelength guided in the fibers,
a highly versatile force detection scheme can be configured that has sub-pico-
newton force sensitivity at the same time being self-contained and mobile.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is that discovering new optical
methods capable of quantifying forces at the nanoscale will transform our
ability to monitor cellular mechanics, determine kinetics of bond formation and
breakage, and optimize drug design parameters, measure elastic moduli of
materials, and image surfaces not accessible by current scan probe techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are that advancing nanophotonic
analytical techniques will have a significant impact on industrial research and
development interested in high-throughput screening techniques used in antibody
screening, drug, drug discovery, or DNA sequencing. In addition to the
industrial impacts, this program will be leveraged to develop a new ?Mobile
Science Lab? educational program that brings the lab to the classroom in school
districts with low budgets and minimal resources to teach students about
research and science.