* 1150588
* CAREER: High-throughput Single-cell Biophysics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Dino Di Carlo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2017
* USD 448,329.00

1150588 Di Carlo

The mechanical properties of cells, the underlying origins of these properties
in cytoskeletal & intracellular structure, and the relationship of this
structure with disease states has been a rapidly expanding area of research.
Purely biophysical (mechanical) measurements can help uncover fundamental
associations between disease and cell architecture, and these properties have
been shown to be powerful label-free biomarkers for cell phenotype. For example,
a measure of shape changes in response to force (deformability) has been shown
to be indicative of malignant transformation in cell lines and human biopsy
samples. However, previous studies have been limited to proof-of-concept
applications by the low-throughput analytical technologies employed.
Applications in biophysics research, clinical diagnostics or drug screening
necessarily require large sample sizes to obtain statistically significant data
- leading to sensitive and specific results. The PI aims to address the low
throughput and complexity of current measurement techniques using a next
generation instrument to assay the mechanical properties of thousands of single
cells in minutes achieving the ease-of-use and throughput of flow cytometry. The
PI has started to address this challenge using continuous microfluidic
stretching of cells in an extensional (purely stretching) flow - i.e.
"Deformability Cytometry". The PI has demonstrated the feasibility of this
approach for deforming >1000 cells per second, which is orders of magnitude
higher than gold standard mechanical measurement techniques. Extending the
development of this instrument, the PI proposes to provide high-throughput and
systematic data to the cell biophysics and bioengineering communities that can
aid in understanding the roles of biomolecules in cellular integrity, and
ultimately suggest currently unknown connections to clinical diagnostic
applications.

Intellectual Merit The mechanical properties of cells have been thought to be
largely determined by cytoskeletal elements with the highest stiffness (namely
actin and microtubules). Recently, intermediate filaments, nuclear envelope
proteins and chromatin structure have been suggested to contribute significantly
to cell mechanical properties. For example, pluripotent stem cells and activated
lymphocytes are known to lack the nuclear membrane proteins lamin A/C and have
less condensed chromatin. It remains an open question whether these
characteristics are responsible for the high observed deformability in these
cells. The PI's innovation is to investigate the combination of these elements
on whole-cell large-scale deformation, without bias for dominant origins in the
traditionally examined cytoskeleton. It is clear that the interplay between
these elements may control mechanical behavior in some cells, while a sole
element may dominate response in other cells (for example chromatin structure in
lymphocytes with large nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios). A simple to use and high-
throughput instrument will allow a systematic survey of these contributors,
alone and as part of a potential linked mechanical network, which will be a boon
to the bioengineering and biophysics communities attempting to address the
fundamental origin of cell mechanical properties.

Broader Impacts A label-free mechanical measurement of cell state can help
address the high cost of healthcare by eliminating the cost of antibody labels
and reducing the technician labor associated with preparing labeled samples for
diagnostics. Further, such an approach could improve quality of life by
increasing our diagnostic capabilities - leading to the identification of the
correct treatment quickly. Educational and dissemination activities will be
seamlessly integrated with the proposed research. These activities will be
focused in areas addressing a variety of stakeholders including the (i)
undergraduate and graduate student community, (ii) the microfluidics community,
and (iii) the broader public. The four education and dissemination activities
include: (1) Graduate and undergraduate exposure to high-speed camera operation
and microfluidics in collaboration with UCLA's CEED (Center for Excellence in
Engineering and Diversity). (2) Summer undergraduate internships to assist
financially disadvantaged undergraduates to become involved in research. (3) An
online community for sharing and discussion of microfluidic designs. (4) An
online YouTube gallery of "cool" slow-motion scientific and illustrative videos
(e.g. water balloons filled with different viscosity fluids thrown against a
wall) to engage and excite the public.