* 1150862
* CAREER: Connecting interface structure to interface-defect interactions in metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Michael Demkowicz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports mesoscale
modeling of solid-state interfaces in metals, with a view to predicting
interface structure and interface interactions with crystals defects: point
defects, dislocations, and cracks. This effort will lead to quantitative
structure-property relations for interfaces, which may then be used to design
structural composite materials with interfaces tailored to yield desired
functionalities, such as high strength or fracture toughness, radiation or wear
resistance, reduced corrosion or creep, and others. Such materials would have a
major impact on energy applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will pursue
three specific scientific objectives. The first is to create mesoscale models
that quantitatively describe and predict detailed interface structure. The
second is to discover the mechanisms of interface-defect interactions, and
create quantitative mesoscale models of these mechanisms. Finally, the third
objective is to validate structure and defect interaction predictions through
numerical uncertainty quantification and hypothesis-driven experiments.
Initially, this project will be restricted to a subset of all possible
interfaces, namely semicoherent interfaces formed between immiscible single-
element metals. The structure of such interfaces may be described using misfit
dislocations, which eases development of quantitative structure models and
provides a basis for predicting interface-defect interactions. Heterophase
interfaces between immiscible metals generally remain stable under a variety of
conditions and do not migrate or intermix easily, easing experimental
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work will focus on flat interfaces in their
lowest energy state, but with differing crystallographic characters. Only pairs
of metals whose crystal structures may be related to the face-centered-cubic
structure by uniform deformations will be studied. Both heterophase interface
and grain boundaries fall within this subset. The effect of temperature will be
studied, but investigations of the effects of curvature, faceting, large pre-
existing extrinsic defect concentrations, or non-equilibrium state will be
postponed. This project will consider interface interactions with three types of
defects: point defects, dislocations, and cracks. The interactions to be studied
are defect trapping, emission, transmission, and motion near and within
interfaces. Interactions with other types of defects - such as voids,
inclusions, point defect clusters, or other interfaces - will not be studied as
part of this project. There are no fundamental physical limitations that prevent
broadening the scope of future work to interfaces, interactions, and defect
types other than those listed above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education
component of this project will support the development of a new class on defect
physics and the revision of an exiting class on mechanical behavior of
materials. All materials as well as videotaped lectures for both classes will be
made available worldwide through MIT's OpenCourseWare. This project will enhance
the training of future scientists by providing undergraduate research
opportunities in materials modeling and integrating their work with
international collaborations through the MIT International Science and
Technology Initiatives program. Postdoctoral experience is increasingly critical
for scientists to gain proficiency in leading research projects that span across
and integrate both modeling and experimental results from different fields of
study. The PI will establish a postdoc office that will undertake to enhance the
postdoc experience at MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to increase our
understanding of interfaces in metals through theory and computer modeling.
Interfaces are locations where two different crystals meet and are ubiquitous in
engineering alloys such as steel, aluminum, titanium, and many others. Although
interfaces typically comprise less than 0.01% of the volume of such materials,
they play a decisive role in determining their mechanical, electrical, thermal,
and diffusion properties. Textbooks often portray them schematically as two-
dimensional and abrupt. This simplification is convenient and often necessary,
but fundamentally false: interface structure is inherently three dimensional,
often complex, and occasionally quite beautiful. Thus, much remains to be
understood about the structure and properties of
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of interfaces may
provide a path to making better engineering alloys. The performance envelope of
materials limits much of what technology can accomplish, for example in energy
applications: from steam generators and batteries to high-voltage power lines
and nuclear reactors, better materials translate into cleaner, safer, and
cheaper energy. Materials performance in these applications is often controlled
by crystal defects, such as vacancies, dislocations, and cracks. Tailoring the
interactions of interfaces with such defects is one path to expanding the
performance envelope of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three
objectives. The first is to develop models that capture the full complexity of
interface structure with enough precision to make quantitative predictions. The
second is to discover how interfaces with different structures interact with
defects that control materials performance and to develop the capability to
predict these interface-defect interactions from interface structure. Finally,
the third objective is to validate the interface structure and defect
interaction models described above. All models make simplifying assumptions. A
major goal of this work is to develop strategies for validating models of
interface structure and defects interactions using both theory and
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because there is an infinite number of
possible interfaces, this project has to focus on a selected subset of them. The
specific types of interfaces to be studied have therefore been downselected
based on criteria that give the highest likelihood of making rapid progress
towards achieving the goals of this project. Similarly, interactions of
interfaces with only three types of defects will be considered: point defects,
dislocations, and cracks. There are, however, no fundamental physical
limitations that prevent broadening the scope of future work to interfaces,
interactions, and defect types other than those initially
downselected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The defect and interface physics involved in
this project will be used to support the development of a new class and the
revision of an existing class on mechanical behavior of materials at MIT. Thanks
to MIT's commitment to share its educational resources through online programs
such as OpenCourseWare, these classes will benefit a worldwide audience. This
project will enhance the training of future scientists by providing
undergraduate research opportunities both at MIT and internationally through the
MIT International Science and Technology Initiatives program. Finally, this
project will enhance the experience of scientists at MIT who recently received
their PhDs and intend to continue building a career in research.