* 1150755
* CAREER: Process-Structure-Property Relationships for Rational Engineering of Semiconductor Nanowires
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Michael Filler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 01/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract Michael A. Filler

The long-range objective of this project is to establish foundational process-
structure-property relationships for semiconductor nanowires and, in doing so,
accelerate the timeline for realizing new nanowire-based photovoltaic device
technologies. Real-time in-situ infrared spectroscopy measurements will be
utilized to fundamentally interrogate the kinetics and thermodynamics that
govern Si and Ge semiconductor nanowire growth. The specific experiments to be
undertaken will test the hypothesis that surface chemistry can strongly
influence crystal structure at multiple length scales. The PI seeks an atomic-
scale understanding of precursor reactivity, adsorbate bonding, and surface
structures such that growth processes can be rationally manipulated and
structure precisely engineered. This chemical knowledge will also be connected
to key optoelectronic properties via ex-situ absorption and electrical transport
measurements. The fabrication of user-defined kinking, diameter, and doping-
modulated superstructures will open new opportunities for efficient photon
harvesting and charge carrier collection.

Intellectual Merit: The combination of an ultrahigh vacuum growth environment
and in-situ measurement limits nanowire degradation and yields a level of
chemical detail not previously achievable. More specifically, it will be
possible to definitively identify the transient surface chemistry that most
strongly influences nanowire structure and properties. The specific bonding
configuration of important surface species, either individually or in
combination, will be distinguishable for the first time. While Si and Ge
nanowires will serve as technologically relevant model systems, key findings
will be broadly applicable to a range of materials classes (e.g. III-V
semiconductors, oxides, etc.).

Broader Impact: Breakthrough renewable energy technologies that could be widely
deployed could transform our energy systems and dramatically reduce their carbon
footprint. The insight gained during this work will enable the rational design
of nanoscale components for next generation photovoltaic devices, making a
contribution to the United States? declared goal of reducing carbon emissions
over the coming years. Advancements are also expected to have broad application
in a range of fields including photonics, electronics, quantum computation, and
electrochemistry.

Through this CAREER effort, the PI will significantly expand educational and
outreach activities aimed at preparing the next generation of scientists and
engineers for the impending shift to an energy sector based on renewables. At
the undergraduate level, lecture modules will incorporate renewable energy
fundamentals into the core chemical engineering curriculum. An upper-level
course will provide a comprehensive treatment of the basic chemical science
underlying solar energy capture, conversion, and storage. Yearly summer
internships will allow local high school chemistry and physics teachers to work
with the PI to create solar energy-related learning modules and hands-on
demonstrations. The ?Prof. Solar? blog will be coupled with social networking
services to disseminate recent scientific advances and introduce complex topics
to a multidisciplinary audience.