* 1150017
* CAREER: Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Repair Protein Recruitment to Localized DNA Photolesions in Live Cells
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* John Papanikolas, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2014
* USD 307,524.00

In this project the PI will test the hypothesis that DNA repair proteins use
one-dimensional diffusion along DNA to locate and identify photo-lesions in
eukaryotic cells. The PI will investigate DNA repair protein recruitment by
imaging fluorescently labeled proteins in live cells. The PI will image protein
dynamics in live cells containing polytene chromosomes, in which proteins
associated with DNA can be optically distinguished from those in the inter-
chromatin space. In addition the PI will trigger protein recruitment by applying
a method developed to create three-dimensionally localized, UV-like DNA photo-
lesions via multi-photon absorption of visible light. The specific research
objectives are to: 1. Characterize the distribution and repair of local DNA
photolesions produced by multiphoton absorption of visible light. 2. Investigate
the interactions of GFP-TopI with damaged and undamaged DNA in live cells, in
order to determine if nonspecific associations contribute in its recruitment to
damaged DNA. 3. Investigate the interactions of XPC and DDB1 with damaged and
undamaged DNA in live cells, in order to determine the importance of nonspecific
associations in the recruitment of these proteins to damaged DNA. The PI will
develop a set of hands-on activities based on his research in fluorescence
imaging, and implement these in Durham public middle schools. The goal of these
activities is to enliven the scientific curiosity of young students, most of
which are members of underrepresented minority groups. The PI will also continue
to introduce precollege and undergraduate students to research through
internships in the group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics
and the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.