* 1150574
* Collaborative Research: Optimizing Multibeam Data Acquisition Operations and Quality for the U.S. Academic Research Fleet
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Jonathan Beaudoin, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,527.00

This collaborative effort proposes to establish technical resources and new
communication mechanisms to develop and share common information, tools, and
expertise regarding the operation and monitoring of multibeam sonars across the
U.S. Academic Fleet. The strategy is to create a community of stakeholders
including representatives from each operating institution, complemented by key
outside experts from the user and technical/engineering communities that can
assist in providing guidance on a broad array of multibeam issues to improve how
these data are collected and assessed. In addition, the effort proposes to
establish a Multibeam Advisory Committee (MAC) that will act as an overall
coordinating body with the primary goal of supporting mapping operations onboard
vessels in the U.S. academic research fleet and ensuring that high quality data
are consistently acquired. They will also assemble small groups of individuals
from the MAC and community of stakeholders into technical teams, each of which
is tasked with specific components of multibeam system performance
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under criterion two, providing infrastructure support
for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support
of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The support of
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers. All users (or the appropriate
funding agencies) share support for basic pooled services on the vessel equally,
with NSF paying a share of the support costs based on fractional usage of the
vessel during the year.