* 1150002
* CAREER: A Multiscale Strategy for Nano- and Bio- Structures: Deformation, Defects, and Electromechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Kaushik Dayal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2018
* USD 426,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to investigate the use of fundamental structural symmetries for
multiscale calculations of structural defects in systems of importance to
nanotechnology and life sciences. The focus nanostructures are carbon nanotubes
and graphene, and the focus biological structures are DNA molecules and lipid
membranes. Structural defects can have huge impacts: for example, carbon
nanotube networks with junctions can behave as soft and ultra-low-weight
electromechanical materials; voids in graphene can cause failure, or even enable
new properties such as piezoelectricity in non-piezoelectric perfect graphene;
mechanical kinks in DNA can affect electron transport and consequently
biological function; and the exit and entry of biomolecules to the cell is
essentially through the formation of defects in lipid membranes. The research
strategy will use a unifying description of the underlying structural symmetries
in these various systems to enable multiscale calculations of defect properties,
in particular the role of defects in deformation and electron
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the project will include new
methods for complex bio- and nano-structures, and the scientific insights of the
focus studies can provide strategies for designing and optimizing new materials
with complex structure. This project plans a number of educational activities
that are closely integrated with the research. This includes a new National
Engineer Week exhibit based on symmetry and collective behavior; involving
undergraduates in the proposed research; training a PhD student; the development
of interdisciplinary graduate courses on "Multiscale Modeling"; and the
organization of conference sessions on topics related to the project.