* 1150630
* CAREER: Investigating Protonic Semiconductivity in Polysaccharide Nanofibers with Field Effect Protonic Transistors
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Marco Rolandi, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 01/31/2017
* USD 549,938.00

This CAREER award is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program (EPM) and Biomaterials Program (BMAT), both in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The research component of this CAREER award
investigates the proton (H+) conductivity of polysaccharide nanofibers in field
effect transistors (FET). The research builds on the demonstration of current
modulation in biocompatible polysaccharide field effect transistors with proton-
transparent contacts. In maleic-chitosan nanofibers, protons move along the
hydrated maleic-chitosan hydrogen bond network following the Grotthuss
mechanism. This project studies a model for describing these field effect
transistors that involves proton type (H+) and proton hole type (OH-)
semiconductors. This model is verified by measuring proton transport in proton
FET devices as a function of water content, temperature, contacts, and channel
material. Specifically, chitin derivatives with proton-donating (acid) and
proton-withdrawing (base) groups with different dissociation constant are
synthesized. These materials should behave as H+ and OH- type proton
semiconductors. Finally, the understanding of these proton transport phenomena
is used to design devices for biomedical applications. These include planar
proton selective patch-clamping and cell-based sensors.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical:
Proton transport plays an essential role in many natural phenomena. As such,
devices that can directly measure and control protonic currents may provide new
means of measuring proton transport in electrophysiology. Progress in
nanoscience and nanotechnology has started to impact daily lives. However,
"hard-science" disciplines often intimidate high-school students and as well as
college students not in science-technology-engineering-mathematics (STEM) majors
because STEM disciplines are perceived as being remote from daily experiences.
To increase the science knowledge of high-school students and non-STEM majors,
this project explores the fun and approachable activity of having them design
graphics to depict nanoscience and nanotechnology concepts. In the process of
creating graphics, students witness that nanotechnology can be an approachable
and creative field, while also gaining a better understanding of the underlying
science. Furthermore, scientists often communicate their results using graphics.
However, little formal training in visual communication is present in the STEM
curriculum. Gathering inspiration and help from working with art majors, this
project introduces a new class on bionanotechnology basic elements for graphic
design, where science and engineering graduate students learn how to make
effective figures for their publications.