* 1150288
* CAREER:   Dissecting the Molecular Mechanisms of Substrate Selection and Degradation by the 26S Proteasome
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Andreas Martin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,085,176.00

Intellectual merit. The protein content inside a cell is constantly changing.
Depending on the cell's needs, certain proteins are made while others are
removed or degraded. Protein degradation must be highly specific and is
therefore tightly regulated by compartmental proteases, large barrel-shaped
complexes that utilize the energy from ATP hydrolysis to mechanically unravel
and then translocate protein substrates into a sequestered internal chamber for
degradation. The major ATP-dependent protease in eukaryotic cells is the 26S
proteasome, which controls protein turnover and numerous vital processes by
specifically degrading regulatory proteins involved for instance in cell
division, signal transduction, and programmed cell death. Most substrates are
marked for degradation by the reversible attachment of another small protein,
ubiquitin, which can be consecutively linked together to form poly-ubiquitin
chains that act as a targeting signal to the proteasome. The goal of this
research is to elucidate the detailed mechanisms of ubiquitin-dependent protein
degradation by using novel approaches for the structural, quantitative
biochemical, and biophysical characterization of the 26S proteasome. Specific
aims are 1) to understand the intricate coupling between substrate degradation
and the preceding removal of ubiquitin chains, 2) to gain detailed structural
and functional insight into the architecture of the proteasome molecular machine
and its mechanisms for substrate recognition, unfolding, and ubiquitin removal,
and 3) to use unprecedented single-molecule measurements to provide a glimpse
into the mechanochemistry of substrate recognition and degradation. It is
expected that elucidating these molecular mechanisms will help to define the
principles that control the degradation of highly diverse proteins in vivo, and
thus further the understanding of the various regulatory functions of
preoteasomes in eukaryotic cells. Due to the ubiquitous functions of the
proteasome in protein turnover and maintenance of crucial pathways, the results
and novel tools generated through this research will strongly impact other cell-
biological studies and approaches.

Broader impacts. A detailed knowledge of the molecular mechanisms for substrate
processing will allow the development of dedicated proteasomes for the
temporally controlled elimination of specific enzymes and other proteins in the
cell, which is highly desired for applications in bioengineering and systems
biology, and may aid the synthesis of drug precursors or biofuels. The proposed
research will be integrated with teaching and outreach to strengthen education
in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Due to
their strongly collaborative nature, the research projects provide intense
interdisciplinary training for undergraduates, postdocs, and graduate students
at the intersection of biology, physics, and chemistry. Furthermore, in order to
start science education and outreach already at a young age, a program will be
developed that includes summer research internships for high school students, a
Laboratory Boot Camp program with courses for undergraduates, community college
students, and high school teachers, and the organization of science fairs at
local public charter schools with high percentage of underrepresented
minorities.