* 1150249
* CAREER: Structure-specific Nanoscale Dynamics Studied by Nonlinear and Magneto-optical Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Kenneth Knappenberger, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 03/31/2018
* USD 638,640.00

This CAREER award by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program supports work by Professor Kenneth Knappenberger at Florida State
University -endowed to develop advanced spectroscopic techniques for the
investigation of the size-dependent and structure-specific optical properties of
gold nanostructures ranging from quantum-confined clusters (&lt; 2 nm) to
plasmon-supporting particles (&gt; 2 nm). Specifically, the PI, along with
graduate students, will develop femtosecond time-resolved magneto-optical
techniques to study both the electronic structure and excited state-dynamics of
size-selected gold nanoclusters. The PI will also develop a nonlinear microscopy
platform capable of single-particle measurements. These data will inform on
plasmon modes that result from hybridization of gold nanostructures in both
small aggregates and lithographically formed arrays. Advances made in these two
areas will be merged to describe plasmon-mediated electric-dipole transitions,
and the nonlinear imaging facility will be extended to a magneto-optical
platform capable of state-resolved plasmon-enhancement measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will allow Professor Knappenberger to develop
advanced measurement technologies to investigate systematically the nanoparticle
structure-function interplay. This research will impact several technical areas:
solar-energy conversion, national security, trace-level analysis and high-
contrast biomedical imaging. Moreover, new facilities, capable of providing
temporally and spatially resolved magneto-optical data, will be established. As
a result, the group will establish a unique expertise that can be applied to
problems in many areas of science and technology that require spin and oxidation
state information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will educate both
undergraduate and graduate students in an interdisciplinary environment at
Florida State University and will benefit from close interactions with the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. Also, in an effort to improve
understanding and stimulate interest in science and technology among a diverse
group of high school students, Professor Knappenberger will work closely with a
high school teacher to introduce new instrumentation into an image-based
chemistry curriculum. Finally, as an extension of the investigator's classroom
teaching, a series of instructional visual materials will be developed to
describe proper use of scientific instruments to a diverse audience.