* 1150536
* CAREER:  Measuring and Modeling Innovation and Risk in Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Katja Holtta-Otto, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 05/31/2017
* USD 0.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career (CAREER) award is to
investigate how engineering design innovation and risk balance differs in small
new ventures, as opposed to larger more mature corporations, so as to model
contributing factors that will enable development of improved engineering design
methods and processes. Data for the hypothesis testing will be gathered from
published lists of award winning products, a survey of US new ventures and
larger companies in selected industries defined by NAICS codes, and from
partnering new ventures. A predictive model of engineering design level factors
contributing to new venture success will be developed. This is an initial step
toward discovering how engineering design methods should be different in new
ventures as opposed to larger companies. This research will result in knowledge
on how to balance one of the key contributor/barrier trade-offs to success:
innovation versus technical risk. This new knowledge will be transferred into a
validated teaching methodology that will be immediately applied in student
design projects and that will be transferred to other institutions through
workshops and scholarly publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
work will increase the ability to model risk and innovation during the
engineering design process and, due to the reflection of small venture issues,
will lead to greater success of new ventures that are vital to the overall
economy of the nation. The work will have an immediate effect on local industry
through collaborations with a partnering new technology venture center. On the
national scale, such university affiliated new ventures have contributed $34
billion to the economy. The integration to teaching through the co-located
design projects will help educate engineering entrepreneurs. In hopes of
enticing pursuit of STEM careers and in collaboration with the Society for Women
Engineers, the research results are incorporated into an annual One Day Design
project for local middle school girls. Finally, all results will be published at
multiple levels including journal papers, brown bag lunches with a local
entrepreneurs' forum, and national and international conferences.