* 1150767
* CAREER: Novel Mechanism for Assembling Large Arrays of Rotary Nano- Electromechanical Devices Using Nanoscale Building Blocks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Donglei Emma Fan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 489,988.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to
explore novel mechanisms for highly efficient assembly of rotary nano-
electromechanical devices (NEMS motors or nanomotors) from nanocale building
blocks and to elucidate the fundamental nanoscale interactions in such systems.
Rotary nanomotors, a type of NEMS device, are particularly important for
advancing NEMS technology. However, the complexity of top-down fabrication of
miniature motors has greatly hindered their development for practical
applications. In this research, the PI aims to investigate an innovative
mechanism to (1) successfully assemble and accurate large arrays of nanomotors
consisting of nanowires as rotors, nanomagnets as bearings, and quadruple
microelectrodes as stators; (2) investigate the nanoscale interactions involved
in a nanomotor system for high-performance nanomotors with controlled rotation
angle, speed and chirality, like stepper motors; (3) evaluate and experimentally
investigate the size limits of nanomotors; and (4) demonstrate the synergistic
operation of nanomotors for pumping nanoparticles and biological cells in
microfluidics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will result in
a unique bottom-up assembly scheme for rotary NEMS devices that can be
integrated into large arrays to perform complex functions. The assembly concept
using nanoscale building blocks can provide a practical solution for the
economical production of NEMS devices. The research may also advance our
understanding of fundamental nanoscale electrical-material-mechanical-magnetic
interactions. Overall, the proposed research may produce transformative impacts
on multiple fields including NEMS, microfluidics, and lab-on-chip architectures.
The synergy of research and education will benefit graduate, undergraduate, and
K-12 students, increase participation of minorities and women, bring new
perspectives on nano-assembly and applications to classroom teaching, and result
in the development of a Nanomotor Learning Module for demonstration at the
Austin Children's Museum.