* 1150036
* CAREER: Provably Good Concurrency Platforms for Streaming Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Kunal Agrawal, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 06/30/2018
* USD 455,852.00

Most of the today's computers are parallel machines. For example, multicore
processors&lt;br/&gt;on personal computers and cell phones, graphics processors,
cloud&lt;br/&gt;computers, and clusters all have more than one processing unit.
&lt;br/&gt;Many modern applications are data intensive; examples include digital
signal processing, audio and video&lt;br/&gt;processing, networking, scientific
and biological computations.&lt;br/&gt;Streaming is an increasingly popular
paradigm for applications that process &lt;br/&gt;large amounts of data in
parallel. A streaming concurrency platform is responsible
for&lt;br/&gt;correctly and efficiently executing streaming applications on a
given parallel machine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
design streaming concurrency platforms&lt;br/&gt;that provide guarantees of
forward progress and efficiency. This&lt;br/&gt;research will fundamentally
advance the technology by addressing &lt;br/&gt;the following important
questions: &lt;br/&gt;(1) How to guarantee that applications will make forward
progress (not&lt;br/&gt;deadlock)? &lt;br/&gt;(2) How to guarantee that the
streaming applications will run efficiently&lt;br/&gt;on modern parallel
machines with deep and complex memory hierarchies?&lt;br/&gt;and&lt;br/&gt;(3)
How to support more general and expressive streaming models
while&lt;br/&gt;still providing correctness and performance guarantees?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In modern machines cache locality can have a significant
impact on&lt;br/&gt;performance. This research has the potential to make
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;contributions to both design and analysis techniques for
steaming&lt;br/&gt;schedulers that guarantee good cache performance to streaming
applications.&lt;br/&gt;This work will enable programmers to express a larger
class of applications more&lt;br/&gt;easily in the streaming model. While this
research project is a primarily theoretical undertaking&lt;br/&gt;aimed towards
designing algorithms and proving asymptotic bounds on&lt;br/&gt;their
performance, the overall goal is to enable practical and&lt;br/&gt;efficient
concurrency platforms that can run high-performance,&lt;br/&gt;high-throughput
streaming computations on real parallel machines.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, one of
the primary objectives will be to design low overhead&lt;br/&gt;and simple
algorithms that can be implemented in production-level&lt;br/&gt;streaming
concurrency platforms.