* 1150908
* CAREER: Photodirected Assembly of Custom-Designed Polyelectrolyte Complexes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Yakov Lapitsky, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2019
* USD 401,421.00

Lapitsky, Yakov&lt;br/&gt;1150908 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to create stimulus-responsive
interfacial microstructures and microdevices through the photodirected assembly
of polyelectrolytes. Recent advances in chemical product design, medicine and
nanotechnology have ushered in a new age of ?smart? materials that respond to
external stimuli such as changes in pH, ionic strength, temperature, and
mechanical or electromagnetic perturbations. Stimulus-responsive polyelectrolyte
complexes are routinely used as building blocks for these materials and find
countless applications, ranging from controlled release of bioactive payloads,
to self-healing materials and soft microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), to
energy devices and water purification. These technologies require custom-
designed structures with an assortment of well-defined morphologies. Yet,
methods for the microfabrication of polyelectrolyte complexes remain limited to
simplistic structural motifs (e.g., planar, spherical, cylindrical, and prism-
like or pyramid-like). This severely limits both the range and intricacy of the
supramolecular architectures that can be prepared from polyelectrolytes, and
presents a major obstacle in the 3-D assembly of polyelectrolyte-based
microdevices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this, the PI aims to direct the
assembly of intricate polyelectrolyte structures via 3-D photopatterning of
polyelectrolyte solutions, where one of the polymer species only becomes charged
when exposed to light. The PI hypothesizes that the irradiation at the focal
point of the multiphoton laser will induce rapid and localized polyelectrolyte
self-assembly into colloidal materials, whose shapes and dimensions will be
directed by the beam path. This project has three objectives: (1) investigating
photodirected assembly of polyelectrolytes as a method for preparing intricate
supramolecular structures, (2) dissecting the photodirected assembly process
with the view of developing robust guidelines for controlling materials
interfacial structure and stimulus sensitivity, and (3) exploiting the stimulus-
responsive properties of photopatterned polyelectrolyte complexes to prepare
micron-scale controlled release devices, actuators and materials that self-
destruct. This research leverages the PI?s background in polyelectrolyte self-
assembly, and will dramatically expand the range and intricacy of
polyelectrolyte-based materials that can be prepared for customized controlled
release, sensor and actuator technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance the design and microfabrication of
smart devices for medical, environmental and household applications. Likewise,
the ability to produce novel stimulus-responsive structures has the potential to
accelerate the development of advanced membranes, coatings, electronics and
energy devices. Importantly, this research will be closely integrated with
educational outreach. The PI will introduce high school students to stimulus-
responsive polyelectrolytes in the Engineer for a Day and EXCEL programs that
are offered to Toledo Public Schools. Moreover, he will continue his involvement
in the Engineering for Teachers of Migrant Students (ETMS) distance learning
course. ETMS provides graduate training for teachers in rural communities who
teach children of migrant farm workers, and aims to develop a set of experiments
that demonstrate the importance of mathematics, science and engineering to
everyday life. The PI has recently become involved with ETMS, and has already
developed several demonstrations that use stimulus-responsive polymers found in
household products (e.g., alginate, poly(acrylic acid), and methylcellulose) to
reinforce concepts that are learned in high school chemistry. To disseminate the
ETMS materials more broadly, step-by-step tutorials will be posted on the PI?s
website and on YouTube. These outreach activities will help increase and
diversify the enrollment of science and engineering students. Furthermore, the
PI?s research will train undergraduate and graduate students (including women
and underrepresented minorities) in the use of materials characterization
techniques, and in the fundamentals of colloid and polymer science. This
research will also generate stimulating examples and project topics, which the
PI will incorporate into the colloids and transport phenomena courses that he
will teach at the University of Toledo.