* 1150988
* CAREER: Next-Generation Micro Gas Chromatography System Toward Ultra-High Capacity,Selectivity, and Portability For Distributed Environmental Awareness
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Hanseup Kim, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 413,489.00

Some unknown physical and chemical phenomena can be precisely observed and
engineered by manipulating fluids in micro and nano scales. PI?s long-term
research agenda lies in the development of Integrated Microsystems to enable
such interface and reverse-engineering on non-electric ambient phenomena by
utilizing precision electro-mechanical transduction via fluidic movement. This
5-year CAREER proposal focuses on developing a ?wearable? micro gas
chromatography (Ã¬GC) system to enable real-time, on-spot, and personal
monitoring of a class of various airborne pollutants (Volatile Organic
Compounds: VOCs) for early warning for individuals. Specifically, PI proposes to
investigate fundamental sciences of an entirely novel gas chromatography
configuration that is expected to overcome the major barrier in miniaturization
and enable the ultra-high capacity, selectivity, and portability beyond the
current state-of-the-art technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome the
miniaturization barrier in scaled-down gas chromatography devices, the
fundamental scientific conflict has to be resolved between the capacities of
chromatographic separation and fluidic pumping under size restriction. Gas
chromatography systems identify targets by racing them along a column resulting
in spatial separation. Ideally a longer column provides farther isolation among
more targets and thus higher detection capacity. However, it imposes rapidly-
increasing fluidic resistance that requires over-sized pumps preventing true
portability of the whole system. Therefore, in order to enable both high-
capacity and wearable-portability in GCs, both the sufficient column length and
fluidic head pressure should be attained in a miniaturized size. Currently there
are no viable options to achieve both. This project proposes to address such
barriers by: (1) investigating fundamental sciences and establishing a
prediction model of the proposed novel gas chromatography configuration, (2)
examining and maximizing performance capacity and limitation under scaling, and
(3) experimentally demonstrating functioning GC operation utilizing the novel
configuration for environmental monitoring: detection of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Although holding
great promises as an enabling tool, recent micro-scale gas sensors still require
bulky pumping systems barring true portability of the whole integrated system.
This project obviates such dilemma by providing a novel paradigm-shifting
concept in gas-chromatography-based sensors. Scientific establishment of the
proposed concept is expected to lead to a revolutionary advancement in generic
chemical and biological detection technology and instrumentation in all scales.
Additionally, the experimental demonstration will provide a new design guideline
for the multiple-component gas chromatography system with the new
configurations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Recent literature and
government policy have increasingly reported the emerging demands of knowing
environmental conditions in real-time at workplace, public, and home. The
proposed project is expected to bring MicroSystems technology, analytical
chemistry, and environmental education together creating synergetic impacts in
increasing the environmental awareness in both academia and public.
Specifically, the education objective of this project is to enhance the
awareness of under-represented highschool and K-12 students of the importance in
environmental monitoring and the roles of science and technology. This project
will educate the next-generation students with the impacts of the micro/nano
sensor technology in such a context. This project will train multiple graduate
and undergraduate students through a new course and hands-on modules, and many
K-12 students to the basic sensor concepts through on-going collaboration with a
local science museum. This project is highly inter-disciplinary among
engineering and science, and will also expose students to important social
issues for balanced education.