* 1150596
* CAREER: Computational Enzymology of Non-Aqueous Biocatalysis: Application to Biomass Pretreatment
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2019
* W. James Pfaendtner, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2019
* USD 484,750.00

1150596-Pfaendtner&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Societal ability to design and produce
chemicals and fuels from sustainable sources relies on future improvements in
bioprocessing. Non-aqueous solvents such as ionic liquids may potentially
revolutionize bioprocess efficiency and economics, particularly in the enzymatic
pretreatment of biomass for fermentation. The potential for non-aqueous solvents
to endow biological catalysts with improved or previously unknown properties is
exciting and could transform their use in industry. In spite of this great
promise, the incomplete understanding of the relationship between solvent,
enzyme structure, and reactivity has hampered significant scientific
technological development in this arena. Specifically, what is lacking is the
ability to relate molecular features of the solvent to its effect on enzyme
stability and activity. In cases where solvents lower the activity of the enzyme
compared with its natural environment we do not have the tools to systematically
understand the root cause of the loss of activity or how to effectively use
mutagenesis techniques to overcome the activity loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project put forward By Jim Pfaendtner of the University of Washington
will develop and validate a new multi-scale computational modeling toolkit for
the discovery and optimization of bioprocess solvent environments. The target of
the research proposal is the investigation of two glycoside hydrolase (GH)
enzymes with a combination of three ionic liquids (ILs). These enzymes are
widely used in bioprocessing applications and the ILs are chosen for their cost
effectiveness and potential for use as biomass solubilization agents. Using
advanced simulation techniques the PI and his group will systematically
determine the underlying molecular scale mechanisms by which ILs change the
activity of GH enzymes. Four research objectives are being pursued that will
discriminate whether the activity changes are based on structure, dynamics or a
combination of both.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There are several technological
broader impacts stemming from this project. Successful completion of the
research will lead to new biomass utilization technologies that could eliminate
one or more pretreatment stages. Additionally, this work will create a general
computational approach for studying enzymes in non-aqueous environments. The new
approach offers a new level of predictive capability that will speed scientific
discovery, reduce experimental costs, and transform the way we use computers to
guide bioprocess design and optimization.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Integrated with
the proposed research is an extensive outreach, education and training plan.
Educational components include a simulation module for an AP chemistry class at
a Seattle High School and a new biocatalysis module for the senior undergraduate
laboratory course. Research training components include research opportunities
for local High School teachers and collaboration with a campus outreach
organization, Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, (LSAMP) to
involve under-represented minorities in the PIs research group.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is jointly made and sponsored by the Catalysis and
Biocatalysis Program of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems Division and the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of
Chemistry.