* 1150137
* CAREER:  Dynamic State Transitions in Vehicular Traffic and the Effects of Driver Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Soyoung Ahn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 04/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program award is
to investigate the effects of driver behaviors, such as car-following and lane-
changing, on traffic state transitions (i.e., changes in traffic conditions such
as speed). This research focuses on transitions near freeway choke points (i.e.,
bottlenecks), merges, and ends of queues (where vehicles encounter congestion).
Transitions around these regions can lead to disorderly traffic conditions, such
as stop-and-go driving, due to sharp changes in speed and frequent lane-changing
maneuvers. This research consists of four primary tasks of (i) collecting new
individual vehicle data, (ii) analyzing general features (e.g. changes in
traffic flow, density, and speed) of traffic transitions, (iii) analyzing driver
behaviors and linking them to the general features, and (iv)
extending/developing models of driver behaviors capable of reproducing the
observed transition phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research
will uncover the physical mechanisms of transitions; i.e., how individual driver
behaviors (e.g., car-following, lane-changing) govern changes in flow, density,
and speed in time and space. Understanding these mechanisms has important
implications for mobility and safety. Transitions around freeway bottlenecks can
determine bottleneck throughput and hence the delays on freeway networks.
Further, vehicles in transition regions are more prone to crashes due to sudden
changes in speed and frequent lane-changing maneuvers. Therefore, the results
from this research will potentially advance traffic control strategies to manage
congestion more effectively and improve safety. Educational and outreach
activities involve the development of a project website, a smart-phone
application to collect probe data, web-based modules for hands-on learning of
data analysis methods and modeling. Using these means, this project will engage
undergraduate and graduate students, STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) high school teachers to reach out to high-school students in the
long term, researchers in other disciplines, and industry stakeholders.