* 1150615
* PECASE: Dielectric Phenotyping of Bacteria for Energy and Medicine
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Cullen Buie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 05/31/2017
* USD 412,000.00

Abstract 1150615-Buie, Cullen R.

The objective of the proposed research is to illuminate the coupling between
cell envelope phenotype and dielectric properties. This will be achieved by the
investigation of pathogenic bacteria and electrochemically active bacteria. A
three-dimensional insulator based dielectrophoresis (3DiDEP) device will be
used. The novel 3DiDEP platform enables non-invasive sorting, trapping, and
characterization of living cells based upon the cell envelope phenotype. The
hypothesis of the work is that 3DiDEP can be used to characterize the functions
expressed on the bacteria cell envelope. 3DiDEP enables low voltage, high
sensitivity separation and analysis of cells. Also, the proposed 3DiDEP employs
electrodes outside of the microchannel, the technique operates at low frequency
or DC electric fields. The proposed 3DiDEP is a powerful technique for high
throughput phenotyping in microbiology. Phenotype based selection using 3DiDEP
represents one of the first applications of microfluidics in the growing field
of phenomics. The proposed project may also help to address widespread concerns
in diverse fields ranging from renewable energy to healthcare. The PI also
proposes to develop relationships with target universitis to increase the
representation of underrepresented minorities in MIT graduate programs. The PI
has outlined a unique approach to train a new generation of underrepresented
minority scientists who may return to their respective undergraduate
institutions as faculty, thereby attacking the diversity issue on both the
student and faculty levels.