* 1150273
* CAREER: Dependable High Performance Scientific Computing at Extreme Scale  via Algorithmic Fault Tolerance
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Zizhong Chen, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 454,497.00

Extreme scale high-end computing platforms are expected to be available before
2020 and will have 100 million to 1 billion CPU cores. Due to the large number
of components in these platforms, the probability that errors occur during the
execution of an extreme scale application is expected to be much higher than
observed today. The goal of this CAREER research project is to develop highly
efficient techniques to detect, locate, and correct both soft and hard errors
according to the specific characteristics of an algorithm. The target algorithms
include (1) Krylov subspace methods for solving sparse linear systems and
eigenvalue problems; (2) Direct methods for solving dense linear systems and
eigenvalue problems; and (3) Newton's method for solving systems of non-linear
equations. This project will create significant education outcomes by
integrating the following four components: (1) establishing a supercomputing
research laboratory to support senior design projects and REU, enhance graduate
education and research, and demonstrate highly dependable applications on high-
end computing platforms; (2) enriching the teaching of both undergraduate and
graduate courses by integrating fault tolerance and high performance computing
into the courses; (3) increasing minority students involvement by encouraging
minority students to pursue graduate degrees in computing; and (4) offering free
workshops to K-12 teachers and students.