* 1150278
* CAREER:   EVOLUTION OF HOST CONTROL OVER SYMBIOSIS,  DYSBIOSIS IN ANTHROPOGENIC LANDSCAPES
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Joel Sachs, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2018
* USD 587,486.00

Rhizobial bacteria are key symbionts that infect the roots of pea plants and
their relatives (legumes) and fix nitrogen for their hosts in exchange for
carbon. Yet global changes are now altering nutrient fluxes of carbon and
nitrogen that are the currency of trade between rhizobia and their hosts. In
some soils, nitrogen levels have increased more than 100-fold due to pollution
from fossil fuel combustion. Evolutionary theory predicts degradation of host
systems that control symbiosis in such extreme settings, potentially unleashing
epidemics of exploitative symbionts. This project investigates the rapid
evolution of legumes and their symbionts in response to nitrogen pollution.
Genetic and phenotypic analyses will resolve differences among populations in
California that vary in nitrogen pollution levels and will uncover the extent
and molecular mechanisms of rhizobial exploitation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enhance our understanding of rhizobial symbioses, which are
critical to wild plants and provide an important service to the bio-economy via
enhanced crop growth and biofuel production. This project will also (i) train
middle-school students and directly involve them in gathering data, (ii) develop
a college course focused on the scientific method and its application to social
and policy-related decisions, and (iii) initiate a microbiology-research
training program that targets undergraduate students from groups
underrepresented in the sciences.