* 1150836
* CAREER:Collective hydrodynamics of confined drops in microfluidic parking networks
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Siva Vanapalli, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 01/31/2017
* USD 406,000.00

1150836&lt;br/&gt;PI: Vanapalli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current high-throughput
screening (HTS) methods use robotic actuators for dispensing and diluting fluids
in microliter-scale multi-well plates. This approach requires significant
investment and imposes constraints on reducing the fluid volumes due to
evaporation. Microfluidic arrays of immobilized drops could emerge as an
inexpensive and powerful alternative to multi-well plate screening. However, the
technical challenge in generating these static drop arrays (SDAs) is to develop
a means to (i) array drops of tunable volume and (ii) vary the reagent
concentration from drop to drop in the array. Despite recent progress, current
microfluidic devices are incapable of manipulating individual drop concentration
and varying the volume in the static array. The field is ripe for breakthroughs
and if the challenge is met the benefits are enormous ? low cost; reduced fluid
volumes; capability to monitor many reactions in drops simultaneously; and
ability to further manipulate drops as the position is indexed in the
array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this challenge, the PI proposes to
investigate the dynamics of trains of confined drops and/or long plugs in a
special class of fluidic networks called microfluidic parking networks (MPNs).
MPNs typically consist of a repeated sequence of loops, with each loop
containing a fluidic trap to park (i.e. immobilize) drops. Preliminary
exploration in just a small region of the control parameter space yielded a
series of unanticipated and astonishing behaviors driven by collective
hydrodynamic resistive interactions in the network. Sub-classes of collective
behavior involving drop parking, break-up, and coalescence led to the generation
of SDAs with tuneable volumes as well as with variation in reagent concentration
from drop-to-drop. To harness the full potential and autonomous control offered
by the preliminary observations, the PI proposes a comprehensive investigation
of the collective hydrodynamics of drops in MPNs, than is currently available.
The investigation will focus on (i) coordinated experimental and modeling
efforts to predict the spatiotemporal dynamics of drops in MPNs that drive many
of the collective behaviors we observed. New tools involving drop-on-demand
generators will be integrated into MPNs, to vary the control parameters to map
the full phase space of collective dynamics (ii) providing a complete picture of
drop/plug break-up in MPNs, by characterizing the fragmentation dynamics to
control the size of drop relative to trap. This data when combined with a novel
strategy to measure pressure variations during break-up will enable rigorous
confrontation of existing models of drop break-up at bifurcations; and (iii)
controlling the coalescence and material exchange between parked and moving
drops, by probing the factors that regulate film drainage, and passive tracer
transport and mixing when drops fuse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
fundamental investigations will enable the development of inexpensive SDAs with
sophisticated capabilities. This work is poised to deliver a true nanoliter-
scale analog of the multi-well plate with the enormous simplification that
dilutions and mixing are carried out passively, thus solving a long-standing
challenge. Replacing a room full of robots with these penny-sized devices will
tremendously benefit HTS methods in biology and material science. The CAREER
project will also provide interdisciplinary training for students in the
cutting-edge areas of microfluidics, multiphase flows, microfabrication and
nonlinear dynamics. Graphic modules of droplet traffic and parking will be
developed for active learning, where students will design their own network
topologies and conduct original analysis. These modules will be integrated into
an elective course on microfluidics and the core courses. Outreach activities
will be developed for middle school girls on the theme "Bubbles on Chips" in
which students will mold devices containing a street map of Lubbock and study
bubble traffic to identify the exits that bubbles choose.