* 1150721
* Conjugated Inorganic-Organic Materials Possessing Unique Electronic and Optical Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* John Protasiewicz, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2016
* USD 488,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor John D. Protasiewicz of the Department of Chemistry at Case
Western Reserve University will explore the development of new types of
conjugated molecules and polymers. While such types of technologically important
materials have been known for some time, most of these materials are solely
based upon arrays of carbon-carbon double or triple bonds. This project seeks to
expand the range of conjugated materials to include other types of double bonds,
especially those that include the double bonded group 15 elements phosphorus,
arsenic, antimony, and bismuth. New types of synthetic methods achieve these
materials will be also developed. Photochemical studies of these new materials
will be undertaken to explore new properties.

This work could lead to new classes of hybrid organic-inorganic conjugated
materials having significant photophysical properties. These materials will also
contribute to the basic understanding of conjugated materials chemistry.
Advances in this project could have impacts on fields and applications such as
sensor technology, organic light emitting diodes, solar photovoltaics, molecular
electronics, and other areas where energy (in the form of light or electricity)
meets molecules and polymers. In addition, this project will provide excellent
interdisciplinary training of students, from pre-undergraduate to post-doctoral,
including those from groups historically underrepresented in the sciences.