* 1150875
* CAREER: Molecular Reorganization of Simple Substrates into Complex Products
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Uttam Tambar, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemistry Synthesis program is supporting the
research of Professor Uttam K. Tambar of the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center. Professor Tambar will develop novel molecular reorganization
processes, wherein a simple starting material selectively rearranges into a more
complex and more valuable product. Molecular rearrangements have pervaded
organic chemistry for decades. In fact, some of the most fundamental principles
of chemical reactivity were elucidated in the context of molecular
rearrangements. Professor Tambar is interested in studying areas of molecular
reorganization that are underdeveloped. His group will develop selective
rearrangements that will facilitate the synthesis of complex molecules,
including polycyclic natural products. In the process of developing these new
transformations, Professor Tambar's group will focus on elucidating new concepts
in chemical reactivity.

Professor Tambar will also initiate new educational activities that will
integrate his research goals with his commitment to educate the broader
community of chemistry's role in improving our quality of life. These
initiatives include introducing elementary school students to chemical
synthesis, improving Chemical Safety Training for graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists at his university, and organizing Science Cafés for the
general public of Dallas-Fort Worth area.