* 1150617
* CAREER: Advanced Photochemical Paradigms for Enhanced Photovoltaics and Photocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Tao Xu, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2019
* USD 424,999.00

Xu&lt;br/&gt;1150617 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;Solar
energy conversion and utilization can be implemented through photoelecrochemical
(PEC) schemes that convert light energy to electricity, such as PEC-based
photovoltaics (PV), or chemical energy such as solar fuels and solar
environmental purification using photocatalysts. Therefore, understanding the
basic science that defines and regulates the elementary light harvesting and
charge transport processes in PEC systems is crucial for the advancement of PEC
solar cells and photocatalysis. The overall goal of this proposal is to
fundamentally transform and enhance the elementary light harvesting and charge
transport efficiencies in current state-of-the-art PEC-based photovoltaic and
photocatalytic systems. Specifically, the proposed research plan will aim to the
following subtasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Converting the photoanodes of
conventional PEC solar cells, typically in the format of a thick PV layer on a
planar transparent conducting oxide (TCO), to a set of 3-D nanoarchitectured
conformal TCO/PV photoanodes. This innovation will drastically shorten the
transport length in the PV layer, leaving the majority of the transport in the
nearly metallic TCO layer for enhanced photocurrent collection, while still
providing sufficient PV material to accommodate the solar photon flux. The PI
will study the fundamental transport mechanisms resulting from these
transformative structures. In particular, reducing the thickness of the PV layer
to approximately the width of the space charge layer (typically 30 nm) at the
interface of TCO/PV layer can subject the overall light-induced charge
separation and transport processes to the strong influence of the built-in
potential at this interface. As a result, the slow diffusive transport mechanism
can be replaced by the more efficient field-driven drift transport mechanism to
suppress charge recombination in the PV layer. In turn, alternative faster redox
mediators with less overpotential can be applied for enhanced photovoltaic
performance. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2. Synergistically, the transformation from
2-D to 3-D TCO enables the incorporation of a variety of 3-D photonic crystal
(PC) configurations into the 3-D conformal TCO/PV architectures, which can trap
light through multiple scattering of photons, resulting in synergy rather than
conflict between the light harvest and charge transport processes. As such, PEC
solar cells can be more affordable since less PV materials are needed for
accommodating the solar flux. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Ti3+ and/or oxygen
vacancy self-doped TiO2-x can be an effective visible-light active photocatalyst
that using no additional dopants, thus to minimize the environmental concerns.
In order to achieve efficient visible-light activity, the concentration of Ti3+
must be high enough to induce a continuous vacancy band of electronic states
just below the conduction band edge of TiO2. Distinguished from the conventional
reduction of TiO2 (Ti4+-¨Ti3+) under harsh conditions, we propose an oxidative
conversion (Ti2+-¨Ti3+) scheme that uses TiH2 and H2O2 as precursors for Ti3+
self-doped TiO2-x photocatalysts. This process will provide a facile, low-cost
and high-concentration doping of Ti3+ throughout bulk of the TiO2-x matrix. The
reaction of TiH2 and H2O2 produces a hydrolyzed sol-gel-like precursory TiO2-x,
allowing convenient incorporation of plasmonic nanoparticles and formation of
versatile nanoarchitectured TiO2-x for enhanced solar photocatalytic activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;As nanoscience provides more
opportunities for more efficient PEC processes, the primary educational goal is
to integrate introductory nanoscience experiments relevant to both this project
and undergraduate chemistry into our existing curriculum with laboratory
assignments, so as to provide students hands-on understanding in course work and
basic nanoscience knowledge. Secondly, as an effective way to train the next
generation scientists, the PI plans to broaden the research collaboration with
Argonne scientists by developing a multifunctional program: Northern Student
Scientists at Argonne. This program will incorporate PI's research
collaborations with Argonne into student recruitment, education and training,
research, employment and community outreach. The students will be exposed to
world-class research environment, involved in frontline research projects at
their young age, and trained with cutting-edge research facilities, cross-
disciplinary knowledge, critical thinking and problem-solving methodologies, and
team-work skills. Due to the growing concerns on environmental disasters related
to petroleum and nuclear energy, PEC energy conversion becomes a highly
attractive aspect of energy science. As energy science is Argonne's core
research area, the PI will leverage Argonne'fs research and NIU's network to
establish an outreach program Energy and Environment Workshop for students and
teachers in local high schools via interactive presentations given by scientists
at Argonne and Northern Illinois University.