* 1150028
* CAREER: Communicative Efficiency and Adaptiveness in the Ideal Speaker
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2017
* T. Florian Jaeger, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 567,843.00

Human communication is typically robust even at high speeds. This suggests that
both speakers and listeners efficiently deal with the uncertainty and noise
inherent to perception, production, and the environment. This CAREER award
investigates how the human brain accomplishes this. A mathematical model of
efficient communication based on probability and information theory (the Ideal
Speaker model) is tested against data from conversational speech. Specifically,
the project investigates how the pronunciation of words in spontaneous speech
depends on words' expected confusability in context, the cognitive load the
speaker is under and the situational incentive for robust communication. The
Ideal Speaker model also predicts that efficient communication with a particular
interlocutor requires adaptation to that interlocutor, a prediction that the
project tests in behavioral paradigms against task-oriented speech production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to our understanding of how humans
produce language, why language has the properties it has, and to what extent the
neural systems underlying language production can adjust to different
communicative task demands. These insights can contribute to the development of
better automatic speech recognition systems (this project is limited to the
evaluation of such systems). In addition, novel paradigms to gather large
amounts of language data are developed that will dramatically cut research
costs. Finally, training in the emerging field of computational
psycholinguistics is provided to a broad international audience via summer
schools and workshops. This will contribute to a new generation of
multidisciplinary scientists working across traditional boundaries between
computer science, linguistics, and cognitive psychology.