* 1150867
* CAREER: Plant-in-a-Chip System for Sensing and Modulating Root-Pathogen Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Santosh Pandey, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 04/30/2018
* USD 407,000.00

CBET-1150867&lt;br/&gt;Pandey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the natural soil
environment, a plant is constantly required to combat a diverse range of
pathogens that aim to bypass its multi-step defense machinery. Upon successful
infection, pathogens can completely destroy an entire crop population. Through
proper understanding of plant-pathogen interactions, including behavioral
traits, it will be possible to develop effective, sustainable control strategies
against plant diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will develop a
new engineering platform to observe, sense, and modulate interactions between
plant roots and pathogens. The research plan is to accomplish the following
tasks: (i) develop a Plant-in-a-Chip system for the growth of Arabidopsis plants
and application of pathogens, (ii) realize chemical schemes for sensing and
modulating the auxin (an important plant hormone) profile in roots under
pathogenic attack using synthetic chemicals, and (iii) build on-chip electrical
schemes for sensing root health and manipulating pathogenic interactions with
roots. An adaptive image-tracking program will be built for real-time
observation of root responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
lack of microscale systems has limited the scope of experiments in plant
pathology to soil pots and petri-dishes that have low spatiotemporal resolution
to adequately characterize plant-pathogen interactions. The proposed system
promises a huge improvement in throughput (growing multiple plants on a single
chip), resolution (imaging single root cells), design flexibility (altering
chemical and electrical environment), and information content (real-time
observation of root responses). These studies will complement existing gene
sequencing efforts, thereby speeding the research to create pathogen-resistant
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research aims to study
an important and neglected area of engineering research ? interkingdom signaling
and behavioral functions of disease-related plant genes. This will help provide
key answers to why, how and when certain pathogens invade certain crops, thereby
helping us engineer disease-resistant transgenic plants. Considering the
importance, complexity and diversity of host-pathogen relations, we anticipate
the proposed system will advance knowledge in several disciplines such as
genetics, agronomy, entomology, bioinformatics, behavioral science, and human
health. The educational plan is to develop a novel bioengineering track for
electrical engineering undergraduates that will bring together students,
particularly females and underrepresented minorities, into this exciting
multidisciplinary research environment.