* 1150960
* CAREER: Phase-change memories and electro-thermal effects at nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Ali Gokirmak, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 532,800.00

Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1) To investigate electro-thermal phenomena that take
place in nanometer scale phase change memory devices through experimental and
computational studies.&lt;br/&gt;2) To computationally and experimentally
investigate aggressively scaled phase-change memory cell designs including
access devices and compact composite cell approaches.&lt;br/&gt;3) To support
graduate and undergraduate education, as well as outreach activities, in
electronic devices, electro-thermal effects, nanoscience and nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Phase change memory is a non-volatile
resistive memory technology that has shown potential for scalability down to
&lt; 10 nm range with fast access times, high packing density and low energy
consumption. Phase change memory makes use of a class of materials that can be
reversibly changed between low-resistance crystalline and high-resistance
amorphous states through rapid melting or annealing. Integration of phase change
memory with silicon electronics for high-density storage and high-performance
low-power storage requires an integrated approach bridging across physics,
materials science, device engineering and circuit design. The proposed work is
an integrated research program in collaboration with IBM, utilizing finite
element simulations and experiments on phase change memory materials, test
structures and devices to close the gaps of knowledge across these fields to
make phase change memory a main stream memory technology.&lt;br/&gt;Finite
element simulations will be used to understand the contribution of electro-
thermal phenomena, design of experiments and design of phase change memory
cells. The experiments will be used to extract important physical parameters and
demonstrate proof of principle. Experiments integrated with computational
studies will be used to extract important physical parameters that cannot be
measured directly, probe electro-thermal processes that are not very well
understood and design novel cell structures. Phase-change elements with access
devices will be studied as a whole, and potential composite devices where the
access device is an integral part of the phase-change element will be
investigated for their potential for high-density arrays. The fabrication
processes will be performed at IBM Watson Research Center using state-of-the-art
tools through an existing collaborative arrangement. Materials and device
characterization, and experimental and computational studies will be carried out
at University of Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The findings
from this project will provide for better understanding of all devices that
either utilize or are affected by electro-thermal effects such as other
resistive memory technologies, micro thermoelectric generators and nanoscale
transistors. The results will be published in scientific journals and online
(e.g. nanoHub, thermalHub). Graduate and undergraduate students will have access
to the facilities and expertise at IBM Watson Research Center, will get
experience on nanofabrication, nanoelectronic device design and
characterization, and will learn about phase changes, thermoelectric transport,
instrumentation and numerical modeling. Findings will be used for outreach
activities and the research effort will be integrated with undergraduate and
graduate level courses at University of Connecticut.