* 1150709
* CAREER:Structural, Spectroscopic, and Mechanistic Investigations of Native and Engineered Hemoglobin-Peroxidases
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Reza Ghiladi, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 586,105.00

The Chemistry of Life Sciences Program funds Professor Reza Ghiladi of North
Carolina State University for a CAREER award to carry out research entitled
"Structural, Spectroscopic, and Mechanistic Investigations of Native and
Engineered Hemoglobin-Peroxidases." This research involves probing the mechanism
and expanding the substrate profile of dehaloperoxidase (DHP), the archetype of
a potentially new and emerging class of bifunctional proteins known as the
hemoglobin-peroxidases. DHP is the first globin identified to possess a
biologically relevant peroxidase activity, and thus provides a unique system to
explore our understanding of metalloprotein mechanism, activation, and design.
Despite a number of studies on DHP that have helped to elucidate several of its
mechanistic pathways, it is still not understood how this bi-functional protein
can act as both a hemoglobin and a peroxidase. Biochemical assays, structural
studies, and spectroscopic investigations (stopped-flow UV-visible, EPR, NMR,
resonance Raman, and MÃ¶ssbauer) will be used to address questions pertaining to
substrate binding and activation from both the peroxidase-active ferric and
globin-active oxyferrous states. As tyrosyl radicals are implicated in mediating
electron transfer in the DHP-catalyzed and H2O2-dependent dehalogenation of
trihalophenols, low- and high-field EPR studies will be directed towards
identifying the location of protein radical formation. Mutants of DHP will also
be investigated for potential application in bioremediation against nitrophenol
pollutants.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Metalloproteins play a central role in all
living organisms, yet the governing principles of the metal-protein interaction
continue to be of interest to scientists who are looking toward building
paradigms for understanding metalloprotein structure-function relationships.
When taken together, the research goals outlined within this proposal take
advantage of the merits of a traditional bioinorganic approach that not only
enable posing and addressing the types of questions about biological systems and
life processes that are of interest to chemists, but can also potentially be of
importance to areas outside of chemistry. These include addressing the
fundamental issues of biocatalysis, enzyme mechanism, and de novo protein
engineering, thus allowing for the advancement of areas as diverse as
bioremediation, chemoenzymatic synthesis, and biomass conversion for renewable
biofuel production. Additionally, the broader impacts resulting from the
teacher-scholar activities supported by the integration of the proposed research
plan with educational endeavors include the following: i) continue to provide
rural K-2 and middle school science classrooms with demonstrations, lectures,
and lessons plans for teachers on the chemistry of life processes through the
"Creating STARS" outreach initiative; ii) continue the mentoring of talented,
disadvantaged minority high school students for summer long research
internships, using the structure-function relationship in metalloenzymes to
introduce basic chemical biology concepts; iii) lead undergraduate and graduate
chemistry students in interdisciplinary scientific inquiry that utilizes
emerging techniques in molecular biology and spectroscopy that are becoming
available to the next generation of bioinorganic chemists; iv) promote the
placement of undergraduate students from low-income or outside-urbanization
locations into multidisciplinary research labs as vehicles for broadening the
participation of underrepresented minorities. This project is receiving co-
funding from the Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.