* 1150438
* CAREER: Identifying the Dominant Controls on Strain Localization in the Lower Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2018
* Christopher Gerbi, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 432,680.00

This project combines a study of crustal rheology with efforts to improve
student understanding of the properties controlling the mechanical behavior of
Earth materials. We integrate the two components of the project by developing a
framework for university faculty, K-12 teachers, and graduate students in both
Earth sciences and education to collaborate during field-based research and
classroom resource development.

The distribution of rock strength in the crust is a fundamental control on
strain and corollary processes such as fluid flow, topographic evolution, and
seismicity. Without being able to accurately characterize the strength
distribution, we cannot accurately predict how the crust will respond to
internal and external driving forces. Despite recent progress constraining the
general mechanisms involved in strain-related weakening, we do not know which
weakening processes dominate at different levels of the crust. Using the
southwestern Grenville Province of Ontario, Canada, as a natural laboratory, we
will combine structural, petrological, and geochronological methods, followed by
analytical and numerical modeling sensitivity analysis, to determine the
relative importance of different weakening mechanisms during the development of
well-exposed km-scale shear zones there. We will test the following hypotheses:
1) Reaction and textural weakening are of subequal importance in shear zone
development; 2) Grain size reduction is commonly not a major weakening factor at
deep crustal levels; 3) Geological evidence does not require shear heating as a
component in shear zone formation; and 4) Although initial heterogeneities are
important for controlling the stress distribution in the crust, km-scale shear
zones form due to a change in constitutive relationships. Earth's topography and
the pattern of rock units exposed at the surface result almost entirely from the
combination of erosion and the heterogeneous movement of rocks within the crust
and mantle. In this project, we focus on identifying what controls patterns of
rock movement, or deformation, in the lower portions of continental crust. By
identifying the processes that control how rocks change strength during periods
of mountain-building, and therefore how the lower crust accommodates the large-
scale deformation induced by the movement of tectonic plates, we will improve
our ability to predict and explain the evolution of Earth's surface and related
processes such as fluid flow and seismicity.

The physical controls on the mechanical properties of geological materials are
well known. Yet many students still appear unsuccessful in understanding those
core ideas in Earth Science courses, despite their inclusion in science
standards. Moreover, due to a relative lack of formal studies, the geoscience
community has not developed a full picture of student misconceptions and
effective pedagogical strategies related to those concepts. To address this, we
will use a concept inventory approach to identify student needs at the 6th-9th
grade and introductory college levels in physical science content areas that
underlie concepts related to deformation, then develop, implement, and evaluate
the impact of instructional resources that address those needs. The principles
that govern rock deformation are the same as those that govern the deformation
of ice, metals, ceramics, and composite materials. Thus, students will be able
to apply gains in their understanding derived from this project more broadly to
fields such as glaciology and mechanical engineering. We will use the vertical
integration of students, pre- and in-service K-12 teachers, and faculty as a
pathway to improve student attitudes to science and engineering and to assist
pre- and in-service teachers in maintaining currency in research-driven advances
in the geosciences and geoscience education.