* 1150975
* CAREER: Tornado-Resilient Structural Retrofits for Sustainable Housing Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2012,01/31/2018
* David Prevatt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 01/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program award
are to characterize tornadic wind loads on a residential building and to compare
the resultant structural response of traditional construction against a
structurally enhanced one. Study variables include both tornado parameters
(vortex size, forward speed, pressure profile and swirl ratio), and the building
parameters (building location relative to the tornado core, structural
connections, and the main wind force resisting system). A 3-dimensional Finite
Element Analysis model of a light-framed residential structural system will be
used as the prototype to establish structural response. A database-assisted
design (DAD) methodology will be used to analyze tornadic wind load time-
histories from a model building shape and determine critical design loads and
reactions for the structural system. Full-scale tests will be conducted on
corner substructures of the prototype building for validating the numerical
model and also to evaluate the structural and economic benefits of enhanced
structural systems in houses. The effort will provide the basis for a tornado-
resilient design methodology for houses.

The award facilitates knowledge generation that provides a better understanding
of the structural behaviors and vulnerability of existing wood-framed houses,
while identifying benefits to a community that incorporate tornado-resilient
building structural systems. A new graduate-level course, Engineered Design of
Sustainable Residential Structures will provide knowledge to civil engineering
graduate students, and enable them to interact with residential building
contractors, and structural engineers. Information on tornadic loads and
structural enhancement of houses will be made available to builders via webbased
portals. A Wind Hazard Damage Assessment Group will be formed to conduct post-
storm assessments and to disseminate research findings on advanced residential
construction practices. Through research immersion, K-12 science teachers will
develop high-school teaching modules on tornado damage to houses for inclusion
in high-school science curricula. Training and mentorship of a PhD student will
be provided in experimental and analytical studies. This award will provide
resources that will be used to develop technologies to improve performance of
low-rise buildings affected by tornadoes.