* 1150790
* CAREER: Sustainable Urine Processes through integration of Education and Research (SUPER)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Treavor Boyer, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 418,474.00

1150790-Boyer&lt;br/&gt;Urine separation and treatment has the potential to
radically transform wastewater management whereby water, nutrients, and energy
are recovered and toxic contaminants are sequestered. Despite the potential of
urine separation and treatment, it has not been widely implemented because of an
absence of engineering strategies that are efficient in contaminant removal,
practical to implement, and acceptable to society. Accordingly, the research
objective of this project is to generate new knowledge of physicochemical
processes in urine to achieve sustainable urine separation, treatment, and
resource recovery. The central research hypothesis is that ion exchange is a
robust, selective, and scalable process, and as such, can be used as a
foundational strategy for urine treatment. The education objective of this
project is to generate excitement and better understanding of wastewater
management ? a topic that is largely underappreciated by society due to the
?ick? factor. The central education hypotheses are that water conservation and
visual iconic symbols can be used to increase appreciation, improve
understanding, and facilitate learning of STEM concepts related to wastewater
management. The research and education objectives will be accomplished by
pursuing four specific aims: (1) identify ion exchange processes in urine that
achieve maximum and selective recovery of nutrients; (2) quantify the efficacy
of ion exchange removal of pharmaceuticals from urine in terms of both removal
efficiency and toxicity; (3) identify the life cycle impacts of treatment
strategies used to recover nutrients and remove pharmaceuticals from source-
separated urine; and (4) evaluate innovative learning approaches for generating
excitement and improving understanding of wastewater management. The approach
will be to systematically evaluate the kinetics, thermodynamics, and toxicity of
ion exchange processes in urine through laboratory experiments; formulate a
mathematical model that couples microscale ion exchange with macroscale reactor
engineering; conduct life cycle impact assessment of urine treatment; develop an
educational pilot program with the Florida Park Service; work with middle school
science teachers; and mentor undergraduates and graduates in research. The
proposed research is expected to generate new knowledge of physicochemical
processes in urine and identify ion exchange strategies that recover nutrients,
decrease toxicity, and lead to a sustainable life cycle. The project will
establish a new partnership with the UF Center for Precollegiate Education and
Training (CPET). The CPET partnership will promote teaching, training, and
learning through undergraduate and graduate students hosting workshops for
middle school science teachers who will bring their new knowledge back to their
students. The educational activities are expected to impact children, students,
and adults thereby generating excitement and new understanding of wastewater
management.