* 1150722
* CAREER: Geodynamics of subducting slabs in the Earth's deep mantle from seismic anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 539,930.00

Subduction zones are among the most important tectonic features on the Earth's
surface and represent prime sites for earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunami
hazards. Subduction is also vitally important for understanding the Earth's
interior; Earth's long-term evolution is driven by the dynamics of the mantle,
and the recycling of oceanic plates back into the mantle through subduction is a
major driver for mantle processes. Understanding how slabs sink from the surface
to the base of the mantle - and how they interact with the mantle around them -
is crucial for understanding the mantle as a dynamic system. The scientific
challenge that this CAREER project aims to address is to understand how
subducting slabs deform the mantle around them as they descend through the deep
mantle using measurements of seismic waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations
and modeling of seismic anisotropy will be used to probe subduction dynamics in
three regions: the deep upper mantle, the transition zone, and the lowermost
mantle. I will examine the pattern of anisotropy and flow in the deep upper
mantle beneath subducting slabs, using detailed shear wave splitting data sets
to test hypotheses for controls on sub-slab mantle flow. I will explore how
subducting slabs deform the transition zone and uppermost lower mantle and
whether the style of deformation is related to the dynamic behavior of
"stagnant" vs. "non-stagnant" slabs. Finally, I will interrogate the geometry of
anisotropy at the base of the mantle in the D" layer, with the goal of
understanding how slab remnants impinging on the core-mantle boundary (CMB)
drive flow, and how flow patterns are related to other structures above the CMB
such as low shear velocity provinces. The research component of this project
will be complemented by an education and outreach effort which will focus on
providing high school teachers with research experience on broadband field
seismology deployments through a pilot program to be called FEST (Field
Experiences for Science Teachers). A prime strategy for translating research
into the structure and dynamics of the deep Earth to the general public is to
involve teachers in deep Earth research, and field-based projects will offer a
highly immersive and meaningful research experience.