* 1150713
* CAREER: Emission and Transport of PBDEs in Indoor Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Ying Xu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2017
* USD 409,149.00

CBET-1150713 Xu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are
endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs) that are used extensively as flame
retardants in consumer products and building materials in the U.S. Although
significant indoor exposures and adverse health effects have been confirmed,
effective strategies to limit exposures to PBDEs remain hamstrung by our poor
understanding of their sources and fate in indoor environments. The goal of this
CAREER development plan is to explicitly elucidate the fundamental mechanisms
governing the emission and transport of PBDEs in indoor environments. Specific
research objectives are to: 1) develop a novel, rapid, micro-chamber method to
characterize emissions of PBDEs from consumer products; 2) determine the
sorptive interactions of PBDEs with indoor particles and surfaces through
systematic laboratory studies; 3) develop PBDE indoor transport models that
include the processes of emission, sorption, desorption and particle transport;
4) conduct a series of controlled tests in large-scale chambers to validate the
transport models; and 5) apply the models and knowledge obtained from the
laboratory to a variety of indoor environments through field measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will combine cutting-edge laboratory
experiments, analytical modeling and field studies in a coherent way to
explicitly elucidate the fundamental mechanisms governing the emission and
transport of PBDEs in indoor environments. The PI will be the first to: develop
a novel and rapid micro-chamber method to measure key parameters that control
PBDE emissions; accurately measure PBDE gas/particle partitioning using an
innovative direct SPME-NTD approach; and apply the new fate and transport model
to explain the results of field measurements to a variety of indoor
environments. In addition, the PI will connect the mechanistic understanding of
emissions to the previously ignored strong sorption by particles and interior
surfaces. This project will significantly advance our ability to predict
emission, fate and transport, and exposure to semi-volatile EDCs ? as PBDEs
represent only one of a vast array of semi-volatile EDCs that are released into
our living environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project addresses
contaminants that disproportionately affect fetuses and children, leading to
lifelong illnesses and disabilities. The fundamental approach to predict
emissions and transport of PBDEs can almost certainly be generalized to a wide
range of other semivolatile EDCs emitted from a host of materials and products
found in homes, schools, offices, cars, and factories. The new mechanistic
understanding will enable effective design of green materials because the
chemical and material properties that govern emissions are clearly understood.
It will be of value to architects and engineers who wish to specify low-emitting
materials for use in green buildings; allow the use of validated models for
developing standards of product environmental performance or green labels; and
permit health professionals to estimate exposure and risk associated with PBDEs
for a wide range of environmental scenarios.