* 1150866
* CAREER: From Self-Assembled Monolayers to Molecular Multilayers: The Electronic Properties of Molecular Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,08/31/2020
* Kim Lewis, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 575,000.00

This CAREER award is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program (EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program (CSDM) in the Division of Chemistry
(CHE). Technical: The research component of this CAREER award investigates the
origin of electronic properties of self-assembled monolayers and multilayers of
molecules in molecular junctions. This investigation focuses on two electronic
properties, multi-state conductance and rectification, and addresses the
intimate connection between conductance and the vibration modes of molecular
systems. These studies can provide an explanation for the dependence of
molecular conductance on bias voltage and the redox states of molecules. The
research aims of the project are to: (1) investigate the origin of conductance
dependence on bias voltage and redox states of porphyrin monolayers in single
molecule junctions, (2) identify the relationships between the vibration modes
of porphyrins and its electronic properties in molecular junctions, and (3)
investigate the origin of rectification in a porphyrin monolayer versus
molecular multilayers. This project introduces studies that are systematically
designed to identify experimental parameters that influence molecular transport
properties (e.g., the dependence of thickness of molecular films on electronic
behavior and the existence of vibration energies in molecular junctions). These
parameters are tested using molecular break junctions, conductive atomic force
microscopy, and nanogaps fabricated by electromigration. Non-technical: This
research project in on electronics at the molecular level. The project supports
the advancement of molecules for two-state devices and rectifiers. A better
understanding of molecular transport can stimulate research in medicine (e.g.,
drug delivery techniques) and chemical sensors (e.g., detection of toxic gases).
To cultivate a broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce, the project
promotes scientific training of students and broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups. This is accomplished through an educational program
called NOLA MOVERS, which is a summer program to support students from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities to participate in cutting edge
research at Rensselaer. In addition, a program is introduced to Rensselaer's
School of Science to retain and mobilize undeclared students.