* 1150644
* Mechanism of nitric oxide synthase regulation by interdomain FMN/heme docking
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Changjian Feng, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Changjian Feng, from the University of New Mexico Health Sciences
Center, will investigate the mechanism of action of the enzyme nitric oxide
synthase (NOS). This flavo-hemoprotein is responsible for the biosynthesis of
nitric oxide (NO), a ubiquitous molecule involved in the regulation of several
physiological processes. Eukaryotic NOS isoforms are large modular enzymes
containing flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and heme domains connected by a
calmodulin-binding linker. Compelling evidence shows the importance of
interdomain FMN/heme docking in the regulation of NOS. However, the molecular
mechanism by which the FMN domain functions in NOS catalysis is unclear. This
problem will be tackled by an integrated program of pulsed electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR), laser flash photolysis, and mutagenesis approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the University of New Mexico is a Hispanic serving
institution, this award will provide research opportunities to underrepresented
minorities, including undergraduate students from other institutions in New
Mexico and other states. Efforts will be made to reach out to institutions in
which the aggregate success rate for applications to federal grants has been low
historically.