* 1150072
* EAGER: Catastrophic landslide dynamics from seismic wave inversion and satellite remote sensing
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Colin Stark, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 08/31/2012
* USD 38,240.00

EAGER: Catastrophic landslide dynamics from seismic wave inversion and satellite
remote sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to address the following
issue: Do the seismic waves generated by catastrophic slope failure retain
enough information on the forces driving a landslide to allow inference of its
dynamics? The dynamics of large, fast-moving landslides are poorly understood
for two reasons: (1) the physics of multi-phase sliding and granular flow is
complex; (2) empirical constraints on such catastrophic failures are rare, and
direct measurements of properties such as acceleration and velocity are almost
non-existent. Landslide seismology has the potential to fill the data gap by
making remote measurements of the dynamics of mass movement, but the field is in
its infancy and fundamental questions need to be answered before major
investment in it can be justified. Consequently, this project is focused on a
proof of concept of the fundamental methodology behind landslide seismology. The
project aims to develop a method for inverting the long-period seismic waves
induced during the motion of massive, rapidly accelerating landslides, and
evaluate the validity of the forces, accelerations, momenta and energies
inferred from it. Emphasis in this pilot study will be on analysis of
catastrophic landslides described in the literature for which global broadband
seismological data are available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this study is
to develop the ability to detect catastrophic landslides remotely and in near-
real-time. This has obvious benefits to communities engaged in natural hazards
mitigation and disaster management, notably in cases where massive slope
failures strike in remote areas or under conditions where communications are
severely compromised. In addition, application of this tool to the global
archive of broadband seismology data will enable the collection of a wealth of
new information on catastrophic landslide dynamics, which will serve a wide
range of science and engineering communities concerned with slope instability.