* 1150555
* CAREER: A Distributed Decision-Making System for Operating a Smart Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2018
* Yong Fu, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2018
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: A Distributed Decision-Making System for Operating a Smart
Grid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to explore a distributed decision-making system for effectively
operating a smart grid which is envisioned as encompassing three levels,
"microgrid", "macrogrid" and "megagrid". The approach includes three essential
components: Decision Framework, Decision Assessment, and Decision Approaches.
The decision framework has distinct and unique attributes including autonomy,
scalability, competition, compatibility, flexibility, collaboration and
extensibility. The decision assessment uses measurable smartness indicators to
assess the performance of the decision framework in terms of economic,
emissions, efficiency, utilization and reliability. The decision approaches
implement Modeling, Unit Decision, System Decision, and Integration to enable a
cost-effective, highly-reliable and sustainable smart grid with widely-
distributed energy resources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed research addresses the energy, environmental and economic challenges
caused by the large-scale deployment of distributed energy resources, and has
the ability to assess their impacts on the performance of smart grid over a
range of operating conditions. The proposed decision-making approaches use
advanced decomposition and coordination strategies to incorporate stochastic
features of smart grid operation and overcome the computational complexity of
large-scale decision-making problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
success of the proposed research will significantly enhance the economic and
energy security of the United States due to reduced energy imports from foreign
sources, reduced emissions, and improved energy efficiency of all economic
sectors. The proposed project will increase public awareness and advance the
understanding of the complexity of smart grid operations among ratepayers,
regulators, politicians, utility executives, and market participants. Research
results will be disseminated via standard academic means.