* 1150013
* CAREER:Toward a locality-enhancing transformation framework for irregular programs
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Milind Kulkarni, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2018
* USD 418,786.00

Many domains in computer science, from data-mining to simulation to
computational biology, focus heavily on irregular applications, which deal with
complex algorithms that manipulate complex data structures. For example, to
analyze large data sets, point correlation - a data mining algorithm - organizes
data in a tree-like structure that is then manipulated to extract trends and
patterns. As such algorithms become more pervasive, and, more importantly, the
data sets they are applied to become much larger, writing high performance
irregular applications has become critically important. However, the complexity
of irregular algorithms makes writing high-performance applications very
difficult: simple expressions of the algorithms do not perform well, and high-
performance implementations are difficult to express. An attractive solution is
to develop a set of tools that could take a simple expression of an algorithm
and automatically transform the program into a higher performing version. This
project aims to develop automated, robust and generally-applicable performance-
enhancing techniques and transformations for irregular programs.

The chief obstacle to identifying and performing performance-enhancing
transformations on irregular programs is the apparent lack of principles that
unify irregular applications. However, this research argues that there are,
indeed, such principles that can guide the development of transformations. By
leveraging high-level structural properties of irregular algorithms, it is
possible to automatically transform irregular programs to significantly improve
their performance. This project pursues a set of interlocking efforts to build a
framework to (i) analyze irregular programs, (ii) identify profitable and legal
transformations, (iii) automatically restructure programs according to those
transformations, and then (iv) tune the performance of the transformed
applications to best fit the target execution platform.