* 1150337
* Linguistic structure in ellipsis and pronoun interpretation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Jeffrey Runner, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 11/30/2017
* USD 275,432.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jeffrey T. Runner will conduct
three years of linguistic research examining how participants interpret
sentences containing a range of different elided phrases. Many of the proposed
experiments will use a lightweight head-mounted eye tracker to monitor eye
movements as participants identify an object or a person in a scene while
listening to descriptions of the depicted activities (e.g., "The security guard
opened the lock and the night watchman did, too."). Which object or person
participants look at, and when they look at them, provides evidence about which
referents they are considering as they interpret the elided expressions. The
goals of this research are to (a) investigate the interpretation of these
expressions with on-line and off-line tasks; (b) evaluate the extent to which
grammatical factors define the potential set of referents for elided phrases and
pronouns; and (c) examine the interaction of these grammatical factors with
pragmatic and discourse factors. The results of this research will be important
for understanding how people assign reference, which is a central goal of
current research in theoretical and applied linguistics. Very little research
has been devoted to using a range of different expressions to explicitly address
these questions. A better understanding of reference resolution can also benefit
research in other domains. Reference resolution is one of the most central and
challenging problems in developing efficient language understanding systems,
including systems that are being developed for health-related bio-medical
applications. Moreover, information about the timing of eye movements and
speech, especially in relation to reference resolution, will also inform
scientists who are developing computer-based language understanding systems that
use eye movements to help resolve ambiguous words and referring expressions.
Furthermore, difficulties in reference resolution are associated with, and often
used to diagnose, certain language difficulties that arise due to brain damage,
and thus a better understanding of the grammatical and discourse factors guiding
reference resolution can prove a useful baseline for clinical research.