* 1150507
* CAREER: Design and Implementation of an Evolving Intelligent Wideband Digital Receiver System on a Tribrid Computing Platform Capable of Cognitive Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Kiran George, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

ECCS-1150507&lt;br/&gt;Kiran George, California State University-
Fullerton&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Design and Implementation of an Evolving Intelligent
Wideband Digital Receiver System on a Tribrid Computing Platform Capable of
Cognitive Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The fundamental
function of a modern radar receiver is to intercept radio frequency signals to
identify and locate its source. Lack of a priori knowledge of the waveform of
interest, multitude of signals and the noise energy that occupies the same
frequency spectrum as the signal, makes the design of a modern wideband receiver
a daunting task. The objective of this effort is to design and implement an
intelligent wideband digital receiver capable of achieving a near-zero false
alarm rate (&lt; 10-6) and a high instantaneous dynamic range by ascertaining
the legitimacy of signals while categorizing and tracking incoming signals based
on the signal environment, attributes and cues, and simultaneously enhancing its
knowledge base through cognitive learning during both in-field and off-field
operations, strongly augmented by three kinds of memory: intrinsic, semantic,
and most importantly episodic. The design will utilize a tribrid hardware
architecture where the computational intensity is intelligently partitioned and
handled between three commercially available off-the-shelf processor systems:
accelerated processing unit, many-core TILE processor, and field-programmable
gate array with silicon photonic technology as the high-speed backplane to
enhance chip-to-chip data communications and reduce data starvation of the
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Outcomes of the proposed
research can be applied to a broad range of areas such as wireless communication
systems, biomedical signal processing, and other applications that utilize fast
Fourier transform based spectral estimation. The proposed learning system design
will be realized in two distinct hardware form factors which will serve as a
starting point for researchers to incorporate the proposed cognitive learning
model into their specific applications. Likewise, the proposed customized
silicon photonic interface card design can be utilized by engineers to improve
the data transfer rate between data acquisition card and processors in real-time
systems. The proposed research will generate both educational and research
opportunities at California State University, Fullerton (CSUF), Wright State
University and Cypress College (CC) through graduate research program,
undergraduate apprentice program, lunch speaker series, and undergraduate summer
research program. Planned educational activities include the integration of
research findings into engineering courses and the introduction of a specialty
track. Concrete outreach efforts to expose the underrepresented and minority
students at CSUF, CC and local high schools are planned. Outcomes will be widely
disseminated to academic and industrial communities through international
conferences, journals, CSUF website, and at on-campus events.