* 1150727
* CAREER: Site-specific vibrational probes of membrane binding and protonation in proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Casey Londergan, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 505,424.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Casey Londergan and a group of
undergraduate research assistants at Haverford College will use infrared and
Raman spectroscopy, coupled with site-specific chemical labeling schemes, to
develop several new methods for spectroscopically isolating specific protein
residues and observing changes in their local environments associated with
functionally important structural and dynamic changes. Functional groups with
unique vibrational frequencies are needed to harness the fast intrinsic time
scale of vibrational spectroscopy to report on the entire dynamic conformational
distribution around particular sites in proteins with complicated self-assembly
and binding activity. This project will develop three such functional groups for
use in particular structural contexts, with a dual emphasis on understanding the
fundamental physical mechanisms of their environmental dependence and using
demonstrated dependences to solve particularly difficult protein-based
structural problems. In some contexts, artificial amino acids are most useful,
and in others, maintaining natively structured residues is centrally important.
The interfacial orientation of membrane-bound proteins will be investigated
using the CN stretching band of cyanylated cysteine and the NNN asymmetric
stretching vibration of azido-substituted amino acids. The C-D stretching
vibration of 2-deuterated histidine will be used to reveal the protonation state
and structural role of specific histidine residues in proteins with pH-dependent
structural changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a set of physically clear baseline
results in hand, this group of new vibrational probe groups will be used to
investigate the dynamic structures of proteins associated with neurodegenerative
disease and viral infectivity. Undergraduate students of all levels involved in
this research will be trained broadly in spectroscopy, chemical manipulation,
and protein expression and purification. The integrative research approach will
be accompanied by an effort to develop experimental design- and inquiry-based
modules for undergraduate teaching laboratories in collaboration with
Philadelphia-area high school teachers.