* 1150742
* CAREER: Cooperative Supramolecular Polymerization from Polypeptide-containing Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Yao Lin, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2018
* USD 512,640.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supramolecular chemistry has made great
progress in assembling small molecules capable of coordinated, non-covalent
interactions into supramolecular structures. However, success in the use of
large synthetic macromolecules as the monomer units for supramolecular
polymerization has been limited. As inferred from supramolecular polymers from
proteins, giant polymeric superstructures can be constructed from macromolecular
monomers, and they are expected to have remarkable material performance and
superior stability. The objective of this CAREER research is to develop
synthetic macromolecules that undergo controlled supramolecular polymerization
to form nanomaterials with predictable morphology and physical properties. The
approach begins with investigations of synthetic macromolecules bearing grafted
polypeptides, and takes advantage of the predictable interactions among grafted
polypeptide secondary structures to drive the assembly. The research seeks to:
(1) synthesize supramolecular polymers from selected polypeptide-grafted comb
macromolecules and characterize their structures, (2) characterize the
mechanical properties of supramolecular polymers and elucidate the molecular
basis of the properties, (3) conduct kinetic and thermodynamic studies to
establish the cooperative assembly mechanisms in the supramolecular
polymerization from macromolecular units, and (4) deduce the general principles
involved in the design of synthetic macromolecular units for cooperative
assembly and polymerizations. The proposed research could ultimately lead to the
generation of polymeric systems that will approach the level of sophistication
and complexity found in nature?s self-organized supramolecular
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
remarkable physical properties of nanostructures assembled from biological
macromolecules have long inspired scientists to create synthetic systems that
work with similar precision and efficiency. Practical design of biologically
inspired synthetic materials has emerged at the interface of polymer science,
chemistry and biology, and may find applications in sustainable plastics,
biomedical materials and renewable energy. The proposed research will create new
macromolecular building blocks for controlled assembly, provide insights into
the assembly mechanisms, and develop nanostructured materials with superior
mechanical strength and self-healing properties. The growth of polymer research
at such an interface provides opportunities to educate students and inspire them
to pursue careers in science and engineering. The CAREER award will allow the PI
to develop an integrated research and education program on Bioinspired Polymeric
Materials at University of Connecticut. The program will address students' major
needs for interdisciplinary education and high quality research experiences in
this emerging field. The proposed outreach program seeks to: (1) integrate the
proposed research with the development of interdisciplinary polymer courses; (2)
provide vibrant polymer research experiences to undergraduates and high-school
students and (3) promote polymer research and its impact on society through
providing lectures for the general public. Emphasis will be given to involve
underrepresented students at all levels.