* 1150138
* CAREER:   Using Laboratory Evolution to Study Protein Dynamics In Vivo
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Jonathan Silberg, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/28/2018
* USD 786,805.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;In order to better understand which atoms in a
protein contribute decisively to the key properties that support enzyme
function, this project will generate libraries of natural proteins that contain
different classes of mutations (random substitutions, glycine substitutions,
backbone fission, circular permutation, insertions, and deletions) and examine
how each mutation type affects protein folding and function within cells.
Adenylate kinases will be used for these studies, since an abundance of pre-
existing biophysical data can be tapped to interpret results from systematic
mutagenesis experiments. This research will establish if the pattern of a
protein's functional tolerance to different classes of mutation contains
information on how different native positions within its primary sequence
contribute to structure, stability, folding, dynamics, and function. This
experimental strategy will be potentially useful for studying any protein for
which an in vivo screen is available, including poorly behaved proteins that
cannot readily be examined by in vitro physical methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This broader impact of this
project will be to provide training for graduate and undergraduate students
interested in science careers. The PI and graduate students performing this
research will conduct annual round table discussions for undergraduates enrolled
at a nearby community college. These community college students begin their
education in lecture courses and are not necessarily exposed to an environment
that mirrors a research lab. Round table discussions will be used to increase
student self-confidence by showing beginning college students that they can read
a peer-reviewed research article, demonstrate to these students the benefits of
research training, and facilitate community college student recruitment to
research experiences. These efforts will vertically integrate undergraduate and
graduate education by providing beneficial training for graduate students,
building self-sustaining outreach from a research university to a minority
serving community college, and offering research experiences for community
college students.