* 1150115
* CAREER: Social Multimedia as Volunteered Geographic Information: Crowdsourcing What-Is-Where on the Surface of the Earth Through Proximate Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Shawn Newsam, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2019
* USD 527,028.00

This project investigates social multimedia for geographic discovery.
Specifically, community-contributed ground-level images and videos are used to
map what-is-where on the surface of the Earth in much the same way that overhead
images taken from air- or space-borne platforms have been used for decades in
the traditional field of remote sensing. The overarching premise is that
georeferenced social multimedia data can be considered a form of volunteered
geographic information. Further, it can enable geographic discovery not possible
through traditional means. The framework, termed proximate sensing, is applied
to two challenging geographic discovery problems: 1) land-use classification,
and 2) mapping public sentiment such as how scenic a particular geographic
location is. Land-use classification is an important problem but is often not
possible using overhead images since remote sensing does not record activities.
This project instead applies and extends state-of-the-art techniques in image
understanding to ground-level images and videos to map land-use. The motivation
is similar for mapping public sentiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include developing K-12 spatial literacy curricula through an
Engineering Projects in Community Service team whose client is the Merced County
Office of Education. University of California-Merced was recently classified as
an Hispanic Serving Institution, making it one of only a handful of research
universities with this designation nationwide. Undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be involved in developing a GeographUSA project
whereby volunteers can upload geographically representative photos of the United
States. Results, datasets, and other project artifacts will be made available
through the project website
(http://vision.ucmerced.edu/projects/socialmultimedia/).