* 1150801
* CAREER: A "first-principles" approach to the smart electric grid: fundamental limits and optimal control algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Raghuraman Mudumbai, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The next generation electric grid faces the challenge of integrating a growing
amount of renewable energy generation such as wind while maintaining
reliability. This research is focused on developing a fundamental approach to
the optimal design and control of a smart electric microgrid, and to develop an
open-source set of tools to facilitate the development of new smart grid
applications. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Renewable energy generators differ
in several key ways from conventional coal or oil-based generators, in that they
are intermittent, cannot be accurately forecast and are not dispatchable. This
research will develop statistical methods to investigate the fundamental limits
of grid reliability because of generation uncertainty, with the ultimate aim of
developing new understanding of the smart electric grid. Furthermore, the
proposed research will develop optimal control algorithms for voltage and
frequency regulation and economic dispatch explicitly taking into account
virtual and real energy storage capabilities and active management of renewable
generators. These control algorithms will be developed from a first principles
basis, rather than simply tweaking existing control procedures and will be
designed to be implemented in a distributed way to the extent possible to
minimize the need for an excessively expensive communication infrastructure
supporting the grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will
precisely quantify the effects of storage and demand response capabilities in
mitigating the effects of generation uncertainty and would be highly beneficial
in designing and optimizing smart metering and load-management technologies. One
of the aims of this project is to develop an open-source set of tools such as
smart sensors and controller-actuators for small wind turbines and batteries, to
facilitate small-scale experimentation with smart grid and distributed
generation. This project will also involve extensive undergraduate research
activity and results will be widely disseminated in technical publications and
conferences.