* 1150246
* CAREER:  Large-scale nitrogen cycles and underrepresented groups: A plan for advancement
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Benjamin Houlton, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 637,562.00

Nitrogen is one of the most important resources on Earth, affecting everything
from food production to the global climate system. This project will use
naturally occurring isotopes of nitrogen (15N) and oxygen to examine controls on
nitrogen cycling across an array of terrestrial ecosystems ranging from desert
to temperate rainforest. Field and laboratory experiments will be used to test
whether enrichment of 15N can be used to quantify conversion of nitrogen to a
gaseous form, a part of the nitrogen cycle that has been particularly difficult
to measure at large spatial scales. Results of these experiments will be used to
parameterize and improve an existing model of the global nitrogen cycle, with
the ultimate goal of developing new ways to study terrestrial nitrogen cycles at
large spatial scales.

This work has implications for understanding the role of nitrogen in climate
change because of the influence of nitrogen on the uptake of carbon dioxide and
because of the importance of natural sources of nitrous oxide, a nitrogen-
containing molecule that is a much more potent greenhouse gas than carbon
dioxide. Ethnically and culturally diverse students will be actively engaged in
the proposed research. The PI is the on-campus (UC Davis) advisor to two
programs: Strategies for Ecology Education, Diversity and Sustainability (SEEDS)
and EnvironMentors. The mission of these programs is to diversify and advance
the profession of ecology through opportunities that stimulate and nurture the
interest of underrepresented groups. Students in SEEDS and EnvironMentors will
be engaged in this research, thereby promoting intellectual/cultural synergism
at both undergraduate and high-school levels. Additional development of the
future workforce will result from involvement of a postdoctoral researcher, two
graduate students, and five undergraduates in this research.