* 1150794
* CAREER:The Role of Proximal Dynamics and Particle Aggregation in Ash Dispersal: An Educational, Numerical, Field and Laboratory Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Josef Dufek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2018
* USD 491,906.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions can inject voluminous amounts of ash into the
atmosphere potentially crippling global infrastructure as witnessed by the
recent eruption of Eyjafjallaj√∂kull in Iceland. While significant improvements
have been made in the development of ash dispersal models and in the conceptual
understanding of processes that govern the transport of ash far from the
volcanic vent, much of the uncertainty in current forecasts of ash dispersal
occurs due to limited description of particle dynamics in the conduit and near
the vent. The proposed work will examine the physical processes that modify the
grain size distribution of particles across a spectrum of energies due to
eruptive processes in the conduit and multiphase interaction in the plume using
computational, field and laboratory approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ash
dispersal models have focused on long-range dispersal, incorporating conditions
from atmospheric models. Due to the investment and advances in these fields, one
of the goals of this work is to provide improved source terms and physical
understanding that can be readily adopted into any dispersal model. To develop
an integrated framework, we will address the following questions, objectives and
related hypotheses: 1. How do post-fragmentation conduit processes play a role
in setting the exit conditions into the atmosphere? 2. How do vent conditions
and entrainment physics contribute to grain size sorting in plumes? 3. What role
does hydrous aggregation play in the proximal distribution of ash? All of these
questions will be closely linked and will make use of carefully chosen field
examples, laboratory experiments, numerical simulations and visualization tools.
This work will also develop an integrated set of fluid dynamics modules,
teaching at a distance tools, and web based tools to enable high school students
to learn more about volcanology and earth sciences in general. This approach has
been designed to reach a broad high school audience, and in its first phase will
reach several schools with large minority populations. Additionally these tools
will be promoted to the broader public through web applications and through
interactive three-dimensional visualizations tools that can be used in museum
displays.