* 1150494
* 44th International Symposium on Macromolecules (MACRO 2012)-IUPAC World Polymer Congress: Enabling Technologies for a Safe, Sustainable, Healthy World
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Timothy Long, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

TECHNICAL AND NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 44th International
Symposium on Macromolecules (MACRO 2012) ? IUPAC World Polymer Congress:
Enabling Technologies for a Safe, Sustainable, and Healthy World, co-supported
by the NSF Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry, will provide an
international forum for leading scientists and engineers from academia,
industry, and government to discuss multidisciplinary technologies that bridge
emerging boundaries of macromolecular science and engineering. This prestigious
conference rotates biannually around the globe; previous USA conferences were
held at the University of Akron (1994) and UMass-Amherst (1982).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 MACRO World Polymer Congress is envisioned as an
integrated scientific and educational forum for the most recent advances in
polymer science and engineering, and the meeting subtitle focuses experts in
diverse fields to address technologies of national importance over a range of
disciplines. Such an international and interdisciplinary forum will facilitate
collaborations and mutual understanding necessary to catalyze breakthrough
polymer-based material solutions from the molecular to the device level. The
objectives of the 2012 MACRO World Polymer Congress include (1) dissemination of
the most recent advances in polymer science and engineering, (2) education
across multiple disciplines, (3) cultivation of collaborations across diverse
disciplines, and (4) formation of international professional networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Congress will consist of eleven symposia on: Recent
Developments in Synthesis, Modern Methods in Characterization, Complex
Macromolecular Systems, Surfaces and Interfaces, Macromolecules and
Nanotechnology, Macromolecules in Biotechnology and Medicine, Energy, Optics,
and Optoelectronics, Sustainability Science and Engineering, Commercial
Frontiers, Advances in Interdisciplinary Interactions, and Polymer Physics.
Poster sessions in concert with instrument exhibitors will provide additional
non-invited contributions with an emphasis on presentations from graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium topics are relevant to the
scientific community in the USA. Each symposium will include a discussion leader
from a US university or company, one or more international co-chair(s), and 30
invited research lectures in the discipline. Each symposium will also welcome
contributed lectures (approximately 30 each, totally 60) and contributed posters
(4 sessions with 150 posters approximately in total). Invited speakers are
recognized as leaders in their fields and will deliver focused lectures with
broad scientific appeal. Special attention was devoted to the development of a
diverse program including under-represented groups, leading universities from
across the nation, international participation, and demonstrated innovation
across disciplines. Two morning plenary lectures will convene the entire
conference registrants for perspectives on themes of global importance (11
plenary speakers in total including 2 Nobel Laureates).