* 1150068
* CAREER: Time-Aware Heuristic Search
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Wheeler Ruml, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 12/31/2017
* USD 504,563.00

Planning is a useful capability -- for instance, it enables robots to be
autonomous and it helps people save money and conserve natural resources.
Traditional planning methods search for perfect plans; this often requires
exponential time and therefore takes too long for many problems. It is often
better to promptly take a reasonable but possibly suboptimal action than it is
to deliberate long enough to guarantee an 'optimal' plan. This project develops
new methods for time-aware search and planning, along with an on-line handbook
to help those who use search techniques choose an appropriate
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing algorithms for
time-aware search in four different settings. (1) In utility-based search, the
algorithm optimizes a user-specified combination of planning time and plan
execution time. This captures the situation in which one wishes to achieve a
goal as soon as possible (e.g., minimize the sum of planning time and plan
execution time). (2) In incremental search, actions can be selected and begin to
be executed while planning continues. This allows the algorithm to benefit from
early execution if a good first action is apparent, but deliberate carefully if
the selection of the first action appears crucial. (3) In on-line continual
search, new goals can arrive asynchronously during execution. This requires the
algorithm to determine if it is worthwhile to re-plan from scratch or whether
simple additions to the existing plan will suffice. (4) In search under a
deadline, a complete plan must be found within a given bound on search time.
This is the objective in many applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
also involves the creation and curation of an online Handbook of Search
Algorithms. It will provide a comprehensive taxonomy of planning and
optimization problem settings, together with the most appropriate algorithms
that have been proposed for each setting. The handbook will integrate on-going
research and educational activities of the PI. It will accelerate the uptake of
academic research on heuristic search and draw attention to compelling settings
that have traditionally received less attention, such as time-aware planning.
The creation and curation of the handbook will be a long-term collaboration
between the PI, students in a yearly seminar course taught by the PI, and
students in the PI's research group. For graduate and advanced undergraduate
students, authoring the handbook immerses them in research, while promoting
fundamental skills in literature review, scientific writing, and empirical
methodology.