* 1150948
* CAREER: First Principles-Enabled Prediction of Thermal Conductivity and Radiative Properties of Solids
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Xiulin Ruan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 02/28/2017
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Xiulin Ruan, Purdue University Proposal Number: CBET-1150948

The proposed effort will enable the prediction of thermal conductive and
radiative properties of solids from first principles. Thermal conductivity and
far-infrared thermal radiative properties of solids are critical issues in many
modern and emerging applications such as thermal management, electronics,
photovoltaics, and thermoelectrics. Both properties, although seemingly
unrelated, are governed in the atomic scale by the dispersion relation and
relaxation time of the same thermal energy carrier called phonon. To guide the
design and synthesis of these materials, it is highly desirable to predict their
thermal properties from first principles, i.e., from their atomic structures
without the use of adjustable parameters. However, existing classical
interatomic potentials are inaccurate even for standard materials such as
silicon and carbon since the potentials were not intended for the purpose of
thermal transport modeling. For most other solids, the classical potentials
haven't been developed yet, making the prediction of their thermal transport
properties impossible. Therefore, it is the objective of this proposal to
formulate new methodologies that can develop accurate interatomic potentials or
can completely bypass the use of classical potentials, for thermal property
prediction. Toward this goal, two multiscale multiphysics methods will be
developed in parallel. In the first method, first principles calculations will
be used to develop accurate classical interatomic potentials that are
intentionally optimized for thermal transport modeling, and the potentials will
then be employed in classical MD to predict thermal conductivity. In order to
bypass the challenging and tedious potential development process, the second
method will introduce a new tight-binding molecular dynamics (TBMD) method to
produce the trajectory of atoms, which will then be used in phonon spectral
analysis to obtain spectral phonon relaxation time as well as thermal
conductivity and radiative properties. The predictive power will be demonstrated
first on standard materials such as silicon, and then on a range of important
but complex thermoelectric and photovoltaic materials, including Bi2Te3 and GaAs
bulk and nanomaterials.

The intellectual merit of the proposal centers around fundamentally new
prediction methods based on first principles for both thermal conductive and
radiative properties. The tight binding MD together with phonon spectral
analysis will revolutionize thermal transport property prediction of a wide
range of materials of technological importance, on which atomic scale prediction
was not possible before due to the lack of empirical interatomic potentials. The
methods will also be used on practically important thermoelectric and
photovoltaic nanomaterials, including Bi2Te3 and GaAs, for the first time to
guide experimental synthesis.

The research effort will impact thermal science and education/outreach programs.
The new prediction methods will be of broad interest due to their generality.
Important applications, including thermal management, thermoelectrics,
electronics, and photovoltaics will benefit from the new insights generated
using these methods. Under-represented and undergraduate students will continue
to be involved in research. A key education/outreach component would be the
dissemination of the research and education codes resulted from this project to
nanoHUB and thermalHUB for general public use. Comprehensive documentation,
online lectures, and tutorials explaining the codes will be provided. These
materials will be of wide interest in the PI's field given the new capabilities
they provide.