* 1150255
* CAREER:Toxicology of graphene-based nanomaterials: A molecular biotechnology approach
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Debora Rodrigues, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2018
* USD 455,967.00

CBET 1150255-Rodrigues&lt;br/&gt;Among all the carbon-based nanomaterials (e.g.,
fullerenes, carbon nanotubes and graphene), graphene-based nanomaterials have
been shown to be the least cytotoxic to humans and animals; however, like other
nanomaterials, they have antimicrobial properties and may therefore have serious
impacts on wastewater treatment. In wastewater treatment plants, microorganisms
are responsible for cleaning the water by digesting organic materials and other
contaminants. Antimicrobial pollutants can seriously hinder the functionality of
the native microbial population, leading to ineffective removal of biological
and chemical wastes in the water. Since the market for graphene-based products
is projected to be as large as $67 million in 2015 and reach nearly $675 million
by 2020, it is expected graphene-based wastes to be generated. Wastewater
treatment plants will be one of the ultimate repositories for these wastes.
Therefore, it is essential to understand the effect of these graphene-based
nanomaterials on microbial populations responsible for the wastewater treatment.
At this time, most toxicological studies with graphene-based nanomaterials have
focused on the effects of single compositions of graphene-based nanomaterials on
one or two bacteria in laboratory settings. It is likely that these studies do
not reflect the real effects of graphene-based nanomaterials on the environment.
The overarching goal of this research is to understand the mechanisms of
microbial toxicity of graphene-based nanomaterials and determine the toxic
concentrations that affect the functionality of microbial communities involved
in various biogeochemical cycles important in wastewater treatment, such as
nitrogen, sulfur, and carbon cycles.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
will enable transformative research in nanotoxicological science by using a new
approach that integrates the fields of microbial ecology and environmental
biotechnology with traditional environmental engineering to better address
challenges in environmental quality, sustainability and security of these
nanomaterials. This will be the first study to employ molecular biology
techniques to assess the mechanisms of toxicity of graphene-based nanomaterials
to answer mechanistic questions that cannot be answered with traditional
toxicological assays. Furthermore, this study will also use a molecular
biotechnology approach to determine the effects of different concentrations of
graphene-based nanomaterials on different nutrient cycles in wastewater. Using
this approach, thousands of genes and biogeochemical pathways will be analyzed
simultaneously with a DNA microarray platform. At the same time, traditional
environmental engineering techniques will be used to set acceptable release
concentration limits for graphene-based nanomaterials in the environment. In
this study, we will investigate the environmental effects of pure and
nanocomposite forms of graphene-based nanomaterials on microorganisms and their
biogeochemical cycles in wastewater treatment plants. Results of preliminary
studies conducted by the PI show that graphene-based nanomaterials for "clean,"
well-controlled systems with several microorganisms are toxic to bacteria.
However, real aquatic systems are more complex than the simplified system used
in the preliminary study. In the proposed project, a systematic investigation
will be conducted to understand the impact of graphene-based nanomaterials on
microbial communities and their biogeobiochemical cycles under real aquatic
system conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project can potentially impact
the use and applications of graphene-based nanomaterials in various
technologies. The results will contribute to the body of knowledge required to
assess the risk of nanomaterials by policy makers, regulatory officials, and
environmental scientists. However, one of the most important impacts of this
project is the education and training of young scientists and researchers who
will be skilled to determine how safe these new materials are in the
environment. This project includes three education and outreach components: (1)
Mentoring of teachers in environmental research as part of a new research
experience for teachers (RET) program recently funded by NSF in order to allow
them to learn about the field of engineering and be able to mentor their
students in this path; (2) Development of a pilot program to provide summer
research experiences to girls in Grades 8-12 to expand diversity in science and
engineering; (3) Integration of environmental engineering, environmental
biotechnology, and microbial ecology into the environmental engineering
undergraduate and graduate curriculum at UH. The PI brings her experiences as a
minority to the mentoring of under-represented students. Diversity is not only a
goal, but a cornerstone of her research group. The PI has successfully engaged
three female graduate students in research, one of which is Hispanic-American
Ph.D. student.