* 1150125
* CAREER:   Study of Astrocyte Migration and Reactivity Using Novel Biomaterial Platforms
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Ryan Gilbert, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 01/31/2017
* USD 503,366.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is to develop novel biomaterials
and cell culture techniques that modulate the reactivity of astrocytes.
Astrocytes formed in the scar tissues after spinal cord injury create a barrier,
and this barrier prevents the regeneration of axons and recovery from spinal
cord injury. This proposal aims to develop biomaterials that attenuate astrocyte
response following spinal cord injury and construct novel biomaterial approaches
to support axonal migration through glial-scar interfaces. To attenuate
astrocyte response, different peptides and proteins will be doped within aligned
polymer fiber substrates. Astrocytes will be seeded onto the nanofiber
substrates and the following parameters will be assessed: 1) dynamic and static
astrocyte migration; 2) astrocyte activation/reactivity using molecular biology
techniques; and 3) astrocyte stiffness using atomic force microscopy. Polymer
spheres containing iron oxide nanoparticles with the chemo-attractants such as
cyclic adenosine monophophate and brain derived neurotrophic factor will be
developed to create magnetically moveable chemo-attractant gradients. These
moveable gradients are expected to foster the directed extension of axonal
growth cones through astrocytes or the inhibitory proteoglycan aggrecan. The
proposal supports the education of undergraduate and graduate students in
developing novel biomaterial scaffolds, isolation and culture of astrocytes and
neurons. In addition, students will be trained in the assessment of cellular
behavior using molecular biology and advanced microscopy techniques.

Individuals with spinal cord injury lose body functions below the site of
injury leading to life-long paralysis. At present, no FDA approved biological,
pharmacological, and/or biomaterial treatments exist to restore the lost
functions. The goal of this proposal is to develop novel biomaterials to
attenuate or eliminate the reactivity of astrocytes, a glial cell found in the
scar tissues of the spinal cord that are known to produce factors inhibiting the
nerve regeneration. Additionally, magnetically inducible polymer spheres will be
developed to guide axons through inhibitory domains. It is believed that these
biomaterials can reduce the inhibitory nature of astrocytes and help promote
directed migration and regeneration of nerve axons. The experiments proposed
within this proposal will provide the framework for developing novel strategies
and treatments for spinal cord injury. In addition, the proposal supports the
education of undergraduates and graduate students in the areas of spinal cord
injury research and biomaterial fabrication. Further, the proposal supports
initiatives to educate students from elementary, junior high school and high
school, and the general public about spinal cord injury and the field of
biomaterials.