* 1150831
* CAREER: An Advanced 3D Tissue Model for the Detection and Study of an Allergic Inflammatory Response
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Heather Fahlenkamp, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,738.00

1150831/Fahlenkamp&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program supports the creation
of an advanced 3D tissue model that can be used for testing and studying human
allergic inflammatory responses. Over the last few decades, the prevalence of
allergic diseases has increased dramatically in developed nations. Due to some
limitations of animal and human models for the study of cellular and molecular
responses to inflammatory stimuli, allergy research and testing would benefit
greatly from the use of a tissue model that includes human immune cells,
ancillary cells, and a blood endothelium in a physiological microenvironment.
The goals of the proposed project are to address this need through (1) the
creation of a tissue-equivalent model that can exhibit an inflammatory response
to allergens and (2) the use of this model to study the role that mast cells
play in shaping the adaptive immune response to allergens. To accomplish the
goals for this project, the knowledge and experience gained from an existing
endothelial cell construct will be used to create a new 3D tissue equivalent
model that includes a supportive biocompatible micro-environment for a wide
variety of cells to proliferate, differentiate, and migrate in a manner that
recapitulates an allergic inflammatory response. The tissue-equivalent model can
be comprised of patient-specific cells in order to function as an allergy sensor
to detect specific biomarkers that are expressed during an allergic inflammatory
reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of this project include a new way
to test allergens and other inflammatory stimuli, and evaluate site specific
delivery of active compounds to alter the local inflammatory and immune
response. This research project has the potential to provide health care
providers with more information that can be used to better manage patients with
allergic diseases, and a better understanding of inflammation in a broader
sense. Such an aggressive approach could change the way immunotherapies are
tested, perceived, and developed against diseases associated with inflammation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women and minority involvement in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) is a centerpiece of the proposed education
plan. The goal is to increase awareness and interest in STEM fields among women
and Native Americans by early scientific socialization and creating new
mentoring relationships that have been proven to enhance minority recruitment
and retention. To support early scientific socialization, an online
bioengineering research experience for high school students will demonstrate how
basic course content can be applied to scientific research and development. To
foster mentoring relationships, graduate students will interact with the high
school students in person and through online content. Graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in the proposed research and will acquire a
transdisciplinary experience in both immunology and engineering. A new graduate
course in transport phenomena in biological systems will support the growing
student interest in bioengineering at Oklahoma State University and provide a
transdisciplinary experience.