* 1150202
* CAREER:    Fluorescence Lifetime in Our Lifetime: Discovery of Approaches to Measure Molecular Excited State Kinetics and Fluorescence Decay by Flow Cytometry
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Jessica Houston, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2017
* USD 531,997.00

CAREER: FLUORESCENCE LIFETIME IN OUR LIFETIME: DISCOVERY OF MODERN APPROACHES
FOR THE DETECTION OF MOLECULAR EXCITED-STATE KINETICS AND FLUORESCENCE DECAY BY
FLOW CYTOMETRY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For several decades, high-throughput single
cell counting, discovery of important intracellular functions, and an
understanding of single cell responses to external stimuli have been possible
with the aid of devices called flow cytometers. Flow cytometers are used for
research as well as in clinical settings where there is a need to obtain an
accurate account of cells collected from blood to provide prognoses for diseases
such as HIV. Cytometers work by causing proteins and other molecular species in
or on individual cells to reach elevated energy levels as the cells travel
through fluidic chambers and traverse laser beams over microsecond transit
times. Despite the prevalence of cytometry systems commercially, available
cytometry devices do not capture "photodynamic" properties from individual
cells. That is, no current cytometry instrument measures the fluorescence decay
and average fluorescence lifetime from molecules in or on cells. This capability
is important because time-dependent information is very valuable in quantitative
cell counting, cell sorting, and improvement of signal-to-noise among cellular
assays. The lack of fluorescence lifetime-dependent cytometry is mainly due to
the difficulties and complexities required for measuring excited state kinetics;
this dearth has in turn resulted in a lack of assays and fluorescence decay-
dependent applications. Thus, this CAREER development plan involves the
discovery of new approaches for time-dependent flow cytometry and introduces new
ways to easily integrate fluorescence dynamic-based measurements into commercial
cytometry systems. Moreover, this research advances cellular applications for
time-resolved flow cytometry. Specific objectives of this work are (i) to
provide an understanding of autofluorescence lifetime changes of intrinsic
cellular proteins with differences in cell cycle and cell viability, (ii) to
explore fluorescent protein lifetime changes associated with intracellular
protein transport, protein-protein interactions and protein complex formation
detectable by Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET) and loss of FRET; and
(iii) to identify ultra-rapid excited state decay times based on microsphere-
bound nanoparticles that exhibit surface-enhanced Raman scattering for multiplex
bead assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico State University (NMSU) is home to
many underrepresented minority (URM) students who remain within the state's
borders for financial and cultural reasons. The training opportunities at NMSU
in the discipline of bioengineering are limited despite high student interest
and the historical excellence of biotechnology and bioscience industry in New
Mexico. In an effort to increase educational opportunities for NMSU students as
well as the surrounding communities that feed into the state's Land Grant
Institution, Hispanic NMSU undergraduates, graduate students, 5th grade
students, and K-8 educators will be enlisted in an educational plan that (1)
implements learning-through-research activities and (2) cultivates K-8
educational outreach. Direct interaction with Hispanic students at NMSU as well
as a culturally marginalized science-magnet elementary school will be initiated
to help build integrated science curricula using research activities in flow
cytometry. New Mexico has a rich history in flow cytometry, where it was in part
invented. This educational plan incorporates real-world solutions to be conveyed
to science students. It also emphasizes the historical significance and provides
a context on who they are as science learners and what they, as native New
Mexicans, can achieve. All project outcomes can be seen at the Principal
Investigator's research website: http://che.nmsu.edu/JPH/index.html.