* 1150490
* CAREER:  Particle Methods for High-Dimensional Integro-Differential Simulation with Application to Aerosol Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Matthew West, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 418,786.00

The research component of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award targets the development of robust and scalable stochastic particle methods
for simulating complex, high-dimensional dynamical systems, with a particular
research goal of enabling efficient, particle-resolved models of atmospheric
aerosols and their climate impact. The research program will involve new
mathematical techniques to allow dramatically faster simulations of complex
particle systems, as well as making the methods robust and reliable enough to be
routinely used by engineers and scientists. Students will be involved in the
research at both the graduate and undergraduate levels, and high-school-aged
female students will be hosted for a week-long summer camp to explore ideas in
dynamics and mechanics. In addition to the diverse student involvement, other
deliverables will include new undergraduate educational materials, new
mathematical algorithms for dynamical simulation, and open-source code for high-
performance particle simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome and benefits
of this work will impact both the areas of dynamical systems and the target
application of atmospheric aerosol modeling. The improved understanding of
aerosol particle processes generated by this research will contribute to a more
accurate understanding of climate modeling and to the impact of aerosol
particles on human health. In a broader context, this project is a step towards
general techniques for computationally analyzing complex dynamical systems in
high dimensions, and thus has the potential to contribute to a wide range of
current scientific challenges. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit
from involvement in the research and through improved classroom instruction,
while the high-school-aged female students participating in the summer camp will
gain exposure and engagement with engineering and science.