* 1150000
* CAREER: Efficient Structural Analysis of Multivariate Fields for Scalable Visualization
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Xavier Tricoche, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 09/30/2017
* USD 513,789.00

Visualization plays a crucial role in research and industry by offering users a
graphical interface to their data that affords them an intuitive basis for
interpretation, assessment and decision making. Yet, the rapidly growing size,
dimensionality, and multi-scale complexity of the produced scientific data
create a pervasive analysis challenge that is not properly addressed by existing
visualization technology. In particular, the investigation of inherently
multivariate and multifield physical problems is typically reduced to the
visualization of a single scalar or vector field, thereby neglecting a wealth of
important information.

The PI will address the limitations of the current state of the art by
pioneering a comprehensive approach for the efficient visual analysis of large-
scale datasets. Central to the proposed approach is a novel definition of
geometric saliency that will permit the automatic identification of remarkable
manifolds in scientific data. To that end, the PI will unify and subsume a
variety of concepts from mathematics and computer vision to create a principled
and versatile model for the structural analysis and visual representation of
multifield problems. Innovative data structures and sparse sampling strategies
leveraging parallel architectures will be devised to enable the efficient
processing of large and multivariate datasets at scale. Lastly, these
computational foundations will power a user-centric visual analysis framework
that the PI will assess in the context of multidisciplinary collaborations
spanning fluid dynamics, materials engineering, high-energy physics, and
cardiovascular research.

This research effort will benefit the scientific community by contributing a
rigorous and scalable framework for the effective analysis and visualization of
computational or measured datasets across a broad range of scientific problems.
The PI will distribute the created software artifacts through an open source web
portal and integrate them in leading visualization tools to facilitate their
dissemination. The PI will organize tutorials and workshops at premier
conferences to raise the awareness of the user community about the developed
technology and he will provide benchmark datasets and sample results to promote
a collaborative effort in the visualization community. Beyond research, the PI
will create new courses at both the undergraduate and graduate levels to expose
students to the critical importance of data analysis in science and engineering
and to the role of advanced visualization in this context. Finally, these
education activities will naturally complement an outreach effort toward
underrepresented minorities and local K-12 programs.