* 1150145
* CAREER: From Robust, Reproducible Geophysical Inference to Geological Interpretation: New Perspectives on the Continental Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Frederik Simons, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,969.00

For this CAREER proposal the researcher will study the structure of the
lithosphere, from a characterization of its long-term mechanical strength
(elastic thickness from gravity and topography inversions) and its short-term
elastic response (seismic structure all the way down to the oil exploration
scale), to its propensity for deformation in the context of plate tectonics and
geodynamics (via the anisotropies detectable in both types of observables). The
researcher uses existing data from land campaigns (gravity, magnetics, heat
flow), satellites (gravity, magnetics, geodesy) and seismic networks and data
centers (USArray, IRIS); some processed, some raw, some for which new processing
methods are very much part of the research. He is building on his recent
development of mathematical functions and statistical estimation theory.
&lt;br/&gt;These share the common ground of analyzing noisy and incomplete
geophysical observations in a variety of acquisition geometries, and building
parsimonious interpretations of them based on recent insights in statistical
inference and geophysical inverse theory. In this way the geophysical and
geological interpretation that he produces is accompanied by a rigorous analysis
of modeling errors, an assessment of the uniqueness in the inversion, and the
effective communication of uncertainty to the audience. The tools the researcher
develops are put at the service of the community via a series of outreach
initiatives aimed at enabling rather than merely informing the public over a
range of prior exposure and ability, from middle-school students to post-
doctoral scholars. The education and outreach building on these activities are
geared towards training young people to do science rather than watching it being
done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How strong is the rigid outer layer of the Earth
called the "lithosphere", how is this strength best measured, and how does it
relate to other geophysical and geological observables such as the depth and
frequency of earthquake occurrence, the measurable heat flow through the crust,
the large-scale patterns of deformation and mountain building? How do we tackle
huge data-rich "inverse problems" in seismology, by which the structure of the
Earth at both the largest scale or at the scales of an oil field is mapped via
the recording and modeling of earthquake- or explosively generated seismic
waveforms? What characterizes the magnetic properties of the lithosphere and how
are they best measured from primary satellite observations? The answers we hope
to provide are of a geological and geophysical nature and significance, but also
impact us in our daily lives. Earthquakes are an obvious example; but perhaps
not everyone knows, that oil drilling requires detailed models of the
lithospheric magnetic field in order to keep the desired bearing, or that
medical imaging techniques such as x-ray tomography and magneto-encephalography
work with some of the same principles by which we probe the Earth's interior.
With our focus on the development of theory and algorithms that help us extract
signal from observations, and facilitate its representation, analysis and
characterization, and the subsequent evaluation of the distribution of errors in
the modeling, we serve a broader purpose than the specific areas in which these
methods are first applied. To ensure this, the researcher also develops lesson
materials at the middle-school and high-school level with the student as
participant, a hands-on research and writing-heavy Freshman Seminar that
combines geology and geophysics to aid with archaeological excavations on
Cyprus, the continued publication and documentation of computer software on the
web, and the mentoring of undergraduates, graduate students and post-docs on
their path to delivering ``reproducible research'' to the society at large.