* 1150944
* CAREER: Systematic Multi-scale Integration of Physics-based and Data-driven Models of Distributed Resources for Enabling Ubiquitous Energy Storage Services in Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Le Xie, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this project is to investigate a novel modeling paradigm, which
seamlessly integrates physics-based and data-driven models of distributed
resources for provision of energy storage services in power systems. The
approach is to (1) define key interaction variables for distributed resources
which allow modularity and spatio-temporal aggregation; (2) introduce a multi-
layered structure-preserving model of power systems; (3) formulate performance-
based regulation pricing, which, combined with energy pricing, aligns economic
incentives with technical performances of various energy storage providers; and
(4) test the proposed modeling and operating algorithms using real-world
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) This
modeling framework rests on the key idea of identifying internal and interaction
variables, which allows modular integration of both physics-based and data
driven models of distributed resources. &lt;br/&gt;(2) A unifying concept of
multi-scale energy storage services will be introduced, which is built upon the
interaction variables at different temporal granularity.&lt;br/&gt;(3) A
performance-based frequency regulation market design will be formulated and
tested, which aligns economic incentives with the technical performances of
energy storage providers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have transformative impact on
engineering sustainable electricity services of the future. A multidisciplinary
course on engineering and economics of electric energy systems will be offered
to students at Texas A&amp;M and Prairie View A&amp;M. The PI will mentor
undergraduate students, in particular under-represented groups, to develop a
smart phone-based application to raise students? interest in electric energy. As
the founding advisor, the PI will actively participate in community outreach
activities organized by Texas A&amp;M Energy Club.