* 1150652
* CAREER: Fundamental Measurements of Mineral Optical Properties and Theoretical Treatment of Light Scattering at Infrared Wavelengths
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2018
* Timothy Glotch, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Linda French
* 05/31/2018
* USD 494,241.00

The research objectives of this project are to (1) determine the mid-IR MIR
(~5-100 Âµm) optical constants (real and imaginary indices of refraction; n and
k) of 33 minerals and glasses of importance to planetary astronomical research,
with a focus on monoclinic and triclinic minerals, and (2) to develop and test a
state-of-the-art electrodynamic model that ultimately can use the derived
optical constants to quantitatively determine the mineralogy of remotely-sensed
objects. This model determines the scattering properties of clusters of spheres
by exactly solving Maxwell's equations at each wave/particle interface. The
broader impacts of this work include several educational components. The PI will
mentor a postdoc, graduate student, and multiple undergraduates. The graduate
course and teacher workshop materials developed by the PI will be made available
to the broader educational community through the NSF-funded Science Education
Resource Center (SERC) site at Carleton College. The teacher workshop planned by
the PI will enhance the education of high school Earth Science students
throughout Long Island and New York State. Long Island has multiple 'majority
minority' school districts, so there is a strong likelihood of the workshop
having a broad impact on minorities on Long
Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are important
since most solar system objects have surfaces consisting of mixtures of coarse
and fine particulates, which are difficult to quantitatively model.
Understanding the nature of this material is a first order problem in
understanding the compositions of these bodies. While work is progressing on
these research objectives, the PI will also expand the graduate geosciences
curriculum at Stony Brook University and develop materials to train K-12
teachers in remote sensing, mineralogy, and planetary science. The curricular
objectives of this proposal are (1) development and implementation of an
advanced undergraduate/graduate course in Applications of Spectroscopy to
Planetary Science, (2) development of introductory lecture materials and
laboratory exercises that demonstrate the use of spacecraft mission data to
learn about planetary surfaces, and 3) development and implementation of a
1-day, continuing education workshop for high school earth science teachers
focusing on the interactive roles of mineralogy, spectroscopy, and planetary
science, utilizing the lecture and lab materials previously described.