* 1150219
* CAREER: Cost-Effective Application Deployments Spanning Multiple Cloud Services
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Harsha Madhyastha, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 10/31/2014
* USD 304,309.00

The use of cloud computing services---services that host infrastructure on
&lt;br/&gt;which third-parties can run applications and store data---has
skyrocketed in &lt;br/&gt;the last few years. However, despite the growing
number of cloud services, most &lt;br/&gt;applications are deployed today on a
single cloud service. This status quo has several&lt;br/&gt;drawbacks---
availability and performance offered by an application are limited&lt;br/&gt;by
the cloud service on which the application is deployed, and cost borne
by&lt;br/&gt;an application provider to meet performance goals is limited by the
types and&lt;br/&gt;pricing of resources offered by that
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will enable distributed
applications to obtain better&lt;br/&gt;availability and performance at lower
cost by planning and managing application &lt;br/&gt;deployments that span
multiple cloud services. Recognizing the fact that
different&lt;br/&gt;components of an application have different characteristics,
this project will&lt;br/&gt;enable cost-effective multi-cloud deployments by
matching the heterogeneity of&lt;br/&gt;an application's components with the
diversity of resources offered by&lt;br/&gt;different cloud services. The
research in this project involves three main&lt;br/&gt;tasks---1) the
development of algorithms to choose cost-effectively among the &lt;br/&gt;myriad
candidate configurations for deploying an application across cloud
&lt;br/&gt;services, 2) the design and implementation of a distributed
measurement and &lt;br/&gt;monitoring framework to dynamically reconfigure an
application's deployment as&lt;br/&gt;the state of cloud services and of the
Internet change over time, and 3) the&lt;br/&gt;development of tools and
techniques that enable legacy applications &lt;br/&gt;implemented for deployment
on a single cloud service to be easily ported to &lt;br/&gt;multi-cloud
deployments. The research will involve significant&lt;br/&gt;systems-building
and experimentation with the proposed techniques applied
to&lt;br/&gt;deployments of popular applications on real cloud
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;In spite of the
increasing popularity of cloud services, there remain several&lt;br/&gt;concerns
about their use. The algorithms and software systems developed as&lt;br/&gt;part
of this research may transform the ways in which application
providers&lt;br/&gt;use cloud services, thus easing concerns with respect to
availability and&lt;br/&gt;performance. The project also has a significant
education component with the&lt;br/&gt;introduction of new graduate and
undergraduate classes, and public talks to&lt;br/&gt;increase awareness about
cloud services among small and non-profit businesses.&lt;br/&gt;