* 1150287
* CAREER:   Exploring the 3D structure organization of genomes
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Frank Alber, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2018
* USD 887,940.00

This award is made to the University of Southern California to develop methods
for studying the 3D spatial organization of genomes. Knowing 3D genome
structures and the spatial distributions of individual genes for various cell
states would drastically change our view of the genome landscape. However, the
3D structures of genomes have yet to be determined. With the rapid accumulation
of diverse genomic, epigenomic, and imaging data, the time has come to tackle
this challenge by combining all available sources of information. This career-
development plan proposes novel approaches to model the 3D structures of genomes
by combining various large-scale data sources, by identifying important
functional units in the 3D structures, and by characterizing structural elements
in genome architectures through image analysis. The modeling of the higher-order
genome structures will provide deep insights into gene regulation, and establish
the missing link between genomics, functional genomics and structural biology.
The 3D genome structure is highly variable, even among cells from an isogenic
sample and no single structure can accurately describe all spatial properties of
the genome. To address this challenge, this research will provide a novel
population-based structural modeling approach, which constructs a population of
3D genome structures that are altogether entirely consistent with all available
experimental data, including data from imaging and chromosome conformation
capture experiments. This research will also provide novel tools for
establishing links between spatial and functional organizations of genomes and
will provide the atlases of functional spatial units in various genomes under
different conditions. Finally this research will develop novel methods for
pattern recognition in imaging of nuclei. A significant amount of effort is
devoted to developing software and a web database for integrative 3D genome
modeling (project URL:
http://www.cmb.usc.edu/people/alber/3D-genome.html).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has a strong commitment to directly involve students at all levels by
building a strong training program in computational structural biology at USC.
This research will be incorporated into an undergraduate course in structural
bioinformatics as well as training of graduate students and post-doc fellows.
Discussion forums will be held for minority high school and undergraduate
students encouraging their pursuing higher education.