* 1150492
* CAREER: Are Weakly-Bound Molecular Clusters Important in Astrochemistry?  Interdisciplinary Studies of H5+ and HO3
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Susanna Widicus Weaver, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2017
* USD 555,063.00

Susanna Widicus Weaver of Emory University, is supported by a CAREER award from
the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program in the Chemistry
Division to conduct a terahertz (THz) spectroscopic study and astrochemical
search for the weakly-bound clusters H5+ and HO3. These and other weakly-bound
clusters may play important roles in the development of complex chemistry in the
interstellar medium (ISM), but laboratory studies to guide observational
searches have been limited. This research seeks to examine the role of cluster
ions in gas-phase interstellar chemistry through studies of the isotopologues of
H5+; investigate the formation and stability of neutral clusters in dense
interstellar environments through studies of the HO3 adduct; and integrate
laboratory measurements with observational astronomy and astrochemical modeling
to obtain a complete picture of the role of weakly-bound clusters in
astrochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widicus Weaver's research
focuses on the emergence of chemical complexity in the star- and planet-forming
regions of interstellar space. Her research program draws from the forefronts of
laboratory spectroscopy, observational astronomy, and astrochemical modeling.
She is combining these techniques to study unstable molecules that are important
for understanding chemical pathways in interstellar chemistry. She uses the
spectroscopic results as a guide to search for these molecules in space. From
these observations, she can determine the abundance, temperature, and spatial
distribution of these species in interstellar clouds. She then uses this
information to model interstellar chemistry and test the influence of varying
physical conditions to gain a better chemical understanding of the interstellar
medium.