* 1150789
* CAREER: Inter-Hemispheric Magnetic Conjugacy of Ionospheric Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Joseph Baker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2017
* USD 488,201.00

This is a five year Faculty Early Career Development project to carry out
integrated research and education activities under the theme of inter-
hemispheric space weather connections. An overarching science objective for the
research efforts to be undertaken is the investigation of the inter-hemispheric
magnetic conjugacy of ionospheric irregularities and convection on closed
magnetic field lines. This will be done based mainly on simultaneous
measurements from the NSF-supported SuperDARN network of radars in the northern
and southern hemispheres. Statistical and case study analysis of more than 20
years of existing SuperDARN radar data from northern and southern hemisphere
sites in the auroral and mid-latitude regions will be conducted. A particular
emphasis will be to compare the degree of conjugacy between the auroral zone and
the subauroral ionosphere. The recent expansion of SuperDARN to middle latitudes
provides new capabilities to investigate inter-hemispheric conjugacy in the
subauroral ionosphere, including a unique 20 month-long dataset of combined
measurements from the Falkland Islands and Wallops radars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort will form the basis for a graduate
degree as well as various self-contained research projects for undergraduate
students. Significant additional education and outreach activities in the
project are designed to enhance the exposure of students to space science
research and associated engineering in undergraduate education and pre-college
summer camps at Virginia Tech. The central concept of inter-hemispheric space
weather connections will be integrated into the undergraduate curriculum and
summer camp activities. Pre-college and undergraduate students will use newly
purchased hand-held radio receiver equipment to search for natural VLF signals
(such as sferics, tweeks and whistlers) and learn about inter-hemispheric space
weather phenomena. Undergraduate students will be employed as teaching
assistants for the summer camp activities. The acquisition of a research grade
ELF/VLF receiver will broaden the radio science activities at Virginia Tech and
operation of the instrument will become a student-led research effort. The
project will provide full tuition and stipend support for a graduate student to
pursue Ph.D. research on inter-hemispheric conjugacy of ionospheric convection.
Travel funds will be provided for the graduate student to attend yearly
scientific meetings in the US, and to visit twice with SuperDARN partner
organizations in the UK for extensive collaboration. All education and outreach
components include appropriate and significant measures of evaluation and
assessment that will be conducted in collaboration with the Office of Academic
Assessment at Virginia Tech.