* 1150761
* The Role of Environmentally Persistent Free Radicals in the Chemistry of Airborne PM2.5
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Barry Dellinger, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 431,726.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) program of the Division of Chemistry
will support the research program of Prof. Barry Dellinger of Louisiana State
University. Prof. Dellinger and his students will study the environmental impact
of Environmentally Persistent Free Radicals (EPFRs) in airborne fine particles.
Prof. Dellinger's group has detected organic free radicals associated with
freshly sampled airborne particles that are less than 2.5 micrometers in
diameter (PM2.5), which can persist in air for several days after collection.
The chemical and toxicological characteristics of these radicals are similar to
radicals associated with the tar in cigarette smoke, and detected in samples of
combustion-generated PM. Since the radicals are both stable toward decomposition
and resistant to reaction with air, they are referred to as environmentally
persistent and may serve as effective reducing agents in aqueous solution. Using
EPR spectroscopy, EPFRs formed from dosing samples of PM2.5 with suspected EPFR
precursors, will be compared to EPFRs formed on controlled surrogate particles
containing different transition metals. The decay and lifetimes of the observed
EPFRs will be determined as a function of temperature, humidity, and solar
irradiation. EPFR-induced formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) under
biological conditions will be determined. The potential for EPFRs to participate
in selected atmospheric chemistry will be evaluated. Reactions with NO and O3
will be studied to determine if EPFRs result in depletion or formation of these
pollutants as well as formation of nitro-/oxy-PAH, other oxygenated species, and
secondary radicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, Dr. Dellinger
and his students will present project and research summaries to science-
affiliated clubs and undergraduate programs. Collaborative research and
interdisciplinary training of graduate students in chemistry, combustion, and
environmental health sciences research will be conducted through the LSU
Superfund Research Center. The PI is committed to student presentations at
national/international meetings and their participation in several high impact
education and outreach groups and programs already established at LSU, including
the Superfund Research Program seminars and exchange program with biomedical
research collaborators.