* 1150878
* CAREER:Toward robust, scalable, and non-intermittent solar power: Silicon-based multijunction devices with integrated photocatalysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Tonio Buonassisi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to
create a silicon-based multijunction solar cell device with integrated
photoelectrochemical capability, resulting in a high-efficiency, robust, and
easily manufacturable device capable of converting sunlight into storable
chemical energy. A systematic approach toward device optimization will be
implemented, combining simulation, device fabrication, and hierarchical
nanoscale characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to leverage the inherent advantages of
silicon for photovoltaic applications (reliability, scalability, performance,
manufacturability, over 60 years of accumulated R&amp;D) while overcoming its
inherent disadvantages (high cost, low efficiency, intermittency).
Collaborations between the PI?s PV-focused group and catalysis experts will
ensure rapid interdisciplinary progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
challenges will be addressed in a systematic fashion: (1) High-performance sub-
devices (individual solar cells) will be created; (2) Sub-devices will be
integrated into a single high-performance silicon-based multijunction cell; (3)
Aforementioned devices will be integrated with catalyst materials. The
envisioned result is a silicon-based multijunction device capable of direct
solar-to-fuels conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses five critical needs enabling utility-scale implementation of
solar energy conversion: low cost, high efficiency, non-intermittency
(dispatchability), scalability, and domestic manufacturability. Close
interaction with local companies will ensure expedient technology transfer and
student internship opportunities. Outreach efforts will improve solar energy
education via augmenting a university course, engaging the general public at
local museums and interactive websites, and educating future thought leaders.
Underrepresented minorities will be engaged in solar energy research and
engineering through an active mentorship program.