* 1150719
* CAREER: Exploiting Quantum Optoelectronic Properties of Dirac Quasiparticles in Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Xiaodong Xu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

**** TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate and enhance
understanding of the quantum electronic and optoelectronic phenomena of graphene
- a system with two-dimensional Dirac cone dispersion. Graphene has unique
electronic and symmetry properties distinct from other 2D electronic systems,
such as the chiral massless dispersion of low energy electrons in single-layer
graphene, the tunable effective mass and bandgap in bilayer graphene, and
unusual quantum Hall effects with large Landau level spacing at moderate
magnetic fields. The integration of ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy with
electrical transport will lead to the investigation of the electronic properties
of such systems while benefiting from advanced nano-optical spectroscopy
techniques. This proposal comprises investigations of both spatial and temporal
dynamics of non-equilibrium excitations with and without magnetic fields, the
photovoltaic Hall effect with circularly polarized light, Berry-phase related
valley Hall effects, broken-symmetry states, and photocurrent generation in the
quantum Hall regime. A fundamental understanding of this technologically
important material may lead to new applications including high-speed and low
power-consumption electronics, broadband communication, new sensing
technologies, and photovoltaics. This multidisciplinary research program
provides an excellent platform for undergraduate and graduate students to learn
physics, device engineering, and materials science, and for post-doctoral
researchers to gain professional experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-
TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;As silicon technology faces fundamental limits,
breakthroughs in electronics are likely to rely on other materials which allow
the exploitation of features and concepts not available in the silicon/oxide
system. One promising system is graphene, a single layer of graphite. What sets
graphene apart from conventional semiconductors is that the electrons in the
graphene behave like photons, traveling with an effective speed just 300 times
smaller than the speed of light. This unique feature gives graphene superior
physical properties for potential new electronic applications. This project will
exploit the novel electronic and optical properties of graphene through a
combination of material synthesis, device fabrication, and optoelectronic
measurements. In particularly, electron dynamics will be probed by ultrafast
laser pulses with a pulse width 13 orders of magnitude smaller than one second.
The obtained physical understanding of this technologically important material
may lead to high-speed and low power-consumption electronics, broadband
communication, new sensing technologies, and photovoltaics. The proposed
multidisciplinary research program provides an excellent platform for
undergraduate and graduate students to learn physics, device engineering, and
materials science, and for post-doctoral researchers to gain professional
experience.