* 1150478
* CAREER: Intein-Mediated Protein Polymer Hydrogels as General Scaffolds for Immobilization of Bioactive Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Zhilei Chen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 10/31/2014
* USD 236,188.00

CBET 1150478/ Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program supports the
engineering of a novel protein polymer hydrogel as a general scaffold for the
immobilization of enzymes and bioactive proteins. Enzymes are versatile
catalysts and are playing an ever-more prominent role in modern biotechnology.
However, poor long-term stability and difficulties in recovery and recycling of
enzymes in solution have greatly hampered their usefulness in biotransformation.
Immobilization of enzymes on solid supports can significantly enhance their
stability and enable convenient recycling and recovery. The proposed protein
hydrogel takes advantage of intein-mediated protein splicing/ligation to form an
inter-connected network of protein polymers. Successful completion of this
project will provide a general method for the synthesis of protein hydrogels
that densely and efficiently incorporate multiple bioactive proteins with a
highly controlled molecular architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will
achieve broader impacts (1) by expanding the current toolkit for protein
immobilization and (2) through participation of young and aspiring scientists
from diverse backgrounds. The technical goal of this work explores new frontiers
in protein immobilization. Insights from these studies will benefit several
industries employing biocatalytic processes, advance our ability to assemble
efficient enzymatic pathways for biotransformation and enzymatic fuel cells, and
facilitate the creation of new bioactive protein hydrogel scaffolds for tissue
engineering and drug delivery applications. The educational goal of increasing
public awareness in biotechnology/hydrogels will be achieved through: (1)
establishing an interactive web-space and YouTube video modules focused on
hydrogels and protein self-assembly, (2) designing hands-on hydrogel-focused
experimental modules for showcasing in an established undergraduate course and
at TAMU outreach outlets including Chemistry Week and Physics Day, (3) hosting
and mentoring secondary science and math teachers through the E3 Research
Experience for Teachers (RET) Program, (4) educating juniors at a predominantly
minority high school through class discussions on topics explored in the
proposed research, (5) disseminating research results in a language
understandable and appreciable by laypersons in collaboration with local
journalists, and (6) hosting/mentoring undergraduate students in the lab,
targeting minority students.