* 1150493
* CAREER: Active Transducers for MEMS Resonators in Integrated Circuit Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Dana Weinstein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal ECCS 1150071

Project Abstract

RF Micro Electro Mechanical (MEM) resonators, with quality factors (Q) often
exceeding 10,000, have seen several success stories spanning communication,
industrial, and automotive applications. Despite the maturity of the RF MEMS
field, intimate integration with ICs has not been possible due to complexity and
cost of integration and large disparity between sizes of MEMS devices and
integrated circuit (IC) transistors. The proposed 5-year program exploring
multi-GHz MEMS resonators using electromechanical transduction with IC
transistors will help overcome these obstacles.

Intellectual Merits: Fundamental innovation in resonator design using this
transduction will enable scaled, monolithically integrated RF MEMS devices with
performance rivaling their off-chip counterparts at previously unattainable
frequencies. Active transduction mechanisms in MEMS resonators leveraging IC
technology for high transducer efficiency with high-gain, high-fT transistors
will be investigated. Actively transduced resonators will be implemented in a
Single Transistor Radio (STaR) and RF front-end filters. These system
demonstrations require innovation in circuit design to harness the benefits of
active transducers in resonators with entirely new topologies.

Broader Impacts: This research plan is merged cohesively with an education and
outreach objective targeting K-12 and undergraduate students to increase
awareness and understanding of MEMS and Electrical Engineering. Hands-on MEMS
demonstrations through local events (e.g. Cambridge Science Festival and MIT
Women's Technology Program) will supplement web-based demonstrations and
tutorials of the MEMS-based radio systems developed through this program. This
work will also serve in the development of a grad/undergrad MEMS course,
introducing fundamentals of the proposed transducers and MEMS resonators into
the curriculum.