* 1150590
* CAREER: Electrokinetic Transport of Fluid, Particles and Macromolecules through Nanochannels and Nanopores
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,03/31/2015
* David Saintillan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2015
* USD 407,752.00

1150590 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Saintillan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in
microfabrication techniques have enabled the development of the field of
microfluidics. As these techniques become more sophisticated, devices are now
being scaled down to the nanoscale, bringing about a new wealth of physical
phenomena to be exploited in lab-on-chip devices for instance. The use of
electrokinetics in these devices has proven particularly useful in a wide range
of applications, and specifically to manipulate fluid, particles and
macromolecules. Yet, the modeling of these flows at the nanoscale still suffers
from limitations, owing to the inability of classical models to capture certain
non-continuum effects, and to the high-cost of direct molecular simulations,
which are only able to resolve very short time scales. These observations
emphasize the need for renewed modeling efforts in the field of electrokinetics
in highly confined environments. In this project, we propose to study
electrochemical and macromolecular transport in confined devices using a new
simulation approach for diffuse charge dynamics based on a Langevin model and
Brownian dynamics for the electrolyte species. This new method will incorporate
features from classical continuum models, but will also allow one to capture
non-continuum effects without the high cost of atomistic methods. It can be
applied to study both electroosmosis and electrophoresis with electrical double
layers of arbitrary sizes, and can easily account for complex geometries. A new
polymer model based on slender-body theory for a fluctuating elastic filament
will also be developed to study the dynamics of polyelectrolytes with arbitrary
Debye lengths. These new models and tools will be applied to study a number of
technological applications, including: (i) the electrophoretic separation of
oligonucleotides in nanochannels, (ii) electrochemical transport through
nanocapillary array membranes, and (iii) the electrically driven translocation
of biological polymers through nanopores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research activities will serve to enhance the fundamental understanding and
modeling of electrokinetic flows and macromolecular transport in highly confined
geometries, where non-continuum effects may become important. The new models and
simulation tools implemented as part of the research will be applicable to a
wide range of problems in the fields of physics, engineering, and medicine,
among which: biochemical assays on lab-on-chip devices, electrohydrodynamic
stretching of DNA for genomic analysis, electrochemical transport through
polymer electrolyte membranes in PEM fuel cells, and many others. Educational
and outreach activities will also be integrated in this program. A new graduate-
level course on fundamentals and applications of micro- and nanofluidics,
including electrokinetic flows, will be introduced at the University of
Illinois. A tutorial website on electrokinetics and its applications will be
designed for use by students and non-specialists, and a visualization software
for diffuse charge dynamics and electrochemical transport will be developed and
made available online to students and researchers in the field under a public
license.