* 1150844
* CAREER: Genes, Environments, and Experiences in the Phenotypic Development of Cost Discounting and High Risk Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Lisa Gatzke-Kopp, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 04/30/2018
* USD 699,197.00

In this project the Principle Investigator will examine the heterogeneity within
impulsive decision making as well as the biological developmental processes that
lead to individual differences in decision making phenotypes. Although decisions
to pursue a goal are typically dichotomous (yes/no), factors that contribute to
decisions are multiple. In addition to the value of the targeted reward,
individuals must consider the costs associated with effort, time, and risk. The
reduction in perceived value as costs increase is known as cost discounting, and
has been demonstrated to differ substantially between individuals. Because
individual variability exists in each of these domains (effort, time, and risk)
independently, more variability exists in the process of decision making than is
evident in the variability of decision outcomes, requiring more detailed
assessment of discounting strategies than can be extracted from tests currently
used in research. Furthermore, developmental theory proposes that variability in
cost discounting arises as a function of environmental adaptation, allowing for
the development of specific hypotheses regarding the relationship between early
developmental adversity and the dopaminergic processing that contributes to cost
discounting. This study will evaluate discounting tendencies in a longitudinal,
prospectively collected, epidemiological sample to test the association between
genotype, biological development, and decision making phenotypic outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research will expand the
understanding of how children process information in making decisions. Impulsive
decision making has been demonstrated to contribute to behavior problems and
academic underachievement. Currently all children characterized by impulsivity
tend to garner the same recommendations and behavioral management approaches.
However, because the neural processes involved in decision making are
multifaceted, different children can arrive at an impulsive (sub-optimal)
decision for different reasons. This project will develop a detailed assessment
of decision making that allows for more individualized characterization of
children, which will directly inform the development of a range of strategies
for behavior management applicable for classroom use. The impact of this
information is two-fold; (1) understanding the heterogeneity of impulsive
decision making will provide a framework from which research on behavioral
change can refine and diversify individual-based approaches, and (2) the
developmental, process-based, information extracted from this study will help
identify windows of developmental sensitivity and mechanisms of influence that
can inform policy and prevention practice to enhance developmental trajectories
for under-served children.