* 1150055
* CAREER: Compilers for Dependable Computational Mathematics
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Gabriel Dos Reis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2017
* USD 83,200.00

Algorithms used in computational mathematics are
increasingly&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated and complex; and the modern civilization
critically&lt;br/&gt;dependents on scientific software at all levels from design
to&lt;br/&gt;equipment control. Yet, the programming languages and tools used
to&lt;br/&gt;express algorithms as computer programs do not progress at a
matching&lt;br/&gt;pace, leaving an expanding gap between provably correct
published&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and their realizations in code. Failures in
software&lt;br/&gt;systems can cost human lives and are responsible for billions
of&lt;br/&gt;dollars lost annually. Furthermore, silent failures of
simulation&lt;br/&gt;software can seriously undermine the credibility of a
scientific&lt;br/&gt;model, entailing profound intellectual liabilities. This
research&lt;br/&gt;project will investigate formal-methods-based principles and
tools to&lt;br/&gt;make the practice of programming a more mathematical activity
for&lt;br/&gt;ordinary programmers. The overriding aim is to make dependability
a&lt;br/&gt;common basic property of critical software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To that end, the PI will design a new
programming system that supports&lt;br/&gt;research in axiomatic programming
based on new logical linguistic&lt;br/&gt;constructs, invent new programming
models and tools grounded in formal&lt;br/&gt;reasoning and methods. The PI will
investigate the design of practical&lt;br/&gt;dependent type systems for
mathematics software and their efficient&lt;br/&gt;compilation to support
integrated automated deduction and computer&lt;br/&gt;algebra systems. The
project has synergistic components that build&lt;br/&gt;bridges between symbolic
and algebraic computation, compiler construction,&lt;br/&gt;proof theory, and
education. Insights gained from this project will&lt;br/&gt;be integrated into
new courses, supported by a book on the practical&lt;br/&gt;implementation of
modern type systems and compilers. The PI expects&lt;br/&gt;to discover basic
principles of axiomatic programming, tools, and&lt;br/&gt;techniques. The
results are expected to influence the evolution of&lt;br/&gt;existing major
mainstream programming languages (such as C++) in&lt;br/&gt;their support for
structured generic programming and improvement of &lt;br/&gt;software
reliability. As ever, the PI will involve students both at&lt;br/&gt;the
undergraduate and graduate levels, in hands-on, fully
integrated&lt;br/&gt;research-based classes.