* 1150235
* CAREER: Understanding the Contraction Biomechanics of Platelets at the Single-Cell Level
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Wilbur Lam, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2018
* USD 449,999.00

1150235 &lt;br/&gt;lam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand the contraction mechanics and dynamics of individual platelets, the
blood cells responsible for the initiation of clot formation, in order to
improve the fields of medicine and bioengineering. During the formation of blood
clots, activated platelets interact with growing networks of fibrin polymers and
contract against this fibrin scaffold. Although this platelet-driven clot
retraction is known to be acto-myosin mediated, extremely little is known about
the underlying biomechanical aspects of platelet contraction, due in part to
technological limitations. Bulk assays of clot retraction exist but cannot
directly measure platelet contractility at the single cell level, which is
necessary to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the contraction process. In
addition, as fibrin has recently been shown to have extremely complex material
and mechanical properties, single platelet studies would enable the decoupling
of the fibrin effects from platelets when examining the cellular biomechanics of
clot formation. Therefore, a clear need exists for robust, single cell assays of
platelet contraction. We recently published the first technique to achieve this
goal using a modified atomic force microscopy system to directly and
quantitatively measure the contraction mechanics and dynamics of single
platelets. Although the atomic force micrscopy technique is highly sensitive,
given the known wide physiologic heterogeneity and variability among individual
platelets, the throughput must be improved to obtain a comprehensive
understanding of the underlying cellular biomechanical mechanisms of platelet
contraction. To those ends, Dr. Wilbur Lam and his laboratory will apply
microfabrication techniques to develop a high-throughput "biomechanical flow
cytometer" that simultaneously measures the contractility of multiple platelets
in a single experiment. Then, Dr. Lam and his colleagues will quantitatively
investigate the mechanistic relationship between the biomechanical and
biological aspects of platelet contraction to obtain a comprehensive, cellular
biomechanical understanding of that process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education
objectives of this proposal are to: create a K-12 science outreach program for
hospitalized children in which their own specific diseases are used as
motivation and springboards for learning about science; use hospital-based
supplies and equipment these children are accustomed to for hands-on science
enrichment as part of this outreach; enable undergraduate and graduate students
to implement this outreach program; and integrate cellular biomechanics concepts
into this program, emphasizing that medicine is interdisciplinary and involves
biology, physics, chemistry, and math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Clot formation occurs in three phases: 1) platelet aggregation at the site of
injury, 2) formation of a fibrin polymer embedding platelets at that site, and
3) platelet-driven clot retraction/contraction. While the first two phases have
been well characterized, extremely little is known about the last phase. As
clots are exposed to a wide range of external forces in a hemodynamic
environment and are spatially non-uniform, leading to a heterogeneity of
mechanical microenvironments platelets might encounter, applying the concepts of
cellular biomechanics to platelet contraction will vastly improve the overall
basic understanding of clot formation. Indeed, our previous data suggest that
platelet contraction is dependent on the mechanical properties of the underlying
substrate. We will test the hypothesis that the mechanical microenvironment
interacts with the known signaling pathways that mediate platelet contraction.
To that end, we will build upon Dr. Lam's atomic force microscopy technique to
enable the higher throughput experiments needed to quantitatively investigate
the mechanics of platelet contraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
These will be the first reported experiments that quantitatively investigate the
cellular biomechanics of platelet contraction and the results will significantly
improve the overall understanding of platelet physiology and clot formation. In
addition, these studies will have broad reaching implications as platelets are
not only involved in clotting but also in numerous other biological processes
(e.g., infections, inflammation, cardiovascular disease, stroke, and cancer) and
the biocompatibility of implanted biomaterials. Diagnostics assessing platelet
function are currently based only on platelet aggregation and as such, the
proposed microsystem will form the basis for a new category of platelet function
testing. Furthermore, the microsystem will potentially serve as a drug discovery
platform for diseases associated with dysfunction in platelet contractility,
such as cardiovascular disease and stroke. Combined with the innovative
education program geared towards science education of hospitalized children,
this interdisciplinary program will have a lasting impact on cellular
biomechanics, basic hematology, and biomedical engineering, and biomaterials.