* 1150963
* CAREER: African American Father Engagement and Early Adolescents' Academic and Social Adjustment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Shauna Cooper, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 06/30/2018
* USD 430,041.00

Little is known about African American fathers' parenting practices,
particularly during the adolescent years. This NSF Career project examines
parenting processes among a sample of African American fathers, and explores how
these parenting practices influence the academic and social adjustment of
African American early adolescents. Two-hundred and forty African-American
fathers and their adolescents (aged 11-12 years old) will be surveyed once a
year for three years. Father, adolescent, and mother reports will be utilized to
gain multiple perspectives on fathers' parenting practices and adolescent
adjustment. This investigation has four specific aims: 1) to investigate
determinants (such as adolescent gender; intergenerational factors; residential
status; maternal relationships) of African American fathers' parenting
practices; 2) to examine whether fathering ideologies (e.g., beliefs about
parenting) explain the association between fathering determinants and parenting
practices; 3) to identify whether African American fathers' parenting practices
change or are stable across adolescence; and 4) to explore how parenting
practices are associated with African American adolescents' academic and social
adjustment outcomes (e.g., academic performance; self-regulation; psychological
functioning).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to expanding the research on
fathering practices in African American families, this investigation has the
potential to inform future strategies to promote academic achievement and social
adjustment. Also, this NSF Career Award includes multiple community-focused
educational and outreach activities. First, in collaboration with the Historic
Columbia Foundation, the investigator and her research team will develop a
curriculum that bridges archaeology, history and psychology for use with
adolescents. An additional component of this curriculum will include a joint
father-adolescent learning activity. Also, educational outreach materials (e.g.,
flyers; workshops) will be developed for local school districts and educators
regarding the importance of father involvement during adolescence. Last, in
efforts to increase exposure to science research and associated careers, this
project will provide intensive mentoring and training opportunities for
underrepresented high school, undergraduate, and graduate students.