* 1150378
* CAREER: Photoelectrochemical Investigation of Thin Film Hematite Solar Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Thomas Hamann, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2017
* USD 527,731.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Hamann of the Department of Chemistry at Michigan State
University will investigate the photo-catalytic oxidation of water using
hematite electrodes. A series of highly-controlled and systematic investigations
on thin film hematite electrodes, including studying contacting electrolytes,
the electrode interface and bulk material modifications, will be carried out. A
combination of electrochemical, photoelectrochemical, spectroscopic and
microscopic measurements will be employed to characterize the new configurations
of hematite photo-catalysts. Also to be explored are strategies of increasing
the light absorption of the optimized thin films including creating highly
ordered nanostructures via atomic layer deposition and incorporating plasmonic
nanoparticles. The broader impacts involve training undergraduate students and
graduate student researchers and developing an experimental module on solar
energy conversion using hematite electrodes for area high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research outlines several approaches to
substantially improve the energy conversion efficiency of hematite solar cells.
A breakthrough resulted from this research will have significant impact on the
realization of truly cost-effective solar energy conversion and storage; this
would benefit society tremendously by contributing to our energy independence
and the mitigation of carbon emissions. In addition, the interdisciplinary
nature of the proposed work is expected to impact diverse fields, including
materials chemistry, electrochemistry, and catalysis. The research further
involves several teaching points which will be integrated into educational
activities at all levels, including the efforts to involve groups generally
underrepresented in science and technology.