* 1151534
* CAREER: Tailoring the Surface State Conduction in Semiconductor and Topological Insulator Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Xuan Gao, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 04/30/2018
* USD 550,000.00

This CAREER award is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program (EPM) and Condensed Matter Physics Program (CMP), both in the Division
of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Due to the ubiquitously large
surface-to-volume ratio of nanomaterials, surface and interface effects are
essential to their electronic and optoelectronic properties. The research
component of this CAREER award focuses on the fundamental study and control of
surface state conduction in nanowires of indium arsenide and bismuth compounds
(e.g., bismuth selenide or telluride), two model systems of the conventional
III-V semiconductors and the recently discovered topological insulators. In
conventional semiconductor nanowires, surface states generally degrade the
material's performance and are often undesirable. However, for topological
insulators, the topological surface states are the subject of interest for both
basic research and potential device applications, and thus should be protected
against the bulk states, which have been hindering the progress in the
topological surface state research. In this research project, surface
functionalization, doping and heterostructured material design are employed
experimentally to tailor the surface conduction in semiconductor and topological
insulator nanowires. These material and synthetic controls of the surface are
further complemented by the conductance and capacitance spectroscopy for the
quantitative understanding and evaluation of the surface versus bulk transport
in nanowires&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Nanowires have become an important
material platform in modern nanoelectronics and photonics. Since nanomaterials
have very high surface to volume ratio, surface effects could dominate the
overall electronic properties and greatly impact the material performance. This
CAREER project aims to achieve a comprehensive understanding of and precise
control over the electronic surface states in nanowires of either conventional
semiconductor or the recently discovered topological insulator materials. The
research activities are expected to benefit multiple areas in which
nanomaterials are playing an essential role. With this CAREER project, the PI
also seeks to establish an education program integrated with the research
project at Case Western Reserve University. Both graduate and undergraduate
students engage actively in the project and learn state-of-the-art nanoscience
and technology. In addition, pre-college students in the Cleveland area are
being outreached through collaborations with a local girls' school and an inner
city school with 100 percent of students receiving subsidized lunches. These
outreach efforts are made to stimulate young students' interest and enthusiasm
in pursuing science and technology as a future career. Further education and
outreach endeavor of this project includes the development of a layman-level
interactive web page and nanoscience course/lecture development related to the
research activity.