* 1151926
* CAREER: Integrating earthquake physics and source imaging while engaging the Hispanic community
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2018
* Jean-Paul Ampuero, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 576,776.00

The main research goal of this project is to understand the origin of earthquake
rupture complexity and its impact on destructive ground motions by narrowing the
gap between theoretical and computational earthquake dynamics and observational
earthquake source seismology, while significantly advancing both. This research
integrates theory and observations to enhance the capacity to extract reliable
constraints on earthquake rupture processes from seismological data. It provides
a computational environment to address open questions and formulate testable
hypothesis about the physics of earthquakes. The proposed developments in
computational seismology tackle the multi-scale aspects of earthquake dynamics
by consolidating two methods that can handle realistic geometries and
rheologies, the spectral element method (SEM) and the discontinuous Galerkin
method, by applying space-time adaptive techniques to dynamic rupture problems
and by extending the SEM simulation capabilities to the longer time-scales of
the earthquake cycle. The proposed observational developments introduce multi-
scale signal analysis concepts in source imaging techniques based on back-
projection of high-frequency seismic array data and integrate these results with
more traditional source inversion approaches at lower frequencies. The 2011 M9
Tohoku (Japan) mega-earthquake is a main focus of the integrative efforts.
Synergistic activities between theory and observations characterize the
uncertainties in source imaging through realistic synthetic scenarios and
mitigate those uncertainties by integrating adequate prior information in the
source inversion problem. The education and outreach activities of this project
engage the Hispanic community in enhancing its scientific literacy about
earthquake processes, to reduce its vulnerability to seismic hazards. This is
achieved by regular workshops for the Hispanic media, by engaging Hispanic
undergraduate summer interns, by assessing in collaboration with social
scientists the cultural factors of vulnerability in the Hispanic population, by
developing school activities that link earthquake hazards and Hispanic heritage
and by involving Latinos of Southern California in low-cost seismic networks. In
addition, software products and related training materials are made openly
available and the research results are integrated in graduate
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses an outstanding challenge
in earthquake science: resolving and interpreting the multi-scale complexity of
dynamic rupture. The project integrates two distinct directions of earthquake
research, theoretical/computational earthquake physics and observational
seismology, through synergy between physics-based simulation and data-based
earthquake rupture imaging. This research improves our general understanding of
multi-scale processes in dynamic fracture and provides related software and
analysis tools with potential applications in other disciplines, e.g. for the
assessment of the reliability of heterogeneous engineering materials. The
research products enhance the capacity of rapid response to mitigate the
destructive effects of earthquakes globally. The project naturally involves
international collaborations. The educational activities foster inter-
disciplinary interactions between seismology and social science, and foster the
participation in scientific education and research of an underrepresented group,
the Hispanic community, while reducing its vulnerability to natural hazards