* 1151003
* CAREER: Full-Scale Simulation of Peak Responses to Reduce Hurricane Damage to Low Buildings and Use of Related Research to Develop Hurricane-Engineering Expertise
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Arindam Chowdhury, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to ascertain the effects of roof shapes and coverings on uplift pressures and
the dynamic response of flexible roofing systems subjected to hurricane winds.
This objective will be accomplished through full-scale testing in the 12-fan
Wall of Wind (WoW) simulation laboratory at Florida International University.
The educational objective is to increase the number of undergraduate students in
hurricane engineering academic programs. The project aims are to: (1) determine
the extent to which full-scale testing can improve roof peak pressure estimates
by simulating local flow fields near critical components; (2) determine through
full-scale testing the dynamic response of flexible roofing systems subjected to
high winds; and (3) synergistically integrate low building aerodynamics research
with inductive learning to foster improvement in undergraduate student knowledge
in hurricane engineering. The expected contributions include: (1) new load
modification functions to improve peak estimates in existing aerodynamic
database; (2) new knowledge on progressive load distribution among roof
subassemblies before damage initiation and as damage propagates; and (3) new
strategic framework for educating and influencing the career path of
undergraduate and graduate students.

The research is expected to benefit the society as it has the potential of
significantly improving building codes and standards to enhance the resiliency
of low buildings that are vulnerable to damage in hurricane winds. These changes
in building codes and standards will improve construction practices of low
buildings and reduce damages in hurricane storms. Advancement of discovery will
be incorporated in to education through step-by-step integration of new
knowledge with inductive learning. Broadening participation of underrepresented
groups will be fostered through active recruitment from minority serving
institutions for this fascinating subject area. The educational contribution of
this project will be significant by increasing number of students pursuing a
career path of hurricane-qualified engineers. Research and education
infrastructure will be enhanced through demonstration of valuable use of the
12-fan WoW facility and inductive learning modules transportable to
wind/hurricane engineering curriculum around the globe. Outreach activities will
be broadly pursued through presentations at various forums and publications.