* 1151497
* CAREER: Empirical Studies of Innovation in Health Care Markets
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2018
* Heidi Williams, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 03/31/2018
* USD 429,861.00

In 2001, Nature and Science published the initial sequences of the human genome.
In the decade since, the sequenced human genome has dramatically accelerated
biomedical research, and has laid the groundwork for a revolution in medicine.
Yet Nature's editorial page in 2001 was focused not on the scientific and
medical promise of the sequenced genome, but rather on a controversy over rules
governing public access to genomic data. Indeed, by many accounts biomedical
researchers frequently struggle to navigate a complex landscape of non-
scientific obstacles to scientific research and product development - such as
negotiating access to patented and non-patented materials. Successfully
translating the science of genomics into improvements in health requires
resolving these economic and institutional obstacles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project outlines a long-term
agenda of research and education investigating barriers to innovation in health
care markets, with a particular focus on the science and medicine of genomics.
The project consists of three parts. First, it constructs a series of new
datasets to measure the development and diffusion of genomic technologies, and
develops open-access programs to enable others to replicate, update, and extend
this data construction. Second, this project incorporates these data into a
series of research projects to test and evaluate theories about economic factors
that may be hindering innovation in biomedical science and health care markets.
The direct goal of these studies is to shed light on specific questions, such as
whether gene patents are hindering scientific research and product development.
The broader goal is to develop new research designs that can subsequently be
applied to other markets. Third, this project develops a monthly research
workshop focused on the goal of integrating PhD students into this agenda. The
goal of this workshop is to build a laboratory - generating leads on new
research questions, and supporting students in collecting data and designing
empirical strategies to test new hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: Barriers to innovation in the health policy context have important
consequences for human health and welfare. In addition,, for federal and state
governments, rising health care costs constitute the principal challenge of
fiscal policy in the coming decades. The best available estimates suggest 30 to
40 percent of health spending - more than half a trillion dollars per year -
could be eliminated with no adverse health impacts. Identifying barriers to
medical innovation holds the potential to encourage the development of new
technologies that can reduce health spending while also improving health
outcomes.