* 1151590
* CAREER: Ultrafast and multidimensional vibrational spectroscopy of aqueous interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* John McGuire, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 650,000.00

In this CAREER award, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor John McGuire and his
research group at Michigan State University will study vibrational relaxation,
orientational dynamics, and couplings between vibrational modes of water at
aqueous interfaces. The properties of water, such as its anomalously high
boiling point and heat capacity, derive largely from its hydrogen-bond network.
The properties of this network are often a product of its dynamics, which are
characterized by picoseconds to sub-picosecond timescales. The termination of
the hydrogen-bond network at interfaces leads to dynamics distinct from those
widely measured in the bulk. However, to date, the vast majority of experimental
studies of aqueous interfaces have focused on their static properties. By
exciting a non-equilibrium distribution of water molecules and then measuring
the surface-sensitive sum-frequency response, the surface dynamics can be
probed. This offers the opportunity for new insights into the interfacial
hydrogen-bond network. Professor McGuire's group will employ new
multidimensional and phase-sensitive techniques for the detection of sum-
frequency signals to enhance the sensitivity to weak surface nonlinear optical
processes. Investigations will address the differences in the dynamical
properties of a range of chemically and physically important aqueous interfaces
including hydrophobic and hydrophilic interfaces and aqueous interfaces
characterized by varying concentrations of solutes such as
salts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding dynamics and vibrational
couplings at aqueous interfaces will impact our understanding of a broad range
of phenomena at aqueous interfaces, such as solvation and charge transfer, that
are central to such varied processes as protein folding, electrochemical energy
generation and storage, heterogeneous catalysis, and atmospheric chemistry. The
techniques developed will also find application in studies of other interfacial
and non-centrosymmetric bulk systems. Students involved in this project will
receive training in vibrational and ultrafast spectroscopy and nonlinear optical
techniques broadly applicable to studies of chemical and physical systems.
Through activities such as engagement of high school teachers in research and
hands-on workshops for K-12 teachers, the process and results of scientific
discovery and an appreciation for a scientific understanding of water will be
disseminated to students in K-12.