* 1151299
* CAREER: Reprogramming Polyketide Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Gavin Williams, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 574,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Sciences Program funds Professor Gavin Williams of North
Carolina State University for a CAREER award to carry research entitled
"Reprogramming Polyketide Biosynthesis." Polyketide synthases (PKSs) are giant
enzyme assemblies that construct a large array of natural products called
polyketides. In general, polyketide structure is determined by the identity and
sequence of modules in the PKS, and this feature offers the prospect of creating
designer PKSs for the synthesis of polyketide analogues. However, our poor
understanding of the relationship between protein sequence, structure and
function, limits the extent to which PKSs can be manipulated. The development
and application of tools at the interface of chemistry and biology is likely
required to overcome engineering obstacles and contribute to our understanding
of PKS chemistry. This work will employ key techniques in chemical biology to
probe, interrogate, and manipulate the chemistry of PKSs in vitro. The project
aims to 1) overcome strict PKS substrate specificity by using directed molecular
evolution to create a chemo-enzymatic pathway constructed from discrete, "stand-
alone" enzymes, 2) explore the use of non-natural prosthetic arms to alter
substrate specificity, promiscuity, and catalysis of PKSs, and 3) map critical
protein interaction interfaces, with single residue resolution, using a novel
photocrosslinking assay. The design principles gathered from this research will
reveal how PKSs and related enzymes catalyze the construction of complex
products from simple building blocks. The researchers will explore the
limitations with which PKSs can be manipulated by chemical biology, and fully
delineate the synthetic capabilities of biosynthetic
machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from teacher-
scholar activities which are integrated with the research plan includes
invigorating youth to become the next generation of scientists, demonstrating
enzyme chemistry and its importance, and emphasizing the role of chemistry in
society. Proposed activities include: 1) the creation of an "enzyme workstation"
that integrates underlying concepts in the NC K-12 program; 2) broaden
participation of underrepresented minorities by co-leading the NSF REU Chemistry
site at NCSU and mentoring future NC Project SEED; 3) design and implementation
of an undergraduate laboratory module and graduate class aimed at unifying
concepts in chemistry and biology; and 4) involvement of the broader community
by participation in Science Caf√©.