* 1151780
* CAREER: Morphologies of Tensed Sheets
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Benjamin Davidovitch, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2018
* USD 410,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education to develop a
comprehensive theoretical framework for studying morphologies of thin sheets
under loading and confinement, a problem with connections to living systems.
Thin solid sheets exhibit complex patterns under generic confinements and
featureless distribution of forces. This morphological diversity reflects the
coupling between geometry and mechanics in elastic sheets. This field has seen
recently a surge of research activity, driven by studies that demonstrated its
relevance for morphogenetic processes, such as the tissue-shaping instabilities
occurring in animal epithelia or plant leaves, and by material applications at
ever decreasing scales that enable the mechanical control of tiny structures. A
major theoretical challenge posed by this progress is to develop a formalism
that explains the basic mechanisms for pattern formation in thin sheets under
various loadings and confinements. The hurdle here is associated with the highly
nonlinear nature and the geometric complexity of the problem when the sheet
thickness becomes very small. To make progress, new concepts and methods, beyond
traditionally used ones are required. Developing these is a focus of the
research.

Quite generally, morphologies of thin sheets are described as composed of
wrinkles, crumples, folds, creases, and blisters. These descriptive words may
appear lucid, but a quantitative distinction between the actual patterns is far
from being obvious; moreover, the conditions under which these various types of
deformations emerge are unclear. A primary goal of this project is to help
clarify these questions. The radial stretching problem will be developed as a
template for classifying various deformation types as symmetry breaking
instabilities of the shape and stress field in an elastic sheet. The research
projects will yield new analytic techniques and will improve numerical methods
for studying the mechanics and geometry of thin sheets. The proposed projects
should be of high relevance for emerging technologies. Two representative
examples for potential applications are related to the metrology of nanofilms,
and to emerging "stretchable electronics" technologies.

The educational broader impacts of this project include training students and
postdocs in a variety of analytical and numerical methods, and a summer workshop
for teachers: "Patterns around us" in which selected research results and other
examples of pattern formation in nature will be assimilated into hands-on kits
that will be delivered to middle-school teachers. This activity will be
coordinated with the University of Massachusetts STEM Education Institute.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education on developing a
theoretical framework to understand the structural patterns thin sheets assume
in response to various forces. Elastic sheets exhibit highly complex
morphologies that are often described as wrinkles, creases, crumples, folds, and
blisters. A close inspection of a candy wrap, a human skin, or a stretched
plastic bag, reveals that these patterns often coexist in the same shape,
ranging from microns or even nanometers, up to human body scales. Why do films
become folded upon stretching or confinement whereas a thick slab of an
identical material does not fold? Why does paper tend to crumple whereas rubber
sheets would smoothly wrinkle? Why do certain plant leaves have a buckled shape,
whereas others are flat? Answering these questions is important not only for
satisfying our natural curiosity. The emergence of complex morphologies in
natural and synthesized sheets affects their mechanical, optical and chemical
properties, and may have far reaching consequences in material science and
engineering, as well as in the bio-world. Understanding how complicated patterns
in sheets emerge spontaneously under featureless forces may inspire efficient
methods for tailoring a desired surface pattern, or the self-assembly of
structures at will from a homogenous piece of matter.

This project seeks to address these questions by applying the concepts and
methods of pattern formation theory. By focusing on a class of problems, the PI
seeks to identify various deformation types as different 'morphological phases'
of thin sheets. These phases for thin sheets would be analogous to phases of
materials like ordinary water's familiar phases of ice, liquid, steam. However,
these 'morphological phases' are conceptually distinct as they arise in systems
that, unlike water, are far from the well understood balance of equilibrium.
Developing a conceptual framework will enable a quantitative analysis of the
forces and geometric constraints under which distinct patterns emerge and
disappear in sheets.

The education component of this award supports a summer workshop "Patterns
around us" that will be developed by the PI in coordination with the University
of Massachusetts STEM Education Institute. The program will use common shapes,
such as shower curtains and stickers attached to curved bumpers in order to: (a)
Stimulate a physical-mathematical thinking through everyday phenomena. (b)
Impart to teachers and students concepts of pattern formation theory.