* 1151918
* CAREER:  Multimetallic Architectures for Dioxygen Chemistry with First-Row Transition Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Theodor Agapie, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2017
* USD 555,407.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Theodor Agapie of the Division of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering at California Institute of Technology will synthesize multinuclear
metal complexes and study their ability to form and break O-O bonds. Since
biological and heterogeneous catalysts perform dioxygen chemistry at
multimetallic sites, the synthesis of small-molecule structural and functional
synthetic models will afford a better understanding of cluster chemistry broadly
relevant to catalysis. Detailed studies of the effect of cluster structure on
physical and chemical properties, and oxygen reactivity will be performed. These
studies are focused on earth abundant first-row transition metals, with the
long-term goal of developing practical and inexpensive catalysts for oxygen
chemistry. The educational components of this project integrate aspects of
chemistry related to energy and catalysis researched in the laboratory and reach
high school students and teachers from the Los Angeles area, and undergraduates
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present studies are significant
in understanding biological and heterogeneous reaction mechanisms and have
potential applications in energy storage in chemical bonds and functionalization
of organic molecules. These areas are of broad importance to society in the
context of carbon-neutral energy conversion to fuels and synthesis of
pharmaceuticals. Professor Agapie will establish teacher-research group
partnerships and summer workshops with a special focus on students from groups
underrepresented in sciences. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in
the research efforts will be trained in synthetic chemistry and will develop a
culture of contributing to their scientific and non-scientific communities that
is expected to last well beyond their formative years.