* 1151896
* SBIR Phase II:  Commercial Scale Production of Synthetic Spider Silk Fibers
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Dan Widmaier, Refactored Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will continue
the development and commercialization of spider silk fibers commenced in the
Phase I effort. Spider silk is a unique material in nature that is currently
inaccessible on a commercial scale. Spider silk and other protein polymers are
broadly useful in fields ranging from specialty textiles, to medical devices and
advanced composites. The critical limitation in producing artificial spider silk
fibers has been the lack of availability of bulk silk material and the knowledge
of how to appropriately process the polymer into a product of native quality.
This project will continue prior work to deliver scalable quantities of material
through microbial production of spider silk protein using a commercially viable
cost structure. In addition, this project will examine the key parameters for
processing silk polymer into fibers whose properties surpass those of native
spider silk. The ability to produce prototype silk fibers from recombinant
protein will enable the initial steps towards commercializing spider silk fiber-
based products.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is important to the
adoption of a job-creating bio-based economy in the United States. The ability
to produce protein polymers has bedeviled biological researchers for decades.
Many important structural proteins and enticing commercially-useful materials
have remained effectively impossible to produce. The advent of cutting-edge
techniques in synthetic biology, microfabrication, and materials processing now
make the production of protein polymers and the processing of them into
beneficial technologies a realistic goal. Potential applications of protein-
based polymers include a full range of sophisticated materials that are
furthermore "green" and sustainable. Spider silk polymers, due to their
mechanical properties, can potentially be used to create the next generation of
ballistic fibers in the production of armor for military, law enforcement, and
private users. In addition, the ability to produce advanced polymers independent
of petroleum sources is a key goal of the emerging bio-based economy. Lastly,
many protein polymers (including silk) are biocompatible and biodegradable and
thus can form the basis for new classes of medical materials used to replace or
re-grow connective tissues with implants or devices.