* 1151148
* CAREER: Thermal Gradient Microflow Calorimetry using Anisotropic Temperature Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2012,09/30/2018
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Crews&lt;br/&gt;CBET-1151148&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will
seek to characterize and apply a unique type of one-directional temperature
sensor. The utility of such a sensor will be most felt within the field of
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). DSC is a broad science that examines
the energy given off or absorbed by a given substance during intermolecular
reactions triggered by temperature change. These energy changes are typically
measured while a sample is steadily heated or cooled over time. This approach is
innately a slow one, since the presence of temperature variation within the
substance at any moment introduces error into the system. This project will seek
to change that paradigm. Rather than decelerate heating to make temperature
gradients insignificant, temperature gradients themselves can be used as the
central driving mechanism of the analysis. This can be achieved without signal
distortion by employing a one-directional temperature sensor in a way that the
temperature variation caused by rapid heating is essentially invisible to the
energy measurement. This will allow for high-precision DSC at faster rates,
thereby exposing the most elusive kinetics of the intermolecular reactions.
Moreover, this approach will allow for DSC instrumentation to be designed for
field sampling, since the temperature gradients driving the analysis naturally
result from common events, such as: insertion of a probe into an oven or
furnace, a localized ignition or combustion process, or even simply exhaling
through a tube. It is the unique sensor that will enable temperature gradients
to be functional rather than problematic. Although there is much potential
usefulness for this proposed analytical technique, it represents a significant
deviation from standard practice, having fundamentally different thermal
transport behavior. Therefore, the basic science surrounding its utility is
currently incomplete. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposal relates to the performance characterization of this new DSC technique.
The proposed system is unique in that it will detect the heat of reaction as
power rather than as energy. This project will evaluate the impact this will
have on the generation, buildup, detection, and subsequent depletion of heat
signatures. This proposed DSC methodology is also uniquely characterized as a
steady heat transfer (called "iso-flux") rather than a negligible heat transfer
(called "quasi-equilibrium") environment. This work will evaluate the relative
measurement sensitivities of both scenarios, as well as the speed with which
each type of system will return to its baseline temperature distribution between
analyses. Effort will also be made to discover an optimization scheme by which
isoflux system performance can be further enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the direct impact this effort will have on the calorimetric science
community, this work contains an educational component that will serve multiple
groups. Many new learning opportunities will be made available within the
university through a continuation of new course development, senior design team
sponsorship, and student research opportunities. The scope of this work also
includes an expansion of ongoing efforts to expand the accessibility of
microfluidic research technologies. Additional outreach activities will be
performed which will impact under-represented populations. A highly successful
summer camp program - developed in part through NSF-sponsorship - will be
modified into a portable format. Educators will then be able to establish this
program across the region. This will have particular impact on the economically-
stressed areas, where participation in the centralized camp programs is not
generally realistic.