* 1151440
* CAREER:  Novel Quantum Hall and Correlation Physics in Topological Band Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Ying Ran, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2018
* USD 475,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education to investigate the new quantum Hall and correlation physics in
materials involving topological band structures. Using quantum field theory,
variational Monte Carlo, exact diagonalization and other modern quantum many-
body techniques, the PI will pursue four main research
directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Exploring novel phases of matter in
transition metal oxide heterostructures, where various topological phases may
emerge. These include possible high-temperature quantum spin hall phases and
correlation induced fractional quantum hall phases in the absence of an external
magnetic field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Understanding the nature of the abelian
and non-abelian fractional Chern insulators and topological insulators. The
research will focus on constructing wavefunctions for these states and
understanding their low energy properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3)
Investigating correlated quantum Hall effects of the 2D Dirac surface states of
a 3D topological insulator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Understanding the quantum
Hall effects and experimental signatures of 3D Weyl semi-metal phases, which may
be realized in materials such as pyrochlore iridates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational activities associated with this award include developing pedagogical
courses and a seminar series for undergraduate and graduate students, with
emphasis on the new phases of matter discovered in modern condensed matter
physics. These are intended to excite students to study and actively pursue
research in physics. Outreach activities include a lecture series aimed at
sparking the interest in science and technology among middle school students,
especially in low-income areas. These lectures are designed to expose the young
audience to some striking advances in the history of modern science and
technology, and their roles in our everyday life. To generate interest in
science over a broader scale, the PI will develop an interactive website for
hosting an overview of his research activities as well as teaching materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical research and education to investigate a recently discovered new
state of electronic matter that arises in certain materials called topological
insulators. Materials are often classified according to the ways electrons
organize themselves within the material, leading to materials types that
include: metals if they conduct electricity, insulators if they do not, and the
familiar magnet. Fundamental concepts make this classification even more
precise. Topological insulators lie outside this traditional classification
scheme making them very important from a fundamental science perspective. They
are at once an insulator in the bulk of the material, but unlike an ordinary
insulator that forms the basis of modern electronics, there is a metal-like
state on the surfaces and edges of the insulator. The metal-like state is an
intrinsic property of the material that is a consequence of the way electrons in
the bulk organize themselves. This state hosts striking phenomena such as ideal
electric transport on the boundaries of the material without losing any energy.
This project focuses on answering fundamental scientific questions about
topological insulators: What are the fundamental properties of these topological
phases? How can they be found in practical materials? What are their potential
applications? The PI will also investigate many promising candidate materials
for topological phases, and the effect of an external magnetic field on these
phases. The conducting surfaces of topological insulators and the possibility of
new phenomena that occur when a topological insulator is brought into contact
with other materials, suggests many possible technological applications from new
device technologies to high performance computer technologies based on the
manipulation of quantum mechanical states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
activities associated with this award include developing pedagogical courses and
a seminar series for undergraduate and graduate students, with emphasis on the
new phases of matter discovered in modern condensed matter physics. These are
intended to excite students to study and actively pursue research in physics.
Outreach activities include a lecture series aimed at sparking the interest in
science and technology among middle school students, especially in low-income
areas. These lectures are designed to expose the young audience to some striking
advances in the history of modern science and technology, and their roles in our
everyday life. To generate interest in science over a broader scale, the PI will
develop an interactive website for hosting an overview of his research
activities as well as teaching materials.