* 1151057
* CAREER: Ultra- Sensitive and Accurate Quantification of Protein Carbonyl Formation using Ratiometric Cleavable Surface-Enhanced Raman Tags (RCST)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Dongmao Zhang, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2018
* USD 599,998.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Office of Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Dongmao Zhang and his group
at Mississippi State University (MSU) are exploring and developing an
innovative, accurate, ultra-sensitive, and reproducible analytical method for
quantification of protein carbonyl, the widely accepted biomarker of protein
oxidative damage. Specific objectives of this work are 1) the design and
synthesis of a pair of Rhodamine dye derivatives for use as SERS labels of
protein carbonyls. 2) the determination of the sensitivity, accuracy,
reproducibility, and dynamic range of the SERS based protein carbonyl
quantification technique. 3) the experimental and computational investigation of
the effect of peptide and protein conjugation on adsorption, aggregation and the
SERS activity of the labeling dyes. In addition, the sensitivity, accuracy, and
reproducibility of the SERS method will be compared with the two most popular
bioanalytical methods: mass spectroscopy and fluorescence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary educational goals of the proposal are: 1) to
continue engaging and mentoring undergraduate students in cross-disciplinary
research in Dr. Zhang's lab from both Mississippi State University (the PI's
home university) and Mississippi University for Women, a nearby non-PhD granting
institution and 2) to help attract Mississippi high school students into STEM
areas by partnering with a nearby high school that has a high drop-out and low
college-attendance rate. By participating in the proposed research, high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students will gain valuable experience in the area
of nanoparticle interfacial interactions and optical spectroscopy. In an effort
to enhance chemistry education in the partner high school, The PI and his group
will assist the partner high school chemistry teacher in setting-up a teaching
laboratory, to design and deliver chemistry experiments. The undergraduate
student and high school student researchers in the PI's lab will share their
college and research experience with their peers in the partner high school in
order to inspire high school students to pursue careers in STEM areas. The
learning from this long-term college/high school partnership will be shared
nationwide through national conferences and/or journal publication. Dr. Zhang
hopes to stimulate more creative ideas to promote education in less developed
regions. Progress of the research and educational activities supported by this
award will be made public on the PI's research website at
http://www.chemistry.msstate.edu/people/faculty/detail.php?faculty=zhang