* 1151957
* SBIR Phase II:  Mass Spectrometry Imaging for High-Throughput Discovery of Enzyme Activity
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Matthew Greving, Nextval Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 598,758.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
develop and commercialize a groundbreaking technology for high-throughput cost-
effective screening and analysis. This technology addresses the growing
disparity between the ability to generate high-complexity chemical libraries
with molecular genetics and combinatorial chemistry approaches, versus the
ability to rapidly screen these libraries for high-value molecules. This new
high-throughput screening product is a novel integration of an acoustic ejection
device with chip-based mass spectrometry to produce mass readout microarrays
that are analyzed in high-throughput with mass spectrometry imaging and
computational algorithms. Phase II efforts will focus on a high-throughput
screening product for cellulase enzyme discovery, a critical enzyme in the
production of alternative fuels that is limited by optically based screens which
often generate false leads. Importantly, this integrated high-throughput
platform does not require sample labeling, is applicable to a broad range of
chemical activities, and provides much more information from a single readout
than current approaches. Phase II development will produce a commercial
screening technology with these advantages and analysis throughput of 250,000
samples/week, while maintaining the flexibility for future applications in the
industrial, pharmaceutical and diagnostic markets.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project are cost-effective high-
throughput discovery of new enzymes and molecules with enhanced or novel
activities in the industrial, environmental, pharmaceutical or diagnostic
markets. Also, the proposed technology enables entirely new types of high-
throughput screens that are currently inaccessible with existing technologies.
Most immediately this high-throughput screening product will be commercialized
for application in the $1 billion industrial enzyme market with specific focus
on one of the largest fractions of this market, the enzymes important for
efficient and economically viable production of second-generation alternative
fuels. Beyond the application to alternative fuels, Phase II development will
produce a flexible discovery platform that can be expanded to numerous
commercial markets. For example, the Phase II developments can also help develop
new lower-cost therapeutics by reducing false leads and enable higher
specificity diagnostics and testing by providing much more chemical information.