* 1151535
* CAREER: Responsive Biomimetic Strategies in Drug Delivery: Molecular Brush Oligomers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Margarita Herrera-Alonso, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2018
* USD 513,780.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:

This research explores the use of amphiphilic brush copolymers to build
environmentally responsive filamentous nanostructures for targeted drug delivery
applications. The objective of this proposal is to synthesize constructs that
enhance delivery by controlling carrier-cell interactions through shape-
dependent environmentally tunable mechanisms. The PI will design oligomers of
molecular brushes containing environmentally responsive moieties along the
backbone and between adjacent brushes to produce carriers of hydrophobic solutes
with controllable spatial and/or temporal 3-D structure, surface chemistry, and
mechanical properties. The biomimetic aspect of these constructs relies on the
fact that they are designed after the segmental nature of secreted mucins. The
programmable aspect targets their environmentally triggered de-oligomerization
and conformational transitions. To address this scientific challenge the PI will
utilize well-defined polymer synthesis and conjugation methods and engineer
surface functionalization techniques. The specific objectives of this proposal
are: (1) to design, synthesize, and characterize amphiphilic core-shell
molecular brushes with pH-sensitivity and then carry out their oligomerization;
(2) to study the hydrophobic collapse of molecular brush oligomers, solute
loading, and the triggered shape change and de-oligomerization of brush
filaments; and (3) to synthesize surface patterned particles from molecular
brushes by the copolymerization of pre-assembled building blocks.

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:

The proposed research will provide valuable information regarding the design of
new polymers inspired by nature. The knowledge gained through the completion of
this project will provide us with a better understanding of the
structure/property relationships of these building blocks and will allow us to
use them in the context of other bioinspired materials applications. If
successful, this project will advance drug-carrier design by harnessing the
chemical flexibility and unique physical properties of stimuli-responsive
polymeric biomaterials to control carrier-cell interactions across the micro-to-
nano length scale. The broader impact of the proposed CAREER program will
combine the PI's research interest in the development of 'intelligent' polymer-
based biomaterials with an educational program targeted to generate interest in
the field throughout the pre-undergraduate educational levels, particularly
among under-represented student populations. By creating an engaging and
inspiring research environment, the PI will seek to continually interest
undergraduate and graduate students in the field of stimuli-responsive polymer
systems and drug delivery. The nature of the proposed research should provide
students with stimulating challenges across disciplines, a comprehensive
education in polymer science from theoretical and experimental perspectives, and
with the tools to address a problem with creativeness and a critical mindset.