* 1151133
* CAREER: Role of Surface Properties in Motility of Bacteria to Control Biofilms
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2018
* Jacinta Conrad, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2018
* USD 400,021.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1151133 PI: Conrad, Jacinta ORG: University of
Houston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Role of Surface Properties in
Motility of Bacteria to Control Biofilms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: The objective of this project is to quantify how surface properties
influence the motility of bacteria, with high spatial and temporal resolution.
Motility is a critical factor in the formation of surface-associated bacterial
biofilms. Once biofilms form, they are notoriously difficult to remove,
resulting in billions of dollars of damage to oil and water pipelines,
biomedical implants, and food. Reducing these costs requires new strategies to
prevent bacteria from forming biofilms. In the initial stage of biofilm
formation, bacteria modify their motility mechanisms to enable irreversible
attachment to nearby surfaces. To test the hypothesis that motility
characteristics and rates of bacterial attachment and detachment are affected by
the interactions between bacteria and surfaces, the specific aims are: (1) To
elucidate the effects of surface chemistry and elasticity on dispersal by
measuring velocity and persistence of motion on surfaces. Single-bacterium
tracking algorithms will be used to track thousands of bacteria moving on
surfaces with controlled surface charge and elastic modulus engineered using
layer-by-layer deposition, yielding optimized surface properties to minimize
dispersal. (2) To quantify directional persistence in response to surface
patterns. The mean-square displacement, mean speed, persistence time, and angle
of motion of bacteria on gradient surfaces with feature sizes of 1-100 microns
will be analyzed using models for chemotaxis, yielding fundamental data on how
surface patterns direct motion in bacteria. (3) To develop assays to evaluate
antifouling surfaces by measuring attachment and detachment rates of individual
bacteria. These rates will be correlated to the structure of the resultant
biofilms on two types of surfaces with demonstrated antifouling efficacy,
amphiphilic polymer films and hierarchically wrinkled surfaces. By generating
new fundamental understanding of the effects of surface properties on motility,
adhesion, and biofilm formation, this project aims to enable the rational design
of coatings that inhibit colonization by bacteria and thereby impede biofilm
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Optimized antifouling coatings
will help to reduce the billions of dollars in biocorrosion damage in water and
resource pipelines each year and in costs related to hospital-acquired
infections. More broadly, detailed microscopic investigations of near-surface
motility will yield new insights on the interactions between bacteria and the
surfaces on which they move, enabling qualitatively new studies of infection and
pathology as well as antifouling surface properties. The information-rich data
generated by this work will improve existing models for directed motility and
for bacterial adhesion. Finally, these techniques can be applied to correlate
bacterial attachment and fouling to surface properties across a wide range of
species and surfaces. The proposed research will be integrated with educational
and outreach efforts aimed at increasing the participation of underserved
populations in engineering in Houston. First, training and learning activities
on biofouling that inspire students to study engineering will be developed in
collaboration with two minority-serving local high schools (KIPP-Houston and
DeBakey), leveraging the PI's ongoing work with NSF-RET and the UH GRADE Camp
program for introducing precollege women to engineering. Second, the PI will
continue to mentor undergraduate students in research through UH and NSF-REU.
Finally, two graduate students will be mentored in research on antifouling
surfaces, and interdisciplinary workshops on engineering for biology will be
initiated by the PI. The proposed teaching and outreach efforts will broaden
participation in engineering throughout the diverse population of Houston,
reflected by the high proportions of African American and Latino (95% and 56%)
and low income (80% and 49%) students at KIPP-Houston and DeBakey, respectively.
Likewise, the PI will pursue these activities at the University of Houston (13%
African American and 21% Latino), the second most diverse research university in
the US. The results from this study will be widely disseminated by the PI and
her students in both the scientific literature and to the petroleum and
biomedical industries, leveraging the PI's experience as an industrially
sponsored postdoctoral researcher and her ongoing collaborations at the Texas
Medical Center.