* 1151337
* CAREER: The Longevity and Evolution of Giant Magma Bodies: A Textural Study of Selected Supereruption Deposits Formed in Different Tectonic Environments Worldwide
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Guilherme Gualda, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2018
* USD 500,350.00

Supereruptions eject huge amounts (&gt;1,000 km3) of material onto the Earth's
surface in a matter of days to weeks, showing that giant bodies of low-density,
crystal-poor magma - much larger than any currently known magma body -
occasionally exist just a few kilometers below the surface. Our knowledge of
these events is limited, largely because the last known supereruption on Earth
occurred ca. 26,000 years ago. The 1815 eruption of Tambora - the largest known
historic eruption - led to the 'Year without a summer' in North America and
Europe in 1816. Yet, supereruptions eject at least an order of magnitude more
magma, demonstrating that these giant eruptions can not only cause widespread
devastation at the local scale, but can also have a significant worldwide
impact, particularly on climate. In his CAREER research plan, the investigator
will endeavor to answer some fundamental questions about giant magma bodies:
What are the timescales over which they crystallize? What causes the transition
from a quiet (pre-eruptive) state to the vigorous eruptive state that ultimately
leads to a supereruption? What can be learned from studying crystal and vesicle
populations? It is planned to investigate the timescales of crystallization of
supereruption-forming magma bodies to gather information on minerals and
glasses, explore the significance of these timescales, and assess the evolution
of giant magma bodies. The project will be designed to obtain a clearer picture
of the evolution of giant magma bodies in time and space, the processes that
shape their evolution, and the conditions that lead to eruption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will include: (a) Texture characterization using
x-ray tomography; (b) Glass inclusion characteri-zation using phase-contrast
x-ray tomography; (c) Mineral zoning characterization using cathodolumines-cence
(CL) imaging and trace-element analysis via electron, x-ray and laser ablation
microprobes; (d) Study of the crystallography of crystal clusters using electron
back-scattered diffraction (EBSD) imaging; and (e) Development of analytical and
numerical solutions for problems at the crystal-scale. The study will focus on 3
deposits spread over 4 continents: Huckleberry Ridge Tuff (USA), Oruanui Tuff
(New Zea-land), and Paran√°-Etendeka rhyolites (South America and West Africa).
All are among the largest known ignimbrite deposits, but they formed in
different tectonic environments and are characteristically different from each
other in eruptive history, mineralogy and petrography. Simultaneous study of
these deposits employing the same conceptual framework and tools should allow
for a qualitative jump in our knowledge of the timescales and evolution of the
giant magma bodies that give rise to supereruptions. Research and teaching will
be intimately connected through the development and offering of summer session
courses in southern Brazil, Namibia, and New Zealand, formally offered by
Vanderbilt University, which are aimed to provide (a) global and international
experiences of collaborative research and learning with the participa-tion of
faculty and students from universities from the US, Brazil and New Zealand; (b)
extensive and meaningful field experience for students, from graduate students
to non-majors; and (c) a unique learning experience for undergraduates who will
participate in the process of construction of knowledge, a goal that is often
difficult to accomplish in regular courses.