* 1151098
* CAREER: A Bio-Inspired Approach to Engineer Zeolite Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Rimer, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 405,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1151098&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Jeffrey
Rimer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tailoring crystallization of zeolites with
predictable structural outcomes is a challenge in zeolite catalyst design,
wherein few synthetic approaches are amenable to systematic and precise
manipulation of material properties. Developing facile, inexpensive routes to
precisely control crystal habit (i.e. morphology and orientation) can address
design limitations that often marginalize catalyst performance and can hinder
their commercial viability. Prof. Jeffrey Rimer of the University of Houston
proposes in his CAREER award study to develop a rational design strategy for
improving the mass transport properties of zeolite catalysts, notably a
reduction in the internal pore diffusion path length and an increase in the
exterior pore surface area, which are known to markedly improve activity and
stability. With this award, Rimer will leverage research thrusts in crystal
engineering and surface science to tailor zeolite crystallization at an
interfacial level, using a bio-inspired approach to tune crystal habit and
surface architecture, and ultimately to test catalyst activity as a function of
these variables. This design approach mimics crystallization in nature by using
modifiers with molecular recognition for binding to specific surfaces and
mediating step growth on crystal faces. Initiatives will focus on reactions of
model compounds with a long-term trajectory of establishing a comprehensive
platform to design, model, and test zeolites for alternative energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will be used to strengthen
outreach initiatives at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels to promote
engineering education and research. Rimer has partnered with KIPP Houston High
School (a minority institution ranked 16th in national college readiness) to
establish a dynamic program for student and teacher (NSF-RET) research at the
University of Houston, guest lectures on engineering topics to KIPP AP Chemistry
students, lesson plans that integrate results of Rimer's research, and an annual
seminar to promote increased interest in STEM.