* 1151314
* CAREER: Quantifying wave-driven mixing and mass transport dynamics within coastal ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2021
* Matthew Reidenbach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 531,428.00

Seagrass ecosystems comprise highly productive regions of the coastal ocean that
have declined dramatically in abundance over the past several decades. While
losses can be attributed to a variety of factors, including ocean warming and
disease, the primary threat appears to be from anthropogenic changes to water
quality. The proposed research will be composed of measurements to determine
large-scale circulation and micro-scale fluid processes impacting sediment
suspension and oxygen fluxes surrounding seagrass communities with the aim of
understanding how hydrodynamic processes, and in particular wave-action, may
ultimately impact pollutant and particulate transport and benthic respiration.
Although previous studies have focused on hydrodynamics of seagrasses,
information on how wave-dominated flows impact particulate and dissolved
chemical transport within these seagrass ecosystems, and to adjacent coastal
environments, is sorely lacking. Research within tropical seagrass ecosystems
will be carried out at two sites along the Atlantic coast of Panama, one a
disturbed and the other a relatively pristine system. Temperate seagrass
research will be conducted along the Virginia, USA coast at the Virginia Coast
Reserve-Long Term Ecological Research (VCR-LTER) station, where there are
ongoing efforts to reestablish a viable seagrass community within the coastal
bays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research
resides in establishing a better understanding of flow and turbulent mixing
processes within wave-dominated environments and how local and large-scale
hydrodynamics affect the ecology of seagrass communities. In doing so, this
research will help advance our knowledge of (1) how the physical structure of
seagrass beds alter the retention and dispersion of sediments within coastal
ecosystems, (2) how wave-dominated flow over and through benthic plant
structures alters the flux of oxygen across the sediment-water interface, and
(3) how alterations to these environments, through changes in seagrass cover,
land use and eutrophication, affect micro- and macro-scale chemical and
particulate transport. Integral to this work will be the development of new
instruments and techniques to quantify mixing and mass transport in wave-
dominated environments that can also be applied broadly to many other coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research resides in
its contribution to understanding hydrodynamic-biological interactions within
important yet vulnerable marine ecosystems. Within Virginia, measurements will
quantify the impact of seagrasses on wave attenuation and sediment resuspension
to determine the extent to which seagrass expansion has altered the bay from a
net erosional environment to one that promotes deposition of suspended sediment,
thereby reducing light attenuation and creating a positive feedback for seagrass
growth. Hydrodynamic and chemical flux measurements in healthy and degraded
seagrass beds in Panama, combined with analysis of historical changes to on-
shore mangrove and off-shore coral reef cover, will determine the impact of
land-use and eutrophication on ecosystem processes. The education plan for this
project includes in-depth classroom, field and laboratory research experiences
for high school to graduate-level students. Collaboration with the VCR-LTER
Schoolyard program will involve high school students and teachers in the
monitoring of water quality in local harbors and coastal bays, which directly
integrates with the proposed research. International outreach, through a
University of Virginia/Panama initiative, will include developing and teaching
an interdisciplinary course in Panama that brings together U.S. and Panamanian
students to study environmental policy and marine conservation. Student progress
in both the Virginia high school and Panama courses will be monitored through
use of a Web-based Interactive Science and Engineering (WISE) learning tool.
WISE is an online science-learning environment that provides for real-time
collaboration and assessment of student's understanding of core concepts. An
online curriculum will be developed for marine sciences where students will
input and analyze their data, compare and contrast findings from U.S. and
Panamanian seagrass communities, and learn about the benefits of and threats to
coastal ecosystems.