* 1151445
* CAREER: An Observational and Numerical Study of Multi-scale Transport and Mixing Processes in the Convective Boundary Layer over Mountains
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Stephan De Wekker, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 630,457.00

The lowest layers of the atmosphere and their interactions with underlying
complex terrain significantly influence forecasts of weather, distributions of
aerosols and associated restrictions to visibility, and behavior of the earth's
climate system. In recent years field studies have produced a wealth of data on
the lower atmosphere over mountainous terrain. The goals of this project are to
exploit these untapped data to 1) determine and quantify the spatial and
temporal variability of aerosol and convective boundary layer structure in
mountainous terrain and to identify the multi-scale processes responsible for
this variability, 2) evaluate and improve numerical model representations of
transport and mixing processes and associated orographic controls on aerosol
distributions and convective boundary layer structure, and 3) create engaging
experiences for K-12, undergraduate and graduate students that will allow them
acquire and apply scientific inquiry skills. This effort will utilize existing
surface and airborne data sets including those from the T-REX (Terrain-induced
Rotors Experiment) in which Doppler lidars play a critical role, as well as more
comprehensive measurements from orbital platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this effort centers on development of more comprehensive
data-driven descriptions of convectively-modified atmospheric behavior over
complex terrain as well as new approaches for improved numerical representation
of the effects of mountains on the lower atmosphere in regional and global
models. Broader impacts of this effort will include significant learning
experiences created through 1) the development of online modules enabling and
encouraging scientific inquiry, 2) partnerships fostering national and
international collaboration, and 3) hands-on activities involving field work and
atmospheric modeling. A new meteorological facility in the Shenandoah National
Park of Virginia is at the core of the hands-on student educational component of
this effort, and will also allow for outreach to park visitors. National and
international collaboration will take place with short-term visits from
international research fellows and underrepresented undergraduate students
during five summers. The development of online modules, hands-on experiences and
national and international collaboration will promote lasting knowledge of
scientific principles in mountain meteorology. In the longer term, results from
this study will be relevant for a wide range of applications including weather
prediction, regional and global climate, and air quality management.