* 1151195
* CAREER:   Engineered Protein Complexes for Designable Control over Metabolic Pathway Flux
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* John Dueber, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 05/31/2017
* USD 631,161.00

Abstract Microbes can be engineered with new and/or modified metabolic pathways
to make a wide variety of compounds, including flavors and fragrances,
therapeutics, plastics, and biofuels. This project aims to investigate the
manner in which engineered protein assemblies within living cells can improve
the sustainable production of these desirable chemicals. Scaffolded protein
assemblies are built using modular protein-protein interaction parts, which act
to co-localize enzymes of a given pathway, forming a complex structure that more
efficiently catalyzes the chemical reactions involved in production. The use of
modular parts provides programmable control over the structure, though currently
the resulting changes in product formation are not predictable. However, the
modular nature of this system will allow for facile manipulation of key
architectural features to test hypotheses and determine the critical design
principles for functional assembly and increased production. Understanding the
fundamental rules governing protein scaffolding and its effects on production
should considerably improve our ability to apply this strategy to new pathways
and products.

Broader impacts Outreach activities have been designed to introduce synthetic
biology research to the broader educational community. The international
Genetically Engineered Machines (iGEM) competition will be the core outreach
platform. This annual summer-long program will involve a team of Berkeley
undergraduates, prospective community college transfers, and both an in- and a
pre-service high school teacher. The team will be guided by intensive peer and
senior mentorship in a working synthetic biology lab; thus upon completion they
will be empowered with the ability to conduct independent research. A far
greater number of students will be indirectly influenced through the
participating high school teachers, who will use their experiences in the
program to better mentor their students and inspire and nurture interest in
careers in science and engineering.