* 1151017
* CAREER: Heterogeneous Catalytic Oxidation and Adsorption of Mercury Vapor: Integrated Research and Education in Air Pollution Control
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Joo-Youp Lee, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2018
* USD 440,964.00

1151017 - Lee

Mercury is a toxic and persistent pollutant that bio-accumulates in the food
chain. Human exposure to mercury occurs primarily by consumption of contaminated
fish. Mercury in the environment is transformed into more toxic methylmercury;
consumption of methylmercury may cause neurotoxic effects. Children and
particularly developing fetuses are especially susceptible to methylmercury
effects. A USEPA proposed rule, Mercury and Air Toxics Standards, requires coal-
and oil-fired power plants to use maximum available control technology to reduce
the emissions of mercury and other hazardous air pollutants as of 2016. Among
elemental, oxidized, and particulate-bound mercury species present in flue gas,
elemental mercury (Hg(0)) is most difficult to control because of its low
concentrations, low reactivity with other flue gas components via homogenous
oxidation, and low solubility in water. This CAREER research plan will
significantly advance the knowledge and fundamental mechanistic understanding of
heterogeneous catalytic oxidation and adsorption using the reactions between
Hg(0) vapor and transition metal chlorides. A detailed mechanistic study will be
conducted to investigate the cyclic Deacon reaction involving transition metal
chlorides for Hg(0) oxidation. Transition metal chlorides are proposed to be
more effective in Hg(0) oxidation than metal oxides since they can readily
eliminate the rate-limiting competitive HCl adsorption step. The reaction of
Hg(0) with transition metal chlorides is a catalytic reaction such that chloride
is consumed to form readily soluble and adsorbable HgCl2. The metal lowers the
activation energy barrier for the oxidation reaction. This will lead to the
further development of metal chloride-based modified selective catalytic
reduction materials for simultaneous NOx reduction and Hg(0) oxidation,
Hg(0)-specific catalysts, and sorbents.

This proposed research will enhance the capability to predict Hg(0) removal
based on a fundamental understanding of physical and chemical principles. It
will ultimately lead to advanced scientific knowledge and enhanced mercury
control options needed for proposed mercury emission control regulations. It
will also lead to various environmental remediation and separation technologies
based on heterogeneous catalysis, adsorption, and absorption. The educational
plan will provide co-benefits for chemical and environmental engineering
faculty, students, and professionals in the areas of environmental catalysis,
separation, and air quality/air pollution control. All of these efforts will
ultimately increase awareness of mercury as a global pollutant and of best
management practices for its control in flue gas emissions.