* 1151438
* CAREER: Deciphering the Beat of a Timeless Rhythm- The Future of Astrochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Stephen Meyers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2019
* USD 576,072.00

CAREER: Deciphering the Beat of a Timeless Rhythm - The Future of
Astrochronology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Meyers&lt;br/&gt;University of
Wisconsin&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1151438&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geologic
record provides the only available documentation of long-term environmental
change, but in order to accurately interpret this record and evaluate rates of
change we require a means to tell time. The dating of sedimentary deposits via
astrochronology has become one of the most important tools for construction of
the state-of-the-art geologic time scale. This method utilizes the geologic
record of climate oscillations - those ascribed to quasi-periodic changes in the
Earth's orbit and rotation - to measure the passage of time directly from
repetitive sedimentary layers. The impact of astrochronology on the
quantification of 'deep-time' has been truly revolutionary, and the approach is
now even employed to fine-tune (e.g., calibrate) radioisotopic data and to test
their veracity. However, although the method has resulted in the development of
extraordinary high-resolution time scales, the uncertainties in deep-time
astrochronologies are almost uniformly poorly constrained. This CAREER project
will address the three fundamental challenges to the field of deep-time
astrochronology using a new computational approach, with the goal of enhancing
the accuracy and precision of an astronomically tuned geologic time
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of the challenges to deep-time
astrochronology arises from the near ubiquitous lack of adequate independent
time control (e.g., radioisotopic data with sufficiently small errors) to
unambiguously calibrate observed spatial rhythms to temporal periods, which
prohibits direct confirmation of the proposed astronomical tempo. This
shortcoming has resulted in much confusion, including multiple incompatible
interpretations for a given stratigraphic record, and has also roused suspicion
about the veracity of astrochronology. The second major challenge is the
corruption of the orbital insolation signal as it propagates through the climate
system and into various depositional systems (including sedimentation rate
changes and hiatus), which may ultimately render the preserved astronomical
signature unidentifiable, or worse yet, result in erroneous inferences about the
preserved tempo. The third major challenge to deep-time astrochronology is the
lack of accurate orbital insolation solutions beyond ~50 Ma, which necessitates
the distinction between 'floating' and 'anchored' astrochronologies. These three
challenges will be addressed by uniting and building upon important scientific
advances within the fields of Quaternary paleoclimate, cyclostratigraphy,
geochronology and geophysics. The new computational approach will provide
fundamental methodological advances towards the achievement of an astronomically
tuned Phanerozoic time scale, and will yield a more complete understanding of
how orbital insolation changes influenced the surficial Earth System during both
icehouse and greenhouse intervals of Earth history. As a test case for the new
methodology, this project will evaluate the Eocene Green River Formation, a
stratigraphic unit of great historical significance to the field of
cyclostratigraphy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central feature of this CAREER
project is the integration of research and education. Involvement in the UW-
Madison PEOPLE program engages youth in scientific discovery, and increases
underrepresented minority participation in Geoscience. Partnership with
colleagues at the UW-Madison Geology Museum will culminate in the development of
a new geologic time display that will be seen by ~45,000 visitors per year, and
participation in their science outreach program will result in a new model
railroad exhibit (the 'Deep-Time Express') to be deployed at large public
events. Establishment of a national research hub for the intercalibration of
astrochronologic and radioisotopic time scales will build community within the
field of geochronology, and will facilitate the distribution of software and
tutorials generated for the project. Finally, the development of courses in
chronostratigraphy and cyclostratigraphy, coupled with student participation in
research, will provide a unique interdisciplinary training for the integration
of astrochronologic and radioisotopic time scales, thus cultivating future
leaders in the field of geochronology.