* 1151650
* CAREER: Improving Critical Pipelines in Harnessing the Power of Galaxy Surveys and in Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Minorities
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2012,10/31/2018
* Andreas Berlind, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 10/31/2018
* USD 877,883.00

Dr. Berlind will carry out a program to help strengthen two critical
"pipelines." The first pipeline starts with measurements of galaxy clustering in
redshift surveys, such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), and ends in a
physical understanding of cosmology and galaxy formation. The pipeline involves
obtaining unbiased estimates of statistical and systematic errors, refining
theoretical models used to fit the data, performing the fitting, and
interpreting the results. A key tool required for every step in the pipeline is
cosmological N-body simulations and associated mock galaxy catalogs. Dr. Berlind
will complete the LasDamas simulations project and use it to enable the joint
modeling of galaxy two-point, three-point, and group statistics in the SDSS.
This should yield the strongest constraints to date on the relationship between
galaxy properties and their underlying dark matter halos. The LasDamas
simulations will also be used to study the detailed properties of dark matter
halos with unprecedented precision.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The second pipeline is
the one that produces professional astronomers from underrepresented minority
groups. This pipeline has "leaks" at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
parts, resulting in a very poor production rate of minority PhDs. Dr. Berlind
will put in place a series of programs designed to patch this leaky pipeline.
These include (1) creating scholarships for K-12 students to attend summer camps
at Dyer Observatory, (2) creating a scholarship to support undergraduate physics
students at Fisk University, (3) running an undergraduate summer research
internship, and (4) designing and teaching an intensive workshop on statistics
and data analysis for Fisk-Vanderbilt Bridge Masters students.