* 1151369
* CAREER: Modifying Electron-Electron Interactions to Control the Optical and Electronic Properties of Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Ethan Minot, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 598,000.00

***TECHNICAL ABSTRACT*** Strong Coulomb interactions between charge carriers are
a defining feature in low-dimensional electronic systems such as carbon
nanotubes (CNTs). Phenomena associated with strong interactions often challenge
theoretical descriptions and can lead to new breakthroughs in technology. In
this project, electron-electron (e-e) interactions in CNTs will be varied by
manipulating the dielectric environment surrounding the CNT. By studying
individual CNT devices with e-e interactions "turned on" and then "turned off",
the proposed experiments will test theories about bandgap renormalization,
photoabsorption cross-section, photocurrent generation efficiency, impact
ionization rates, and Luttinger liquid behavior. It is predicted that modifying
the e-e interactions will causes dramatic changes in all these properties.
Successful completion of the experiments will establish how electron
interactions modify the properties of a nanomaterial, thereby generating
fundamental knowledge about how to engineer nanomaterials with specific
properties. The experiments will also directly contribute to the development of
a solar cell design that breaks the conventional limit for solar energy
conversion efficiency. The project supports PhD students and undergraduates who
will be trained in a powerful combination of nanofabrication and nanometrology
techniques. Nanoscience activities developed during the project will reach a
broad audience, including rural highschool classrooms and introductory physics
classes.

***NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT*** Devices such as computer chips and photovoltaic
cells are based on our understanding and control of electrons inside of
materials. In most materials, electrons move independently of one another, which
simplifies theory but limits the possibilities of discovering new phenomena. In
materials such as carbon nanotubes, however, the repulsive interactions between
electrons are extremely strong due to the nanoscale geometry of the material. If
one electron dances about inside a carbon nanotube, the other electrons dance
too. New phenomena related to this collective electron dance include faster
signal propagation speeds and higher efficiency solar energy conversion. Much
work is required to understand and utilize the phenomena related to the strong
interactions between electrons in nanomaterials. In this project, measurements
of individual carbon nanotubes will be made in a variety of conditions that are
designed to promote or suppress the collective electron dance. Successful
completion of the experiments will establish how electron interactions modify
the properties of a nanomaterial, thereby generating fundamental knowledge about
how to engineer nanomaterials with specific properties. The experiments will
also directly contribute to the development of a solar cell design that breaks
the conventional limit for solar energy conversion efficiency. The project
supports PhD students and undergraduates who will be trained in a powerful
combination of nanofabrication and nanometrology techniques. Nanoscience
activities developed during the project will reach a broad audience, including
rural high school classrooms and introductory physics classes.