* 1151154
* CAREER: Integrated molecular and computational sensing (IMACS) for label-free bacteriomics
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2018
* Wei-Chuan Shih, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 425,000.00

The PI proposes novel compressed sensing and parallel acquisition imaging
approaches to monitor many cells (~thousands) and obtain the unique molecular
barcodes via surface enhanced and normal Raman imaging (SERI &amp; NRI) with a
throughput advantage ~1000X over existing Raman techniques. Instead of point-
scan as used in current confocal Raman microscopy, multi-foci and compressed-
sensing snapshot Raman imaging are proposed. To realize large area SERI over
mm2, the PI engineers a new class of highly reliable plasmonic surface with
hierarchical nanoarchitecture to selectively image cell surfaces and internal
organelles (for identification and counting), cell-secreted proteins, enzymes
and exotoxins in the extracellular environment (for virulence and biofilm
formation assessment), as well as biofilm growth and heterogeneity. Multivariate
computational algorithms will be developed and employed in molecular detection
and identification, separation of biological fluorescence background, and
spatio-spectro-temporal feature extraction, pattern recognition and library
matching. IMACS could enable label-free investigation of bacterial sporulation
and germination at the population level and network behavior such as quorum
sensing and its role in the secretion or recruitment of extracellular factors.
IMACS could provide critical information for biolfilm maturation and
heterogeneity.