* 1151231
* CAREER: Symmetry Breaking in Metamaterials: Giving a "Twist" to Light-Matter Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Dionne, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 623,098.00

Technical Description: The research component of this CAREER award aims to
develop a new class of solid-state materials exhibiting strong, tunable electric
and magnetic resonances at visible frequencies. Such materials have the
potential to transcend the optical properties of naturally-occurring media,
enabling unique optical excitation of magnetic modes, tunable refractive
indices, and controllable optical chirality. These metamaterials are designed
using two symmetry-broken "meta-atoms" as building blocks, including a metal-
coated dielectric nanocrescent and a close-packed trimer of metallic
nanoparticles. They are expected to enable a controlled electric and magnetic
resonance for unique refractive index tenability, and lead to chirality and
optical activity as a result of a strong interaction between electric and
magnetic dipoles. Theoretical calculations guide meta-atom design, whose
synthesis is through a combination of bottom-up and top-down assembly. Optical
and electron spectroscopy techniques are used to characterize the electric and
magnetic modes of the proposed metamaterials with nanometer-scale
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The color of objects, the
efficiency of solar cells, and the physics of fiber-optical communications are
all interconnected by the way light interacts with materials. Light is composed
of oscillating electric and magnetic fields, but at visible frequencies, most
materials only interact with the electric component. If materials could also
interact with magnetic component, there would be profound implications in
science and technologies. This project is designed to develop a new class of
solid-state materials that interact with both the electric and magnetic
component of light. These materials are constructed from nanoscale metal and
dielectric building blocks exhibiting geometric asymmetry. In addition, cross-
disciplinary education activities introduce the public to these exotic and
enabling materials. The PI engages in undergraduate and graduate mentoring, K-12
outreach, conference symposia organization, and writing a textbook. Further, the
PI develops a nano-optics art exhibit for local museums, featuring the history
of nano in art, as well as the exotic and enabling science and applications of
symmetry-broken nanostructures in modern life.