* 1151687
* CAREER: Sub-Picosecond Electron Dynamics in Complex Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Norman Mannella, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** Complex electron systems (CES) such as cuprate high-
temperature superconductors exhibit unconventional phenomena emerging from the
interplay and competition among the charge-, lattice- and spin-degrees of
freedom. Unraveling the details of this interplay will foster understanding of
the physics at play behind the functionality of complex materials. The
impossibility of establishing cause-effect relationships among the degrees of
freedom hampers understanding their interplay. This Proposal discusses a unique
experimental approach promising the overcome of this challenge. It is based on
the extension of ultrafast measurement techniques to Angle Resolved
Photoemission experiments using femtosecond lasers as photon sources. The time
resolution allows disentangling the coupling of different degrees of freedom in
CES by exciting them on timescales shorter than the underlying correlations, and
to sort out these interactions by probing their time response as the
correlations develop. A time hierarchy among different degrees of freedom is
established based on the dynamical response of the excited electron states. The
proposed science and supporting infrastructure at the University of Tennessee
provide an excellent setting for the education and training of young students.
Our educational plan exploits the availability of these resources in a concrete
effort to integrate research and education based on creating new research
opportunities for undergraduate students and a detailed plan to reach high
school students.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** In complex electron systems (CES), electrons
interact among each other via their charge, lattice, or spin, giving rise to
spectacular and unconventional phenomena such as high temperature
superconductivity. A major challenge in the study of CES is the problem of being
unable to establish a cause-effect relationship among the interactions, thus
hampering a sound understanding of complex materials. This Proposal discusses a
unique experimental approach promising the overcome of this challenge. It is
based on inducing electrons emission, with ultra-short (less than a billionth of
a second!) pulses of ultraviolet radiation. Analyses of the emitted electrons
provide important information about how electrons interact in a material. These
pulses can excite electrons so quickly so as to instantaneously destroy their
interactions. Electrons are then monitored following these initial excitations.
When the interactions start to re-form, it will be possible to observe their
signature in the electronic spectra. The interactions will thus be disentangled
by probing the response in time of the excited electron states, with the
possibility of establishing a time hierarchy among them. The proposed science
and supporting infrastructure at the University of Tennessee provide an
excellent setting for the education and training of young students. Our
educational plan exploits the availability of these resources in a concrete
effort to integrate research and education based on creating new research
opportunities for undergraduate students and a detailed plan to reach high
school students.