* 1151789
* Collaborative Research: The Design, Chemistry and Study of Systems for Making Solar Hydrogen
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Richard Eisenberg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2016
* USD 512,059.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports a four-way collaboration between
Professors Richard Eisenberg and David W. McCamant of the University of
Rochester and Michael R. Detty and David Watson of the University at Buffalo on
new systems for the visible light-driven generation of hydrogen from aqueous
protons, and associated photochemical and photophysical investigations to fully
understand this critical transformation. The reaction corresponds to the
reductive side of water splitting, which is the key reaction in artificial
photosynthesis and the conversion of light into stored chemical potential
energy. The research focuses on: (1) systems containing new or unstudied
chromophores for light absorption and electron transfer, and catalysts for
proton reduction; and (2) systems integration since the robustness and activity
of different components affect each other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abundant,
environmentally-benign energy for sustainable development is one of this
century's great scientific and technological challenges, and solar energy
conversion is the key long-term strategy to solving this problem. Through the
Chemical Catalysis Program, this collaborative research effort will contribute
to the fundamental science on which future energy technology can be built and
implemented. The entire concept of a hydrogen economy relies on an efficient and
robust means to carry out water splitting using the sun as the primary energy
source. The broader impacts of the research will manifest themselves in two
major ways. First, through the research accomplished, greater knowledge about
the reductive side of water splitting will be gained. For the most viable new
systems for hydrogen generation, connection to a successful module for water
oxidation may yield a system for solar splitting of water. Second, new
scientists will be educated and trained to work in this challenging and
important subject.