* 1151121
* Intramolecular Anodic Olefin Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Kevin Moeller, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Kevin Moeller of the Department of Chemistry at Washington
University in St. Louis will explore the chemistry of highly reactive radical
cation intermediates and the molecular transformations that they trigger. The
radical cation intermediates are generated electrochemically, a versatile
technique that allows for structure-reactivity studies to be conducted on the
radical cations. These studies serve to increase our mechanistic insight into
the factors that control radical cation initiated reactions, and in so doing
open up the opportunity to discover new synthetic methods for the construction
of complex organic molecules.

Since the electrochemical methods being developed can be conducted with the use
of sunlight as the source of electricity, the chemistry holds great potential as
a sustainable method. For example, chemical oxidation reactions utilize
stoichiometric amounts of a chemical oxidant and in so doing require the
formation of a stoichiometric reduction product as waste. In contrast,
electrochemical oxidation reactions do not employ a chemical oxidant. Instead,
the oxidation occurs by the loss of an electron to an anode surface. The
required reduction reaction is channeled toward the formation of hydrogen gas at
the cathode. Hence, a solar-driven electrochemical oxidation consumes only
sunlight and generates hydrogen as the only byproduct. The proposed research
will seek to expand this approach as a general synthetic method. Finally, this
project will provide an excellent training environment for students, from pre-
undergraduate to graduate, including those from historically underrepresented in
the sciences.